CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF DOTHAN, ALABAMA 
____________ 
Published in 1998 by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Adopted: March 31, 1998 
Effective: April 6, 1998 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
DOTHAN, ALABAMA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Chester Sowell 
Mayor 
____________ 
George Williams, Jr. 
John H. Glanton, Jr. 
Don Clements 
Ralph Smith 
Pat Thomas 
Matt Bullard 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Jerry L. Gwaltney 
City Manager 
____________ 
F. Lenton White 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Delma Lee 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Dothan, Alabama. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1977 Code, as supplemented through Ord. No. 96-276 enacted August 27, 1996, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the board of commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1977 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
STATUTORY CHARTER SC:1 STATUTORY CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE SCCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 STATUTORY CHARTER INDEX SCi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of David G. Poucher, Supervising Editor, and Robert MacNaughton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Delma Lee, City Clerk, and Mr. Len White, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Dothan, Alabama. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Dothan, Alabama. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Dothan, Alabama. 1998. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 98-74 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Dothan, Alabama; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Whereas, by Resolution No. 98-51, the Board of Commissioners gave notice of the proposed adoption of a new Code of Ordinances, and 
Whereas, the Board of Commissioners of the City of Dothan, Alabama, now finds that said resolution has been complied with. 
Be it Ordained by the Board of Commissioners of the City of Dothan, Alabama, as follows: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Dothan, Alabama," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 114, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before October 28, 1997, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 and no sentence of imprisonment or hard labor shall exceed six months except when enforcement of the penalties prescribed in Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-191, such fine shall not exceed $10,000 and a sentence of imprisonment or hard labor shall not exceed one year. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the Board of Commissioners to make the same part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after October 28, 1997, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. After publication as required by law, this ordinance shall become effective on April 6, 1998. 
    Passed, adopted, and approved on March 31, 1998. 
/s/ Chester Sowell 
      Mayor   /s/ George Williams, Jr. 
      Associate Commissioner   
/s/ John H. Glanton, Jr. 
      Associate Commissioner   /s/ Don Clements 
      Associate Commissioner   
/s/ Ralph Smith 
      Associate Commissioner   /s/ Pat Thomas 
      Associate Commissioner   
/s/ Matt Bullard 
      Associate Commissioner   ATTEST: 
/s/ Delma Lee 
      City Clerk       I hereby certify that the above Ordinance was published in THE DOTHAN EAGLE, a newspaper of general circulation and published in the City of Dothan, Alabama, on April 3, 1998. 
/s/ Delma Lee 
      City Clerk   Certificate of Adoption 
    I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the board of commissioners of the City of Dothan, Alabama, held on the 31st day of March, 1998. 
/s/ Delma Lee 
      City Clerk   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Include/ 
Omit Supp. No. 2011-1  1- 4-11 Include 30 2011-29  2-15-11 Include 30 2011-212  9- 6-11 Include 31 2011-213  9- 6-11 Include 31 2011-286 10- 4-11 Include 31 2012-8  1-17-12 Include 31 2012-119  5-15-12 Include 32 Act 2009-355 Include 33 Act 2009-362 Include 33 Act 2011-252 Include 33 2012-208  8-21-12 Include 33 2012-319 12- 4-12 Include 33 2013-4  1-15-13 Include 33 2013-94  4- 5-13 Include 34 2013-149  6- 4-13 Include 34 2013-263  9- 3-13 Include 35 2014-25  2- 4-14 Include 36 2014-46  3- 4-14 Include 36 2014-298 11-18-14 Include 37 2015-259  9-15-15 Include 38 2015-336 12- 1-15 Include 38 2015-337 12- 1-15 Include 38 2015-338 12- 1-15 Include 38 2015-366 12-15-15 Include 38 2016-79  3-15-16 Include 39 2016-262  9-20-16 Include 39 2016-246  9- 6-16 Include 40 2017-1  1- 3-17 Include 41 2017-15  1-17-17 Include 41 2017-112  4-18-17 Include 42 2017-113  4-18-17 Include 42 2017-114  4-18-17 Include 42 2017-115  4-18-17 Include 42 2017-116  4-18-17 Include 42 2017-159  5-16-17 Include 42 2017-160  5-16-17 Include 42 (Res. of)  7-19-17 Include 43 2017-294  9-19-17 Include 44 2017-295  9-19-17 Include 44 2017-348 11- 7-17 Include 44 2017-349 11- 7-17 Include 44 2017-376 11-21-17 Include 44 2017-395 12- 5-17 Include 45 2018-19  2- 6-18 Include 45 2018-115  5-15-18 Include 46 (Res. of)  6-20-18 Include 46 2018-168  7-17-18 Include 46 2018-212  8-21-18 Include 47 2018-235  9- 4-18 Include 47 2018-250  9-18-18 Include 47 2019-1  1-15-19 Include 48 2019-17  2- 5-19 Include 48  
PART I - STATUTORY CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is Code of Ala. 1975, tit. 11, ch. 44E, which provided for the Mayor/Commission/City Manager form of government for the City of Dothan, Alabama. The history notes indicate the act from which the section is derived. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform, and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - ADOPTION OF THE MAYOR/COMMISSION/CITY MANAGER FORM OF GOVERNMENT; ELECTION AND TERM OF FIRST COMMISSION 

Sec. 11-44E-1. - Cities to which chapter applies. 
    Any class 5 municipality in the State of Alabama may adopt the mayor/commission/city manager form of government by proceeding in the manner hereinafter provided in this chapter. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 1.01) 
Sec. 11-44E-2. - Ordinance. 
    At any time upon passage of this chapter and said chapter becoming law, any class 5 municipality may adopt the mayor/commission/city manager form of government by adopting an ordinance by a majority vote of the members of that governing body adopting the mayor/commission/city manager form of government. Within 30 days of the adoption of the ordinance adopting the mayor/commission/city manager form of government, members of that governing body shall adopt a second ordinance for the election of commissioners from six single-member districts with the district boundaries established therein. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 1.02; Ala. Act No. 90-287, § 1) 
Sec. 11-44E-3. - Elections. 
(a)  The expense for all elections shall be paid by such city. The mayor and all commission candidates shall qualify as provided in Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-44E-71 and 11-44E-12 respectively and shall have the qualifications and eligibility set forth in this chapter. Under applicable laws for the election of commissioners to the commission, the mayor, within the scope of this chapter, shall provide for an election to be held on the second Tuesday in July, 1991, and every two years thereafter for the positions of associate commissioners in the manner herein provided. 
    Upon the adoption of such form of government and approval by the justice department, the mayor shall call an election, to be governed by this chapter, to be held no later than the second Tuesday in July, 1991, and every four years thereafter for the positions of associate commissioner for districts 2, 4 and 6 for four-year terms. Associate commissioners for districts 1 and 5 shall also be elected the second Tuesday in July, 1991, for initial two-year terms. Any commissioner whose present term does not expire until 1993 shall continue to serve the remainder of his term, but shall represent the district in which he resides. Districts 1, 3 and 5 shall elect associate commissioners the second Tuesday in July, 1993, for four-year terms. After 1993, all associate commissioners shall serve four-year terms. The mayor shall continue to hold office until the first Monday in October, 1993, and shall continue to be elected at large for a four-year term. 
    Each voter in the election may cast one vote for a candidate from his/her district and one vote for a candidate for mayor. Any district commissioner candidate receiving a majority of the total votes cast from the district in which he (she) is a candidate shall be declared elected as a commissioner from his (her) district. In the event that no candidate receives a majority, the two candidates receiving the highest number of votes cast shall be eligible for a second (runoff) election. Such election shall be held on the second Tuesday next thereafter following the first election. The candidate for the commissioner receiving a majority of votes cast in the second election shall be declared elected to such designated office. The commissioners so elected shall take office on the first Monday in October following the election. Each commissioner shall hold office for four years, but shall serve until his successor shall have been designated as prescribed elsewhere in this chapter. A commissioner may succeed himself in office. 
    The candidate for mayor receiving the majority of votes cast at the first election shall be elected thereto. If at the first election no candidate receives a majority of the votes cast, the two candidates receiving the highest number of votes shall be declared eligible for a second (runoff) election. The second (runoff) election shall be held on the second Tuesday next thereafter following the first election. The candidate receiving the majority of votes cast in the second (runoff) election shall be declared elected to such office. 
    Notwithstanding any notice requirements of any other statute or statutes concerning municipal elections, a notice shall be published by the city clerk no earlier than the second Tuesday and no later than the third Tuesday in May preceding the election. Said notice shall, in substance, state the month, day and year of said election and the purpose for which it is called. Said notice shall further recite that the city has been divided into districts as provided under this chapter and state where a copy of the district division is on file. Said notice shall be published at least one time in a newspaper published in the city, and if no newspaper is published in the city, then by posting notices in three public places within the municipality. The election of the first commission shall be held and conducted in the same manner as provided by law unless otherwise provided for in this chapter. All municipal officials of the city shall have the same duties and responsibilities as they have with respect to municipal elections as provided by law. The call of said election by the mayor shall be sufficient to require any municipal officer or officers to comply with their duties and responsibilities with regard to all municipal elections, including the designation of places of voting, appointment of election officers and other matters concerning the election. Said officer or officers shall issue any orders necessary to cause all election requirements to be met. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a), effective in 2011, and thereafter, the first election date for the mayor shall be on the first Tuesday in August and the second election or run-off election shall be held on the sixth Tuesday thereafter. Notice of the election shall be given no earlier than the first Tuesday and no later than the third Tuesday in June preceding the election. 
(Acts 1988, No. 88-445, p. 660, § 1.03; Acts 1988, 1st Ex. Sess., No. 88-831, p. 293, § 1; Acts 1990, No. 90-287, p. 379, § 1; Act 2006-348, p. 921, § 1; Act 2009-362, p. 684, §1.) 
Sec. 11-44E-4. - Mayor and commissioners to be known as commission; powers and duties; qualification and taking of office; commencement of mayor/commission/city manager form of government. 
    The commissioners provided for in this section, along with the mayor, shall be known collectively as the commission and shall have the powers and duties hereinafter provided. The commissioners first elected shall qualify and take office in the manner hereinafter prescribed on the first Monday in October following the date of election, and thereupon such city shall at that time be organized under the mayor/commission/city manager form of government provided under this chapter and shall thereafter be governed by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 1.04) 
ARTICLE II. - LEGAL STATUS; FORM OF GOVERNMENT; POWERS 

Sec. 11-44E-20. - Continuation as municipal corporation; duties, rights, etc. 
    Any such city which adopts the mayor/commission/city manager form of government shall continue its existence as a municipal corporation. The word "city" as hereinafter used shall mean and refer to any city which has adopted the mayor/commission/city manager form of government. The city shall continue as a municipal corporation, within the corporate limits as then established, and as thereafter fixed in the manner prescribed by law, subject to all the duties and obligations then pertaining to or incumbent upon it as a municipal corporation and shall enjoy all the rights, privileges, immunities, powers, duties and franchises then enjoyed by it, as well as those that may thereafter or hereinafter be granted to it. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 2.01) 
Sec. 11-44E-21. - Government to be known as mayor/commission/city manager form of government; powers of city vested in commission; exercise of powers. 
    The municipal government of any such city proceeding under this chapter shall be known as the "mayor/commission/city manager form of government." Pursuant to the provisions and limitations of this chapter and subject to the limitations imposed by the laws and Constitution of Alabama, all powers of the city shall be vested in the commission elected as herein provided and hereinafter referred to as "the commission," which shall enact ordinances, resolutions, budgets and policies. All powers of the city shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this chapter or, if the manner be not prescribed, then in such manner as may be prescribed by the laws of the state. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 2.02) 
Sec. 11-44E-22. - Powers of city; acquisition of property; enumeration of powers in chapter not exclusive. 
    The city shall have all the powers granted to municipal corporations and to cities by the constitution and laws of this state together with all the implied powers necessary to carry into execution all the powers granted. The city may acquire within or without its corporate limits for any city purpose, in fee simple and any lesser interest or estate, by purchase, gift, devise, lease or condemnation and may sell, lease, mortgage, hold, manage and control such property as its interests may require; and except as prohibited by the constitution of this state or restricted by this chapter, the city shall and may exercise all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities of every name and nature whatsoever. The enumeration of particular powers by this chapter shall not be deemed to be exclusive, and in addition to the powers enumerated therein or implied thereby, or appropriate to the exercise of such powers, it is intended that the city shall have and may exercise all powers which, under the constitution of this state, it would be competent for this chapter specifically to enumerate. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 2.03) 
ARTICLE III. - COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Code cross reference- Commissioners, § 2-101 et seq. 

Sec. 11-44E-40. - Election of commissioners; generally. 
(a)  Any commissioner whose present term does not expire until October, 1993, shall continue to serve the remainder of his term, but shall represent the district in which he resides. The commissioners shall qualify and take office in the manner hereinafter prescribed on the first Monday in October following his (her) election. An election shall be held on the second Tuesday in July, 1991, and every four years thereafter for the positions of associate commissioners for districts 2, 4 and 6 and in the manner herein provided. Associate commissioners for districts 1 and 5 shall also be elected the second Tuesday in July, 1991, for initial two-year terms. Districts 1, 3 and 5 shall elect associate commissioners the second Tuesday in July, 1993, for four-year terms. After 1993, all associate commissioners shall serve four-year terms. The mayor shall continue to hold office until the first Monday in October, 1993, and shall continue to be elected at large for a four-year term at the same election in 1993 as districts 1, 3 and 5 and every four years thereafter. The commissioners shall qualify and take office on the first Monday in October following his (her) election. The commissioners elected at any such regular election shall on or before the first Monday in October, make oath that he (she) is eligible for said office and will execute the duties of same according to the best of his (her) knowledge and ability. At any election for commissioner the candidate receiving the highest number of votes for the office shall be elected thereto, provided such candidate receives a majority of all votes cast for such office. If at the first election a majority is not received by any candidate for the office of commissioner, then a second election shall be held on the second Tuesday next thereafter following the first election, in the same mode, manner and under the same rules and regulations provided in Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-44E-3 hereof with respect to the election of the first commission. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a), effective for the election of city commissioners in 2011, the city commissioners in Districts 2, 4, and 6 shall be elected for a two-year term. Effective for the election of city commissions in 2013 and thereafter, all city commissioners shall be elected for four-year terms. Effective for the election of city commissioners in 2011, and thereafter, the first election date shall be on the first Tuesday in August and the second election or run-off election shall be held on the sixth Tuesday thereafter. 
(Acts 1988, No. 88-445, p. 660, § 3.01; Acts 1990, No. 90-287, p. 379, § 1; Act 2006-348, p. 921, § 1; Act 2009-362, p. 684, §1.) 
Sec. 11-44E-41. - Statement of candidacy. 
    Any person desiring to become a candidate in any election for the office of commissioner may become such candidate by filing in the office of the city clerk a statement in writing of such candidacy accompanied by a petition signed by a minimum of 50 registered voters of such commission district or in the case of mayor, 100 registered voters of the municipality, endorsing the candidacy of such candidate and an affidavit taken and certified by such city clerk or notary public. Such statement shall be filed by 5:00 p.m. on the fourth Tuesday in June preceding the date set for the election and shall be substantially in the following form: 
"State of Alabama, _______ County. I, the undersigned, being first duly sworn, depose and say that I am a citizen of the City of _______, in said State and County, and reside at _______ in said City of _______, that I desire to become a candidate for the office of commissioner for District _____, in said City at the election for said office to be held on the _____ day of _______ and that I am duly qualified to hold said office if elected thereto, and I hereby request that my name be printed upon the official ballot at said election. Signed ___________; 
Sworn to and subscribed before me on this _____ day of ________, [20___], and filed in this office for record on said day. 
___________ City Clerk." 
    Said statement shall be accompanied by a qualifying fee in the amount of $150.00 for candidates for a commissioner, which fee shall be paid over by the city clerk to the general fund of the city. Any person may file with the city clerk a verified pauper's oath that he (she) does not have the financial resources to pay a qualifying fee and thereupon shall be exempt from filing such fee. No name shall appear upon said ballot as a candidate for election except the names of such persons as have become candidates according to provisions as above set forth. No primary election shall be held for the nomination of candidates for the office of mayor or commissioner, and candidates shall be nominated only as hereinabove described. 
(Act 2011-252, p. 450, § 1) 
Sec. 11-44E-42. - Eligibility of candidates; vacancy when commissioner ceases to possess qualifications. 
    The candidates for office of commissioner shall be qualified electors in the city for at least one year prior to qualifying, shall be at least 19 years of age, shall have continuously resided in the district for which he (she) is a candidate for the preceding six months, and shall hold no other public office except that of notary public or member of the national guard of [or] naval or military reserve. If the commissioner shall cease to possess any of these qualifications or shall be convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, his (her) office shall immediately become vacant. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 3.03) 
Sec. 11-44E-43. - Compensation and bond of commissioners. 
    The compensation of all commissioners elected during the first election held under the terms of this chapter shall be the sum of $21,000.00 per annum. 
    The fees, salary or compensation of any commissioner whose election is authorized by this chapter shall not be increased or diminished during the term for which he (she) shall be elected; provided, however, that the commission shall have authority and power to adjust such fees, salaries, or compensation for the succeeding term. 
    The commissioners shall each be bonded in the minimum amount of $25,000.00 and such additional amount as the commission may determine, if any. Such bond will be at the expense of the municipality. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445; Ala. Act No. 90-287) 
Sec. 11-44E-44. - Powers of commission. 
    The commission shall be the legislative body of the city. It shall have powers vested in it by this chapter. These powers shall be as follows: 
(1)  To establish administrative departments. 
(2)  To adopt the budgets of the city. 
(3)  To authorize the issuance of bonds or warrants. 
(4)  To inquire into the conduct of any office, department or agency of the city and make investigations as to municipal affairs. 
(5)  To appoint the members of all boards, commissions or other bodies authorized hereunder or by law. 
(6)  To succeed to all the powers, rights and privileges conferred upon the former governing body of the city by statutes in effect at the time of adoption by the city of the mayor/commission/city manager form of government and not in conflict with this chapter. 
(7)  To levy property taxes and impose and collect license taxes and local improvement assessments and enact any such new revenue or adjustments as elsewhere prescribed by law. 
(8)  To adopt each year a financial plan for at least the next succeeding five years showing anticipated revenues, anticipated expenditures and with all capital projects ranked by priority. Said financial plan shall be used as a financial planning guide by the city staff and city manager, but shall not be binding on the commission. 
(9)  To enact such resolutions, ordinances and policies, as prescribed by this chapter or prescribed elsewhere in the Code of Alabama. 
(10)  To employ the city manager; to discharge the city manager; to enter into employment contract with the city manager. 
(11)  To hold public hearings as prescribed by law. 
(12)  To set the compensation of the mayor and commission in accordance with procedure in Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-44E-43 and 11-44E-73. 
(13)  To adopt policies for the operation of the city. 
(14)  To adopt rules of procedure. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 3.05; Ala. Act No. 89-525) 
Sec. 11-44E-45. - Interference in appointment or removal of officers and employees; dealings of commission with administrative service. 
    Neither the commission nor any of its members shall direct or request the appointment of any person to, or his removal from, office or position by the city manager or by any of his (her) subordinates, or in any manner take part in the appointment or removal of officers and employees in the administrative service of the city with the exception of certain employees as prescribed in Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-44E-92(2) of this chapter. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the commission and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the city manager, and neither the commission nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the city manager, either publicly or privately. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 3.06) 
Sec. 11-44E-46. - Vacancies in commission. 
(a)  Whenever a vacancy in the office of commissioner shall occur by reason of death, resignation, removal, or any other cause, and the remainder of the term is six months or less, the remaining members shall, by a majority vote, appoint a commissioner to serve the remainder of the vacated term, who shall serve until a successor has been elected and qualified. 
(b)  If the remainder of the vacated term is more than six months, the remaining members shall, by a majority vote, appoint a commissioner to serve until a successor has been elected and qualified as hereinafter provided. The interim commissioner selected shall receive the same rate of pay and allowances provided for the commissioner whose vacated office he or she fills. The mayor shall within ten days after the occurrence of the vacancy, call for a special election to be held in the district of the vacancy on a Tuesday not less than 60 days and not more than 120 days from the date the vacancy occurred. If a regular or special municipal election is scheduled in the municipality within not less than 60 days nor more than 120 days after the date the vacancy occurred, then the election for a commissioner to fill this vacancy shall be held at the regular or special municipal election. Notice of the election shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation and published in the city. The method, procedure, and requirements of qualifying, voting, and determining the successful election of the commissioner shall be the same as is provided herein relative to the election of a commissioner at regular elections, except that statements of candidacy shall be filed within ten days after notice of election has been given. The commissioner chosen at the election shall take office no later than the next Monday following election and shall hold office for the unexpired term until a successor is elected and qualified. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 3.07; Ala. Act No. 98-290, § 1, 4-14-98) 
Editor's note- In City of Dothan et al v Delma Lee, City Clerk, CV 96-5034, the circuit court held that the elections law allows special election only for the position of mayor, that until preclearance by the Justice Department holding an election in other than odd years would violate federal law, and the next election of any kind in that case allowable is July 1997. 
Sec. 11-44E-47. - Continuation of city clerk in office where subject to civil service or merit system; appointment where not subject to such system; duties of city clerk. 
    If the city clerk of any city which adopts the mayor/commission/city manager form of government holds office subject to any civil service or merit system, such clerk shall continue to be the city clerk under the mayor/commission/city manager form of government of such city, and the clerk's successor shall be selected and hold office subject to the provisions of such civil service or merit system. If the city clerk of any city which adopts the mayor/commission/city manager form of government does not hold office subject to any civil service or merit system, the city manager may appoint the city clerk in the same manner as department heads are appointed. The city clerk shall give notice of special or called meetings of the commission, shall keep the journal of its proceedings, shall authenticate by his (her) signature and record in full, in a book kept for that purpose, all ordinances and resolutions and shall perform such other duties as shall be required by this chapter or by ordinance, and such duties as are imposed by law of Alabama upon city clerks. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 3.08) 
Sec. 11-44E-48. - Meetings of commission. 
    The first meeting of each newly elected commission shall be held at 2:00 p.m. on the first Tuesday in October, with all subsequent meetings held at such times as may be prescribed by ordinance of the commission. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 3.09) 
Sec. 11-44E-49. - Commission to judge election. 
    The commission shall be the judge of the election by officially canvassing the votes. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 3.10) 
Sec. 11-44E-50. - Rules of procedure of commission; journal of commission proceedings. 
    The commission shall determine its own rules and order of business. It shall keep a journal of its own proceedings, and the journal shall be open to public inspection. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 3.11) 
Sec. 11-44E-51. - Meetings of commission; mayor to preside; quorum; majority vote requirement; enactment of resolutions, bylaws and ordinances; record of proceedings; publication of ordinances. 
    The commission shall hold regular public meetings at a regular hour to be fixed by ordinance of said commission. It may hold such adjourned, called, special, or other meetings as the business of the city may require. The mayor, when present, shall preside at all meetings of said commission. A majority of the commission members elected shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any and every power conferred upon said commission, and affirmative vote of a majority of those members present shall be sufficient for the passage of any resolution, bylaw or ordinance, or the transaction of any business of any sort by the said commission or the exercise of any of the powers conferred upon it by the terms of this chapter or by law, or which may hereafter be conferred upon it. No resolution, bylaw or ordinance granting any franchise, appropriating any money for any purpose, providing for any public improvements, any regulation concerning the public health, or of any other general or permanent nature, except the proclamation of quarantine, shall be enacted except at a regular public meeting of said commission or an adjournment thereof. Every ordinance introduced at any and every such meeting shall be in writing before any vote thereon shall be taken, and the yeas and nays thereon shall be recorded; provided that if the vote of all commissioners present be unanimous, it may be so stated in the journal without recording the yeas and nays. A record of the proceedings of every meeting of the commission shall be kept, and every resolution or ordinance passed by the commission must be recorded, and the record of the proceedings of the meeting shall, when approved by the commission, be signed by the mayor and the city clerk. Such record shall be kept available for inspection by all citizens of such city at reasonable times. No ordinance of permanent operation shall be passed at the meeting at which it was introduced except by unanimous consent of all members of the commission present, and such unanimous consent shall be shown by the yea and nay votes entered upon the minutes of said meeting; provided, however, that if all members of the commission present vote for the passage of the ordinance and their names are so entered of record as voting in favor thereof, it shall be construed as giving unanimous consent to the action upon such ordinance at the meeting at which it is introduced. Publication of ordinances shall be governed by Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-8, as amended, Ala. Act No. 87-668. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 3.12) 
Sec. 11-44E-52. - Grant of franchise; lease, or right to use streets, etc.; transfer of waterworks, sewer, electric, or gas plant and system to board or public corporation. 
    No resolution, bylaw or ordinance granting to any person, firm or corporation any franchise, lease or right to use the streets, public highways, thoroughfares or public property of the city organized under the provisions of this chapter, either in, under, upon, along, through, or over same shall take effect and be in force until 30 days after the final enactment of same by the commission, and publication of said resolution or ordinance in full once a week for three consecutive weeks in some newspaper published in the city, which publication shall be made at the expense of the persons, firms or corporations applying for the grant. 
    Pending the passage of any such resolution or ordinance, or during the time intervening between its final passage and the expiration of the 30 days during which publication shall be made as above provided, the legally qualified voters of the city may by written petition or petitions addressed to the subject of such grant, and if during this period such written petition or petitions signed by at least a number of qualified inhabitants equal to four for every 100 inhabitants of the city or fraction thereof, according to the last federal census, shall be filed with the commission, the commission shall forthwith order an election, at which the legally qualified voters of the city shall vote for or against the proposed grant as set by resolution or ordinance. In the call for the election, the resolution or ordinance making the grant shall be published at length and in full at the expense of the city in some newspaper in the city. One publication shall be sufficient for the purposes of this section. 
    If at such election the majority of the votes are in favor of the resolution or ordinance and the making of the proposed grant, the same shall thereupon become effective; but if a majority of the votes so cast shall be against the passage of the resolution or ordinance and against the making of the grant, the resolution or ordinance shall not become effective, nor shall it confer any rights, powers, or privileges of any kind, and it shall be the duty of the commission, after the result of the election is determined, to pass a resolution or ordinance to that effect. 
    No grant of any franchise or lease or right of user, or any other right in, under, upon, along, through or over the streets, public highways, thoroughfares or public property of any such city shall be made or given, nor shall any such rights of any kind whatsoever be conferred upon any person, firm or corporation, except by resolution or ordinance, duly passed by the commission at some regular or adjourned meeting, and published as above provided for; nor shall any extension or enlargement of any such rights or powers previously granted be made or given except in the manner and subject to all the conditions herein provided for as to the original grant of same. 
    Any waterworks plant and system, sewer plant and system, electric plant and system, and gas plant and system, or any one or more of such plants and systems now or hereafter owned by any class 5 municipality shall be authorized to transfer and convey one or more of such plants or systems, or any part of such plants or systems, or any rights incidental thereto to any board or public corporation organized under the provisions of Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-50-1 et seq., as amended, or under any subsequent act providing for the incorporation of like boards to own and operate any waterworks plant or system, any sewer plant or system, any electric plant or system, or any gas plant or system, whether such board was incorporated with the approval of the city owning such plant or system, or with the approval of some other city in Alabama, the governing body owning any such plant and/or systems shall provide for an election at which the qualified voters of such city shall be allowed to vote on such proposition, which election shall be held in accordance with this chapter except that no written petition or petitions to the governing body of the city owning such plants or systems shall be required for the holding of such election herein provided. 
    Except as herein provided for, and at the time holding of the same, all elections herein required shall be held according to the general laws of Alabama. At any such election the proposition to be submitted to the voters shall be: 
"Shall the governing body of the City of _______ be authorized to transfer and convey the city-owned waterworks plant and system, sewer plant and system, electric plant and system, gas plant and system, or any one or more thereof, or any part or parts of such plants or systems, or any rights incidental thereto to any board or public corporation organized under section 11-50-1 et seq. of the Code of Alabama (1975) as amended, or to any board created or established by any subsequent Act providing for the incorporation of like boards to own and operate any such plant and/or systems, the members of which board will not be elected by the qualified voters of the City of _______? NO _____ YES _____." 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 3.13; Ala. Act No. 89-525) 
Sec. 11-44E-53. - Codification authorized. 
    The commission may provide at any time it may deem proper for the revision and codification of its resolutions, bylaws and ordinances, or for the adoption of a code or codes by ordinance. Such code or codes and the revisions or amendments thereof may relate to the whole system of city resolutions, bylaws and ordinances, or may relate to that portion of such resolutions, bylaws, and ordinances which relate to, affect or purport to govern any particular subject or subjects or subdivision of municipal legislation. The commission shall have full power and authority to prescribe the manner in which said code or codes, revisions or amendments thereto shall be made public, whether by proclamation of any officer or officers of said city by posting or by publication, one or all, but it shall not be necessary unless so prescribed by the commission for such code or codes, revisions or amendments thereto to be published in a newspaper or newspapers. Nor shall it be necessary that such code or codes, revisions or amendments thereto be spread at length upon the minutes. The commission may prescribe that such code or codes, revisions or amendments thereto be spread at length upon the minutes. The commission may prescribe that such code or codes, revisions or amendments thereto may be certified by and filed with the city clerk, or other corresponding officer, in lieu of spreading the same on the minutes; and the commission may prescribe the manner in which copies of such code or codes, revisions or amendments thereto may be officially certified for use by the inhabitants or by the courts. The commission may adopt and provide for the maintenance in a designated office of the city a comprehensive zoning map of the city open for inspection by the public at all reasonable times, and may make such zoning map a part of any ordinance by reference thereto in such ordinance and without publication of such zoning map in any newspaper. Such zoning map need not be in one piece but may for convenience be in sections. A zoning map of territory newly added to the city shall be treated as a comprehensive zoning of the city for purposes of application of the provisions of the preceding sentence. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 3.14; Ala. Act, 1st Sp. Sess., No. 88-831, p. 293, § 3) 
Sec. 11-44E-54. - Examination of books and publication of accounts. 
    At the end of each year, the commission shall cause a full and complete examination of all the books and accounts of the city to be made by a certified public accountant or by the state department of public examiner of public accounts. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 3.15) 
ARTICLE IV. - MAYOR[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Code cross reference- Mayor, § 2-71 et seq. 

Sec. 11-44E-70. - Election; generally. 
    The mayor shall be elected at the same election at which commissioners for districts 1, 3 and 5 are elected under the provisions of article III of this chapter and shall hold office for four years. The mayor shall be elected at large. The mayor shall qualify and take office in the manner hereinafter prescribed on the first Monday in October following his (her) election. The regular election for mayor shall be held on the second Tuesday of July, 1993, and every four years thereafter. The mayor elected at any such regular election shall on or before the first Monday in October following his (her) election make oath that he (she) is eligible for said office and will execute the duties of same according to the best of his (her) knowledge and ability. At any election for mayor the candidate receiving a majority of votes for the office shall be elected thereto. If at the first election a majority is not received by any candidate for the office of mayor, the two candidates receiving the highest number of votes shall be declared eligible for a second (runoff) election to be held on the second Tuesday next thereafter following the first election. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445; Ala. Act, 1st Ex. Sess., No. 88-831; Ala. Act No. 90-287) 
Sec. 11-44E-71. - Statement of candidacy. 
    Any person desiring to become a candidate at any election for the office of mayor may become such candidate by filing in the office of the city clerk a statement in writing of such candidacy, accompanied by a petition signed by a minimum of 100 registered voters of such city endorsing the candidacy of such candidate and an affidavit taken and certified by such city clerk or by a notary public that such person is duly qualified to hold the office for which he (she) desires to be a candidate. Such statement shall be filed by 5:00 p.m. on the fourth Tuesday in June preceding the day set for such election and shall be in substantially the following form: 
"State of Alabama, _______ County. I, the undersigned, being first duly sworn, depose and say that I am a citizen of the City of _______, in said State and County, and reside at _______ in said City of _______, that I desire to become a candidate for the office of mayor in said City at the election for said office to be held on the _____ day of ________ and that I am duly qualified to hold said office if elected thereto and I hereby request that my name be printed upon the official ballot at said election. 
Signed ___________; 
Sworn to and subscribed before me by said ___________ on this _____ day of ________, [20___], and filed in this office for record on said day ________, City Clerk." 
    Said statement shall be accompanied by a qualifying fee in the amount of $300.00, which qualifying fee shall be paid over by the city clerk to the general fund of the city. Any person may file with the city clerk a verified pauper's oath that he (she) does not have the financial resources to pay a qualifying fee and thereupon shall be exempt from filing such fee. No names shall appear upon said ballot as a candidate for election except the names of such persons as have become candidates according to provisions of this chapter. 
(Act 2011-252, p. 450, § 1) 
Sec. 11-44E-72. - Eligibility of candidates. 
    The candidates for office of mayor shall have been qualified electors of the city for at least one year prior to qualifying, shall be at least 19 years of age and shall hold no other public office, except that of notary public or a member of the national guard, naval or military reserve, or the city commission. The candidates for mayor shall reside in any district within the city. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 4.03) 
Sec. 11-44E-73. - Compensation-Bond. 
    The compensation of the mayor elected during the first election held under the terms of this chapter shall be the sum of $42,000.00 per annum. 
    The fees, salary, or compensation of the mayor whose election is authorized by this chapter shall not be increased or diminished during the term for which he (she) shall be elected; provided, however, that the commission shall have authority and power to adjust such fees, salaries, or compensation for the succeeding term. 
    The mayor shall be bonded in the minimum amount of $50,000.00 and such additional amount as the commission may determine, if any. Such bond will be at the expense of the city. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445; Ala. Act No. 90-287) 
Sec. 11-44E-74. - Vacancy. 
    Whenever a vacancy in the office of mayor shall occur by reason of death, resignation, removal or any other cause, the acting mayor selected by a majority vote of the commission shall assume the duties of the office of mayor effective on the date such vacancy occurs and shall serve as acting mayor until a new mayor is elected and qualified as hereinafter provided. The acting mayor shall receive no compensation, expenses or allowances as a commissioner while acting as mayor, but he (she) will receive the same rate of pay and allowances provided for the mayor whose vacated office he (she) fills. The election commission of the city, if there be one, and if not then the commission thereof, shall within five days of the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of mayor call a special election to fill such vacancy, such election to be held on a Tuesday not less than 30 days and not more than 60 days from the occurrence of such vacancy; provided, however, if a regular or special election is scheduled or required to be held within 90 days after the occurrence of the vacancy but more than 30 days after such occurrence, then the vacancy in the office of mayor will be filled at such regular or special election. Notice of such election shall be given at the expense of the city by one publication at least 18 days in advance of the same in one or more newspapers published in such city. The method, procedure and requirements of qualifying, voting upon and determining the successful candidate shall be the same as is provided herein relative to the election of the mayor at regular elections, except that statements of candidacy must be filed at least 20 days before the date set for such election. The successor to the mayor chosen at any such election shall qualify for office as soon as practical thereafter and shall be clothed with and assume the duties, responsibilities and powers of such office immediately upon such qualification and shall hold office for the unexpired term of his (her) predecessor and until his (her) successor is elected and qualified. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445; Ala. Act No. 90-287) 
Sec. 11-44E-75. - Powers and duties. 
    The mayor shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To serve as the presiding officer of the commission. 
(2)  To vote and have the same privileges as any member of the commission. 
(3)  To represent the city in ceremonial functions. 
(4)  To serve as chief executive officer. 
(5)  To develop the basic objectives and policies of the city in conjunction with the commission and with the advice of the city manager. 
(6)  To insure that adequate plans for the future development and growth of the city are prepared; participate in the preparation; and periodically present such plans for general review and approval by the commission; and present such proposals to the commission for review and approval. 
(7)  To plan in conjunction with the commission for the development of resources within the city and maintain programs which will encourage successful future management of the city. 
(8)  To succeed to all powers, rights, and privileges conferred upon the mayor of the city by statutes and laws of Alabama in effect at the time of adoption by the city of the mayor/commission/city manager form of government and not in conflict with this chapter. 
(9)  To designate the mayor pro tem in the temporary absence of the mayor. 
(10)  With commission approval, to take such steps as may be necessary to protect and enhance the city's fiscal posture. 
(11)  To develop proposed rules of procedure for consideration by the commission. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445; Ala. Act No. 90-287) 
Sec. 11-44E-76. - Payment of all funds. 
    The payment of all funds shall be by checks or warrants signed by the city clerk and countersigned by the mayor; provided, however, a facsimile thereof may be used for such signing. During the absence of the mayor from the corporate limits of the city, and necessity therefore arising, checks or warrants may be countersigned by the mayor pro tem designated by the mayor to act in his (her) stead. All such disbursements shall be authorized by resolution of the commission. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 4.07) 
ARTICLE V. - CITY MANAGER[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Code cross reference- City manager, § 2-141 et seq. 

Sec. 11-44E-90. - Creation of office of city manager. 
    The office of the city manager is hereby created under sole authority of this chapter. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 5.01) 
Sec. 11-44E-91. - Appointment of city manager; qualifications; residence; noneligibility of elected officials. 
    The city manager shall be appointed by a majority vote of the commission. He (she) shall be chosen without regard to political beliefs and solely upon the basis of his (her) executive and administrative qualifications, with special recognition to his (her) actual experience in, or knowledge of, the duties of his (her) office as defined by this chapter. The choice shall not be limited to inhabitants of the city or the State of Alabama, but once appointed to the office, the city manager shall reside within the city. No elected official of the city shall be appointed to the position of city manager during the term for which he (she) shall have been elected nor within one year after the expiration of such term. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 5.02) 
Sec. 11-44E-92. - Powers and duties of city manager. 
    The city manager shall be the administrative head of the city. He (she) shall devote all his (her) working time and attention to the affairs of the city and shall be responsible to the commission for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city over which he (she) has jurisdiction. He (she) shall have the power and it shall be his (her) duty: 
(1)  To administer the policies of the commission, the Code of Ordinances of the city, and state and federal laws pertaining to the city as provided herein. For the purpose of said administration, the commission does hereby authorize and direct the city manager to see that all duties and authority conferred upon it by law, all city ordinances, resolutions, policies and directives are carried out, and any and all his (her) acts shall be for and in the name of the city and/or the commission; provided, however, there is hereby excepted and excluded those duties and authority given by the commission, state and federal laws to other boards, agencies and officials. 
(2)  To direct the affairs of all department heads and to appoint and, when necessary for the good of the service, discipline and remove all heads of departments, or other employees appointed by the city manager. Said appointments and removal shall be done only upon the recommendation of the city manager and subsequent approval by the commission. All such appointments shall be made upon merit and fitness alone. The city manager may, without notice, cause the affairs of any department head or employee to be examined. All appointments, removals or suspensions shall be subject to regulations, authority and provisions of any civil service act or merit system act relating to such city. 
(3)  To exercise control over all departments under his (her) supervision now in existence or that may hereinafter be created by the commission. 
(4)  To recommend to the commission the creating, consolidating and combining of offices, positions or departments of the administrative and operational departments of the city. 
(5)  To plan, organize and supervise the operations of the city's various department heads so as to promote harmony, economy, efficiency and cooperation among the departments and with the other agencies, commissions and committees as hereinabove set forth. 
(6)  To investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration and operation of the city government and services maintained by the public utilities of the city. 
(7)  To see that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city or its inhabitants in any public utility franchise are faithfully kept and performed and, upon the knowledge of any violation thereof, to call the same to the attention of the commission. 
(8)  The city manager, or an officer appointed by him (her), shall be the purchasing agent for the city for purchases for departments under his (her) control. 
(9)  To attend all meetings of the commission with the right to take part in the discussions but having no vote. The city manager shall be entitled to notice of all special meetings. 
(10)  To keep the commission fully advised at all times as to the financial condition and needs of the city. 
(11)  To prepare, or cause to be prepared, each year, an operations budget and supplemental budget as provided in article VI of this chapter. 
(12)  To cause to be prepared and presented to the commission semiannually a statement showing the exact financial condition of the city as of the end of the preceding quarter and showing amounts appropriated, amounts expended, and unexpended balance of the items of appropriation. 
(13)  To recommend to the commission adoption of such measures as he (she) may deem necessary or expedient. 
(14)  To insure that proper accounting procedures are established and followed. 
(15)  To seek to improve the relationship between the city government and the public by the formulation of an adequate program which shall include personnel training as well as public relations. 
(16)  To perform such other lawful duties as may be required by resolution or ordinance of the commission. 
(17)  To assure that each administrative unit of the municipality develops written operating procedures for that unit. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 5.03) 
Sec. 11-44E-93. - Noninterference by mayor or commission with certain duties of city manager; dealings with administrative service. 
    Neither the mayor, commission nor any of its members shall direct the employment or removal of any person by the city manager or by any of his (her) subordinates in the administrative service of the city. Appointments or removals of employees not subject to a civil service or merit act will be done in conformity with Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-44E-92(2). Except for the purposes of inquiry and investigation held in a manner firmly established by resolution or ordinance in advance of such inquiry and investigation, the commission and its members shall deal with the administrative service of the city solely through the city manager, and neither the commission nor any member thereof shall give orders, either publicly or privately, to any employee under the supervision of the city manager, except in emergencies. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 5.04) 
Sec. 11-44E-94. - Political, other improper influences on city manager and personnel under his (her) authority prohibited; ineligibility of candidates for public office to continue employment. 
    Neither the city manager nor any person appointed by him (her) or seeking appointment by him (her) shall be appointed, promoted, reduced, removed or in any way favored or discriminated against because of his (her) political opinions or affiliations. Neither the city manager nor any officer or employee directly appointed by the city manager shall continue in such position after becoming a candidate for nomination or election to any municipal public office. No person appointed by the city manager, or seeking appointment by him (her), shall either directly or indirectly give, render or pay any money, service or other valuable thing to any person for, or on account of, or in connection with, his (her) test, appointment, proposed appointment, promotion or proposed promotion. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 5.05) 
Sec. 11-44E-95. - Bond of city manager. 
    The city manager, before entering upon the discharge of his (her) duties, shall give bond in the penal sum of not less than $50,000.00 payable to the city and for the benefit of the city, and for the use and benefit of the public, to secure and indemnify the city and any of the public by reason of his (her) default, misfeasance or nonfeasance in the performance of his (her) duties. Expenses of providing such bond shall be paid by the city. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 5.06) 
Sec. 11-44E-96. - Compensation of city manager. 
    The city manager shall receive such compensation as, from time to time, may be approved by the commission as is specified in any employment contract that may exist between the commission and city manager. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 5.07) 
Sec. 11-44E-97. - Eligibility and participation in city retirement and insurance plans. 
    The city manager shall be eligible and may participate in the retirement system and the group insurance plan of the city. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 5.08) 
Sec. 11-44E-98. - Contract between city manager and city. 
    The tenure, compensation, and duties as provided by law of the city manager shall be enumerated in a contract between the city manager and the city. The contract shall not exceed two years in length with two, one-year renewal options. Commencing on the effective date of this amendatory act, the contract shall not exceed four years in length with two, one-year renewal options. Commencing on October 1, 2009, the contract shall not exceed four years in length with two, one-year renewal options. 
(Acts 1988, No. 88-445, p. 660, § 5.09; Act 2009-355, p. 678, § 1.) 
Sec. 11-44E-99. - Vacancies in office of city manager. 
    In the case of a vacancy in the office of city manager, the commission may appoint an acting city manager who shall possess the powers and duties of the city manager until such time as a new city manager is appointed by the commission. The acting city manager shall be compensated at no less than the level as the preceding city manager. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 5.10) 
Sec. 11-44E-100. - Temporary absence or disability of city manager. 
    During the temporary absence or disability of the city manager, the city manager shall designate the appropriate department head to serve in his (her) absence with the city commission's approval. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 5.11) 
ARTICLE VI. - BUDGET 

Sec. 11-44E-110. - Fiscal, budget and accounting year. 
    The fiscal year of the city government shall begin on October 1 and shall end on September 30 of each calendar year. Such fiscal year shall also constitute the budget and accounting year. As used in this chapter, the term "budget year" shall mean the fiscal year for which any particular budget is adopted and in which it is administered. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 6.01) 
Sec. 11-44E-111. - Submission of budgets. 
    On a day to be fixed by the commission, but in no case later than September 1 in each year, the city manager shall submit to the commission: 
(1)  A separate current revenue and expense budget for the general operation of the city government to be known as "operations budget"; and 
(2)  A budget message. 
    On a day to be fixed by the commission, but in no case later than March 20 each year, the city manager shall submit to the commission: 
(1)  A supplemental budget, which shall encompass new programs or activities, capital expenditures, and new personnel additions; and 
(2)  A budget message. 
    When submitting budgets to the commission, the city manager shall submit his recommendation of new sources of revenue or manner of increasing existing sources of revenue, sufficient to balance the budgets, if such additional revenue is necessary to accomplish that purpose. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 6.02; Ala. Act, 1st Sp. Sess., No. 88-831, p. 293, § 6) 
Sec. 11-44E-112. - Five-year plan. 
    The city manager shall submit to the commission on an annual basis at least a five-year projection of revenue and expenses. In addition, the plan shall include a projection of personnel, program and capital needs along with a ranking of such by priority. This document shall be known as the five-year plan and without binding the commission shall be used as a budgeting tool. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 6.03) 
ARTICLE VII. - COMMISSION DISTRICTS 

Sec. 11-44E-120. - Territorial limits of city. 
    The territorial limits of the city shall remain the same as under its former organization, except that for the purpose of holding elections under applicable laws, the present governing body shall, by duly enacted ordinance, divide such city into six single-member districts, each containing as nearly as practical equal population according to the last federal decennial census. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660; Ala. Act No. 90-287) 
Sec. 11-44E-121. - Reapportionment. 
    Whenever there shall be a change in population in any of the districts heretofore established, evidenced by a federal decennial census of population published following the last federal census of population preceding the adoption of this chapter, there shall be a reapportionment of the commission districts in the manner hereinafter provided: 
(1)  The mayor and commissioners shall, within six months after the publication of each federal census of population for the city, following the last federal decennial census of population preceding the adoption of this chapter, or if within six months after there shall have been any change in the corporate limits of the city, file with the commission a report containing a recommended plan for reapportionment of the commission district boundaries to comply with the following specifications: 
a.  Each district shall be formed of contiguous, and to the extent reasonably possible, compact territory, and its boundary lines shall be the centerlines of streets or other well-defined boundaries. 
b.  Each district shall contain as nearly as is practicable the same population. 
(2)  The report shall include a map and description of the districts recommended and shall be drafted as a proposed ordinance and considered by the commission as other ordinances are considered. Input shall be solicited from the community. 
(3)  The commission shall enact a redistricting ordinance within six months after receiving such report. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445; Ala. Act No. 90-287) 
ARTICLE VIII. - SUCCESSION IN GOVERNMENT 

Sec. 11-44E-140. - Rights of officers and employees preserved. 
    Nothing in this chapter contained, except as specifically provided, shall affect or impair the rights or privileges of officers or employees of the city or of any office, department or agency existing at the time when this chapter shall take effect, or any provision of law in force at the time when the mayor/commission/city manager form of government shall be adopted and not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, in relation to the personnel, appointment, ranks, grades, tenure of office, promotion, removal, pension and retirement rights, civil rights or any other rights or privileges of officers or employees of the city or any office, department or agency thereof. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 8.01) 
Sec. 11-44E-141. - Continuance of present officers; exercise of powers of abolished agency by agency designated by commission. 
    All persons holding administrative office at the time the mayor/commission/city manager form of government is adopted shall continue in office and in the performance of their duties until provision shall have been made in accordance therewith for the performance of such duties or the discontinuance of such office. The powers conferred and the duties imposed upon any office, department or agency of the city by the laws of the state shall, if such office, department or agency be abolished by this chapter or under its authority, be thereafter exercised and discharged by the office, department, or agency designated by the commission unless otherwise provided herein. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 8.02) 
Sec. 11-44E-142. - Continuance of officers and employees holding positions in classified service. 
    Any person holding an office or position in the classified service of the city under any civil service or merit system applicable to the city when the mayor/commission/city manager form of government is adopted shall continue as such officer or employee in the classified service of the city under the mayor/commission/city manager form of government and with the same status, rights and privileges and subject to the same conditions under such applicable civil service or merit system as if the mayor/commission/city manager form of government had not been adopted. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 8.03) 
Sec. 11-44E-143. - Transfer of agency records and property. 
    All records, property and equipment whatsoever of any office, department or agency or part thereof, all the powers and duties of which are assigned to any other office, department or agency of this chapter, shall be transferred and delivered to the office, department or agency to which such powers and duties are so assigned. If part of the powers and duties of any office, department or agency or part thereof are by this chapter assigned to another office, department or agency, all records, property and equipment relating exclusively thereto shall be transferred and delivered to the office, department or agency to which such powers and duties are so assigned. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 8.04) 
Sec. 11-44E-144. - Office, etc., with name or powers and duties the same or substantially same as existing office deemed a continuation of such office. 
    Any office, department, board or agency provided for in this chapter with a name or with powers and duties the same or substantially the same as those of an office, department or agency heretofore existing shall be deemed to be a continuation of such office, department or agency and, until otherwise provided, shall exercise its powers and duties in continuation of their exercise by the office, department, board or agency by which the same were heretofore exercised and, until otherwise provided, shall have power to continue any business, proceeding or other matter within the scope of its regular powers and duties commenced by an office, department or agency by which such powers and duties were heretofore exercised. Any provision in any law, rule, regulation, contract, grant or other document relating to such a formerly existing office, department or agency shall, so far as not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, apply to such office, department or agency provided for by this chapter. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 8.05) 
Sec. 11-44E-145. - Existing contracts continued in force; public improvements for which legislative steps taken. 
    All contracts entered into by the preceding form of government shall continue in full force and effect. Public improvements for which legislative steps have been taken under laws existing at the time of the adoption of the mayor/commission/city manager form of government may be carried to completion as nearly as practicable in accordance with the provisions of such existing laws. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 8.06) 
Sec. 11-44E-146. - Pending legal actions and proceedings. 
    No action or proceeding, civil or criminal, pending at the time of the adoption of the mayor/commission/city manager form of government, brought by or against the city or any office, department or agency or officer thereof, shall be affected or abated by the adoption of the mayor/commission/city manager form of government or by anything herein contained in this chapter; but all such actions or proceedings may be continued notwithstanding that functions, powers and duties of any office, department, or agency, or officer party thereto may by or under this chapter be assigned or transferred to another office, department or agency or officer, but in that event the same may be prosecuted or defended by the head of the office, department or agency to which such functions, powers and duties have been assigned or transferred under this chapter. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 8.07; Ala. Act No. 89-525) 
Sec. 11-44E-147. - Laws relating to pensions or retirement and relief funds continued in force. 
    All laws and parts of laws relating to pensions, retirement and relief funds for policemen, firemen and other employees of the city, contained in the general or local laws of the state, as the same may apply and be in effect with respect to any city at the time when such city shall elect to be governed by the provisions of this chapter, shall continue in full force and effect, and without interruption or change as to any rights which have been acquired thereunder, after adoption of the mayor/commission/city manager form of government by such city. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 8.08) 
Sec. 11-44E-148. - Laws relating to authority for fairgrounds, etc., continued in force. 
    All laws and parts of laws relating to establishment of an authority for fairgrounds, parks, exhibits, exhibitions and other installations, facilities and places for the amusement, entertainment, recreation and cultural development of the citizens of a city, and for the powers, authority, mode of financing and conduct of the same, contained in the general or local laws of the state, as amended, or as the same may apply and be in effect with respect to any city at the time when such city shall elect to be governed by the provisions of this chapter, shall continue in full force and effect, and without interruption or change as to the establishment or conduct of any authority created thereunder, after adoption of the mayor/commission/city manager form of government by such city. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 8.09) 
Sec. 11-44E-149. - Ordinances and resolutions continued in effect. 
    All ordinances and resolutions of the city in effect at the time of adoption by the city of the mayor/commission/city manager form of government herein set up shall continue in effect unless and until changed or repealed by the commission. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 8.10) 
ARTICLE IX. - CODE OF CONDUCT AND PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF THIS CHAPTER 

Sec. 11-44E-160. - Party caucus or primary for nomination of candidates for mayor or commissioner prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to hold a party caucus or primary for the purpose of nominating any candidate for the office of mayor or commissioner, and any candidate who solicits, receives, or accepts a party or caucus nomination for any office shall be ineligible for such office or any other municipal office for a period of four years thereafter. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 9.01; Ala. Act No. 89-525) 
Sec. 11-44E-161. - Bribes; transportation of voters to polls. 
    It shall be unlawful for any candidate for office or any officer in the city, directly or indirectly, to give or promise any person or persons an office, position, benefit or anything of value for the purpose of influencing or obtaining the political support, aid or vote of any person or persons, or for any candidate to provide or use any trucks, automobiles or other vehicles for the purpose of transporting voters to the polls on election day. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 9.02) 
Sec. 11-44E-162. - Statement of campaign contributions. 
    Each candidate for city office provided for by this chapter shall, not later than 30 days after the election, file with the city clerk his (her) sworn itemized statement in detail of each contribution received by him (her) or any person or committee acting in his (her) behalf, specifying the amount of same, the full name and address of the contributor, and each campaign-related expenditure in excess of $50.00, specifying the name and address of the person or company to whom the expenditure was made. The statement shall also list the total amount of contributions received and the total amount of campaign expenditures made by the candidate or any person or committee acting in his (her) behalf. The statement shall be published one time, at the expense of the city, in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 9.03) 
Sec. 11-44E-163. - Financial interest in public service utility. 
    No mayor or commissioner or any other official of the city, nor any employee thereof, shall be financially interested in any corporation operating any public service utility within the city; provided, however, this shall not apply to any employment or interest existing at the time of the selection or election of such mayor or commissioner or other official. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 9.04) 
Sec. 11-44E-164. - Election bribes; false statement as to qualification to vote; voting or offering to vote by person who is not qualified. 
    Any person offering to give a bribe, either in money or other consideration, to any voter for the purpose of influencing his (her) vote at any election provided for in this chapter, or any voter entitled to vote at such election, receiving and accepting such bribe or other consideration, or any person making false answer to any of the provisions of this chapter relative to his (her) qualifications to vote at an election, or any person willfully voting or offering to vote at such election, who has not complied with the residency requirements provided for by general law, or who is not voting age, or is not a citizen of the United States, or knowing himself (herself) not be a qualified voter of the precinct, where he (she) offers to vote, or any person knowingly procuring, aiding or abetting any violation hereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as provided by law. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 9.05) 
Sec. 11-44E-165. - Employee involvement in elections. 
    Any employee of any such city shall not wear signs or election material at his (her) place of employment or work. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 9.06) 
Sec. 11-44E-166. - Hiring of persons to solicit votes at polls on election day. 
    It shall be unlawful for any candidate for mayor or commissioner, or for any other person in his (her) behalf, to hire, or pay or agree to pay, any person to solicit votes at the polls on election day, and it shall also be unlawful for any person to accept such hire, or make contract for pay, to solicit votes for any candidate for mayor or commissioner. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 9.07) 
Sec. 11-44E-167. - Penalties for violations of this chapter; disqualification of candidate. 
    Any person willfully violating any provisions of this chapter relating to the mayor/commission/city manager form of government for which penalties have not otherwise been prescribed shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction shall be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00 or may be sentenced to hard labor for the county for a term not to exceed six months, or both. Furthermore, any candidate for the office of commissioner or mayor shall be disqualified from holding municipal office for a period of four years from such conviction. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 9.08) 
Sec. 11-44E-168. - Recall of elected official. 
    The mayor or any commissioner shall be subject to recall. To institute a recall election, any registered voter may present a petition to the city clerk having the signatures of no less than 30 percent of the registered voters having voted in the last preceding election. Such petition shall contain the following statement: 
To the city clerk. We the following registered voters of _______ (name of municipality) do respectfully request that you instigate an election to be held for the purpose of recalling ___________ (name of person) who holds the office of _______ (name of office). 
    Signatures of those signing the petition along with residential addresses shall follow. 
    Upon receipt of such petition, the city clerk shall make arrangements under Alabama law to hold such election within 30 days of receipt by the city clerk of such petition. 
    Provided that a majority of registered voters vote for the recall, then the city clerk shall thereupon declare that office vacant, and the officeholder shall no longer be an elected official. 
    The officeholder's successor shall be named as prescribed elsewhere in this chapter. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 9.09) 
Editor's note- In City of Dothan et al v Coleman, etc., CV 92-05008, the circuit court held that Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-4E-168 was unconstitutional and that the remainder of the sections are valid and in effect. 
ARTICLE X. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 11-44E-180. - Removal of officers and employees; appeal. 
    Subject to the provisions of any civil service or merit system applicable to the city, and Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-44E-92, any officer or employee or a head of any office, department or agency may be removed by the city manager or other appointing officer at any time, and the decision of the city manager, or other appointing officer shall be subject to appeals therefrom, if any are provided by applicable law. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 10.01; Ala. Act, 1st Sp. Sess., No. 88-831, p. 293, § 7) 
Sec. 11-44E-181. - Appointment of committees; inquiries and investigations by commission, etc.; subpoenas; failure to obey subpoena. 
    Any committee of the commission or comprised of members of the commission shall be appointed by the mayor only. Any other committee comprised solely of noncommission members shall be appointed by the mayor and commissioners. The commission or any person or committee authorized by them shall have power by resolution to inquire into the conduct of any office, department, agency or officer of the city and to make investigations as to municipal affairs, and for that purpose may subpoena any person to produce books, papers and other evidence. Failure to obey such subpoena or to produce books, papers or other evidence as ordered under the provisions of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed ten days or both. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 10.02) 
Sec. 11-44E-182. - Contracts extending beyond one year. 
    No contract involving the payment of money out of the appropriation of more than one year shall be made for a period of more than five years, nor shall any such contract be valid unless made or approved by resolution or ordinance. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 10.03) 
Sec. 11-44E-183. - Interest of official or employee in contracts with city or public utility prohibited; acceptance of gifts, etc.; penalty. 
    No member of the commission, the mayor, officer or employee appointed shall be financially interested, directly or indirectly, in any contract for work or material, or the profits thereof, in services to be furnished or performed for the city; and no such member of the commission, the mayor, or employee shall be financially interested, directly or indirectly, in any contract for work or material, or the profits thereof, in any services to be furnished or performed for any person, firm or corporation operating interurban railway, street railway, gas works, cable television systems, electric light or power plant, heating plant, telegraph line or telephone exchange within the territorial limits of said city. No such member of the commission, the mayor, officer or employee of such city shall be interested in or be an employee or an attorney of any corporation operating any public service utility within said city. No such member of the commission, officer or employee shall accept or receive, directly or indirectly, from any person, firm or corporation operating within the territorial limits of said city any cable television system, railway, gas works, waterworks, electrical light or power plant, heating plant, telegraph line, or telephone exchange, or other business using or operating under a public franchise, any frank, free pass, free ticket or free service, or accept or receive, directly or indirectly, from any such person, firm or corporation, any gift or other thing of value, or any service upon terms more favorable than are granted to the public generally. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, the guilty person shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $300.00. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 10.04) 
Sec. 11-44E-184. - Bonds of employees. 
    Such employees as required by Alabama law and those required by the commission shall give bond in such amount and with such surety as may be approved by the commission. The premiums on such bonds shall be paid by the city. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 10.05) 
Sec. 11-44E-185. - Oath of office. 
    Every officer of the city shall before entering upon the duties of his (her) office, take and subscribe to the oath or affirmation as required by law to be filed and kept in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 10.06) 
Sec. 11-44E-186. - Continuation of laws. 
    All laws relating to the school board, library board, hospital board, airport board, housing authority, plumbers or electricians board, planning board, zoning board, park or recreation board, municipally owned public utility and any municipally owned service enterprise, including, inter alia, electric, gas and water boards, agencies, etc., and any board, authority, agency, etc., given such independent status, as the same may apply and be in effect at the time when such municipality shall elect to be governed by the provisions of this chapter, shall continue in full force and effect and without interruption or change as to the establishment or conduct of any such authority, board or agency, until otherwise provided by law. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 10.07; Ala. Act No. 89-525) 
Sec. 11-44E-187. - Inclusion of annexed territory into districts. 
    Upon the adoption of any ordinance providing for the addition or deletion of territory into the city limits of the city, such ordinance shall provide for the inclusion of such territory into one of the districts of the city. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 10.08) 
ARTICLE XI. - ABANDONMENT OF MAYOR/COMMISSION/CITY MANAGER FORM OF GOVERNMENT 

Sec. 11-44E-200. - Authority to change from mayor/commission/city manager form of government. 
    No city may change from the mayor/commission/city manager form of government within two years after adoption thereof. At the end of such period, or at any time thereafter, the city may change its form of municipal government to any form of municipal government provided by the laws of Alabama. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 11.01) 
Sec. 11-44E-201. - Petition for change of form of government; election as to proposed change; election of new officers and governing body; termination of term of office of mayor and commissioners. 
    Any proposal to change the form of government shall be initiated by a petition signed by at least the number of qualified voters, equal to four for every 100 inhabitants of the city or fraction thereof according to the last federal census, and then filed with the city clerk. The city commission shall forthwith order an election, at which the legally qualified voters of the city shall vote for or against the proposed change in form of government. The officers and members of the governing body of such newly adopted form of municipal government shall be elected as soon as practicable under the provisions of law applicable thereto, and upon their election and qualification for office the term of office of all members of the commission and mayor under the mayor/commission/city manager form of government shall terminate. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 11.02) 
Sec. 11-44E-202. - No election on change of form of government within two years. 
    No election on the abandonment of the mayor/commission/city manager form of government shall be held within two years after any other election thereon. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 11.03) 
ARTICLE XII. - GENERAL STATUTORY PROVISIONS 

Sec. 11-44E-220. - Effect of chapter on existing law. 
    All laws and parts of laws, general, local or special, relating to or affecting the city, its powers, functions, duties and property, in force when this chapter shall take effect, are hereby continued in effect; but all such laws relating to the exercise of powers, functions and duties by the preceding other form of government shall be superseded to the extent that the same are inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 12.01) 
Sec. 11-44E-221. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Mayor/Commission/City Manager Act of 1988." 
(Ala. Act No. 88-445, p. 660, § 12.03) 
APPENDIX. - DISTRICT BOUNDARIES[5] 
    Unless otherwise specified, all district boundary lines run along the centerlines of street rights-of-way, railroad rights-of-way, or other named physical features. 
DISTRICT 1 
    Beginning at the intersection of the northern Dothan city limits and Lingo Road; then southerly along Lingo Road to Flynn Road; then easterly along Flynn Road to North Denton Road; then southeasterly and southerly along North Denton Road to the Ross Clark Circle, also known as Alabama Highway 210; then easterly along the Ross Clark Circle to the CSX Railroad; then southeasterly along the CSX Railroad to the projected centerline of Stough Street; then easterly along the said projection and Stough Street to Headland Avenue; then southerly along Headland Avenue to Pine Street; then east on Pine Street to East North Street; then easterly along East North Street to North Range Street; then southerly along North Range Street to the CSX Railroad; then easterly and southeasterly along the CSX Railroad to East Burdeshaw Street; then easterly along East Burdeshaw Street to North Beverlye Road; then southerly along North Beverlye Road to Columbia Highway, also known as Alabama Highway 52 East; then northeasterly along the Columbia Highway to the eastern Dothan city limits. 
DISTRICT 2 
    Beginning at the intersection of the eastern Dothan city limits and Columbia Highway, also known as Alabama Highway 52 East, then southwesterly along the Columbia Highway to North Beverlye Road; then northerly along North Beverlye Road to East Burdeshaw Street; then westerly along East Burdeshaw Street to the CSX Railroad; then northwesterly and westerly along the CSX Railroad to North Range Street; then northerly along North Range Street to East North Street; then southwesterly along East North Street to Pine Street; then westerly along Pine Street to Headland Avenue; then northerly along Headland Avenue to Stough Street; then westerly along Stough Street and the projection thereof the CSX Railroad; then northwesterly along the CSX Railroad to Reeves Street, also known as U.S. Highway 431; then southwesterly along Reeves Street to Montgomery Highway, also known as U.S. Highway 231 North; then westerly along Montgomery Highway to North Park Avenue; then southerly along North Park Avenue to West Main Street, also known as U.S. Highway 84 West; then easterly along West Main Street to South Oates Street, also known as U.S. Highway 231 South; then southerly along South Oates Street to East Selma Street; then easterly along East Selma Street to Sixth Avenue; then northerly along Sixth Avenue to Summit Street; then easterly along Summit Street to East Haven Drive; then northerly along East Haven Drive to U.S. Highway 84 East, part of which is also known as John L. Murphree Boulevard; then southeasterly along U.S. Highway 84 East to the eastern Dothan city limits. 
DISTRICT 3 
    Beginning at the intersection of the eastern Dothan city limits and U.S. Highway 84 East, part of which is also known as John L. Murphree Boulevard; then northwesterly along U.S. Highway 84 East to East Haven Drive; then southerly along East Haven Drive to Summit Street; then westerly along Summit Street to Sixth Avenue; then southerly along Sixth Avenue to East Selma Street to South Oates Street, also known as U.S. Highway 231 South; then southerly along South Oates Street to the Ross Clark Circle, also known as Alabama Highway 210; then easterly along the Ross Clark Circle to Hodgesville Road; then southerly along Hodgesville Road to the southern Dothan city limits. 
DISTRICT 4 
    Beginning at the intersection of the southern Dothan city limits and Hodgesville Road; then northerly along Hodgesville Road to the Ross Clark Circle, also known as Alabama Highway 210; then westerly along the Ross Clark Circle to South Oates Street, also known as U.S. Highway 231 South; then northerly along South Oates Street to West Main Street, also known as U.S. Highway 84 West; then westerly along West Main Street to South Park Avenue; then southerly along South Park Avenue to Fortner Street; then westerly along Fortner Street to the Ross Clark Circle, also known as Alabama Highway 210; then southeasterly along the Ross Clark Circle to Hartford Highway, also known as Alabama Highway 52 West; then southwesterly along Hartford Highway to Earline Road; then northwesterly along Earline Road to McAllister Road; then northerly along McAllister Road to Fortner Street; then westerly along Fortner Street to the western Dothan city limits at the western boundary of section 28, township 3N, range 26E. 
DISTRICT 5 
    Beginning at the intersection of the western Dothan city limits at the western boundary of section 28, township 3N, range 26E, and Fortner Street; then easterly along Fortner Street to McAllister Road; then southerly along McAllister Road to Earline Road; then southeasterly along Earline Road to Hartford Highway, also known as Alabama Highway 52 West; then northeasterly along Hartford Highway to the Ross Clark Circle, also known as Alabama Highway 210; then northwesterly along Ross Clark Circle to Fortner Street; then easterly along Fortner Street to South Park Avenue; then northerly along South Park Avenue to West Main Street, also known as U.S. Highway 84 West; then westerly along West Main Street to the Ross Clark Circle, also known as Alabama Highway 210; then northerly along the Ross Clark Circle to Choctaw Street; then northwesterly along Choctaw Street to Westgate Parkway; then northerly along Westgate Parkway to Rock Creek; then westerly and northwesterly along Rock Creek to Buena Vista Drive; then northerly along Buena Vista Drive to Brookside Drive; then northerly along Brookside Drive to Murphy Mill Road; then westerly along Murphy Mill Road to the western Dothan city limits. 
DISTRICT 6 
    Beginning at the intersection of the western Dothan city limits and Murphy Mill Road; then easterly along Murphy Mill Road to Brookside Drive; then southerly along Brookside Drive to Buena Vista Drive; then southerly along Buena Vista Drive to Rock Creek; then southeasterly and easterly along Rock Creek to Westgate Parkway; then southerly along Westgate Parkway to Choctaw Street; then southeasterly along Choctaw Street to the Ross Clark Circle, also known as Alabama Highway 210; then southerly along the Ross Clark Circle to West Main Street, also known as U.S. Highway 84 West; then easterly along West Main Street to North Park Avenue; then northerly along North Park Avenue to Montgomery Highway, also known as U.S. Highway 231 North; then easterly along Montgomery Highway to Reeves Street, also known as U.S. Highway 431; then northerly along Reeves Street to the CSX Railroad; then northerly along the CSX Railroad to the Ross Clark Circle, also known as Alabama Highway 210; then westerly along the Ross Clark Circle to North Denton Road; then northerly and northwesterly along North Denton Road to Flynn Road; then westerly along Flynn Road to Lingo Road; then northerly along Lingo Road to the northern Dothan city limits. 
(Ord. No. 92-98, § 1, 4-14-92) 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein are the district boundaries as revised by the city in Ord. No. 90-172, § 1, adopted April 14, 1992, from the appendix to part I of the 1977 Code of Ordinances, Dothan, Alabama. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform, and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

STATUTORY CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - ACTS 
This table enumerates acts which are amendatory of the Code of Alabama (1975), Ch. 44E. 
Ala. Act/SP. 
Sess. No. Page Section  Section 
this Charter 88-445 11-44E-3 11-44E-40 11-44E-43 11-44E-70 11-44E-73-11-44E-75 11-44E-121 660 11-44E-120 1.01, 1.02 11-44E-1, 11-44E-2 1.04 11-44E-4 2.01-2.03 11-44E-20-11-44E-22 3.02, 3.03 11-44E-41, 11-44E-42 3.05-3.15 11-44E-44-11-44E-54 4.02, 4.03 11-44E-71, 11-44E-72 4.07 11-44E-76 5.01-5.11 11-44E-90-11-44E-100 6.01-6.03 11-44E-110-11-44E-112 8.01-8.10 11-44E-140-11-44E-149 9.01 11-44E-160 9.02 11-44-161 9.03-9.09 11-44E-162-11-44E-168 10.01-10.08 11-44E-180-11-44E-187 11.01-11.03 11-44E-200-11-44E-202 12.01 11-44E-220 12.03 11-44E-221 88-831 11-44E-3 11-44E-70 293 2 11-44E-41 3 11-44E-53 5 11-44E-71 6 11-44E-111 660 7 11-44E-180 89-525 11-44E-44 11-44E-52 11-44E-146 11-44E-160 11-44E-186 90-287 11-44E-3 11-44E-40 11-44E-43 11-44E-70 11-44E-73-11-44E-75 11-44E-120, 11-44E-121 1 11-44E-2 98-290 314 1 11-44E-46 2009-335 11-44E-98 2009-355 678 1 11-44E-98 2009-362 684 1 11-44E-3 11-44E-40 2011-252 450 1 11-44E-41 110-44E-71  
STATUTORY CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table indicates the disposition of ordinances included in Part I. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Charter 92-98  4-14-92 1 11-44E-221  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Dothan, Alabama," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1) 
State Law reference- Authority for the revision and codification of ordinances, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-44E-53. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Board of commissioners. Whenever the term "board," "board of commissioners," "city commission," "commission" or "governing body" is used, it shall be construed to mean the legislative body of the City of Dothan. 
    City, in the city. The term "the city" or "this city" shall mean the City of Dothan, Alabama, and shall extend to its several officers, agents and employees when acting in their official capacity. Every section contained in this Code, whether expressed to apply "in the city" or not so expressed, shall apply and shall have full force and effect within the corporate limits of the city and within the police jurisdiction thereof and within the territorial limits of any property or right-of-way owned by the city, wherever situated. However, any such section shall not apply within the police jurisdiction if expressed to apply within the "corporate limits of the city," or if the section cannot legally be made to apply in the police jurisdiction or if the section cannot physically apply in the police jurisdiction or if the section, otherwise than by use of such terms as "in the city" or "within the city," contains clear inherent evidence of intent that it shall not apply in the police jurisdiction. 
    City officials, officers and employees. Whenever reference is made to officials, boards, commissions, departments, etc., by title only, i.e., "mayor," "city clerk," "planning commission," "chief of police," or any other such designation, such references shall be deemed to be to officials, etc., of the City of Dothan, and powers and authority granted to them shall be deemed to be grants of such powers and authority to their respective duly designated subordinates. 
    Code. The word "Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, City of Dothan, Alabama, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Code of Alabama. Whenever reference is made to the "Code of Alabama" or the "Alabama Code" or abbreviations thereof, it shall mean the Code of Alabama 1975, as amended, or any subsequent official code or compilation of this state. 
    Computation of time. The time in which an act is to be done must be computed by excluding the first and including the last day, and, if the last day is a Sunday or legal holiday, that shall be excluded. 
    Corporate limits. The term "corporate limits" or "city limits" shall mean the corporate or city limits of the City of Dothan, not including its police jurisdiction. 
    County. The term "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Houston in the State of Alabama. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations, as well as to males. 
    Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provisions imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
    Joint authority. All words giving joint authority to four or more persons or officers shall give such authority to a majority of such persons or officers, unless it is otherwise declared. 
    Jurisdiction. All provisions of this Code and other city laws and ordinances prescribing police or sanitary regulations and prescribing penalties for violations thereof shall have force and effect in the corporate limits of the city and in the police jurisdiction thereof and on any property or rights-of-way belonging to the city, except those provisions, laws and ordinances which specifically limit their force and effect to the corporate limits, or which, for any reason mentioned under the definition of "city" in this section, cannot legally apply to any such area outside of the corporate limits. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-40-10. 
    May. The term "may" shall be permissive. 
    Month. The term "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Number. A term importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things, as well as to one person and thing. 
    Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be submitted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals or groups of individuals, and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee or similar representative thereof. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as defined in this section. 
    Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Shall. The term "shall" is mandatory. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" shall mean that portion of a street between the curblines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature or subscription. The term "signature or subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write if his name is written near the mark and witnessed by a person who writes his own name as a witness. 
State Law reference- Signature defined, Code of Ala. 1975, § 1-1-1. 
    State. The term "the state" shall be construed to mean the State of Alabama. 
    Street. The term "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public ways in the city and shall embrace all parts thereof within the designated right-of-way. When the public records are silent, the term shall embrace all of the area between the off-street edge of the sidewalk or walkway on each side of the street, including the grassplots or other divisional areas lying between the sidewalk or walkway and street. 
    Tense. Words used in the present or past tense include the future as well as the present or past. 
    Words and phrases. All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
    Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The term "year," unqualified, means a calendar year. 
(Code 1977, § 1-2) 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections and other headings; notes and references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several subsections, sections, divisions, articles and chapters of this Code printed in boldface or italic type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the subsections, sections, divisions, articles or chapters and shall not be deemed or taken to be the title of any such subsection, section, division, article or chapter nor as any part of the subsection, section, division, article or chapter nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any such subsection, section, division, article or chapter, including the catchline, is amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source note appearing in parentheses after a section in this Code is not intended to have any legal effect but is merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Cross references and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles or sections are to the chapters, articles and sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1977, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
    Wherever in this Code or in any of the city ordinances any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or misdemeanor or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful and no specific penalty is provided, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not less than $1.00 nor more than $500.00 or by imprisonment in the jail or at hard labor for a period of not exceeding six months or by both such fine and imprisonment, at the discretion of the judge trying the case. Each day any violation of this Code or any such city ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1977, § 1-8) 
State Law reference- Authority of municipal corporation to adopt and enforce ordinances, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-1; penalty for ordinance violations generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-9. 
Sec. 1-5. - Violation of orders and rules and regulations. 
    Any person who shall violate or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any lawful order of any lawful officer of the city made in pursuance of and under his authority as such officer or who shall violate or shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the rules and regulations or laws adopted or pursuant to this Code shall be guilty of an offense. However, this section shall not apply to violations of official duty imposed by this Code upon city officers or employees as such, unless the provision imposing the duty also expressly makes the violation thereof unlawful or punishable. 
(Code 1977, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-6. - Judgments and sentences to run consecutively. 
    All judgments and sentences imposed and ordered by the municipal court shall run consecutively unless otherwise specifically provided by the judge of such court in such judgments and sentences. 
(Code 1977, § 1-10) 
Sec. 1-7. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money of the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by the city. 
(5)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, opening, widening, paving, abandoning, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(6)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(7)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective only for a stated or limited time. 
(8)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(9)  Any ordinance regarding personnel, salaries and expense allowances, including but not limited to public corporations. 
(10)  Any ordinance regarding civil emergencies and paramedics. 
(11)  Any ordinance regarding city boundaries. 
(12)  Any ordinance regarding the education board districts. 
(13)  Any ordinance regarding the business privilege license tax and schedule. 
(14)  Any ordinance regarding election districts and wards. 
(15)  Any ordinance which is special, although permanent in effect. 
(16)  Any ordinance providing for and regulating flood management. 
(17)  Any ordinance regarding bondsmen. 
(b)  All such ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-8. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-9. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1977, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-10. - Amendments to Code. 
    All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this Code, which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. If any chapter, section or subsection or any part thereof is repealed by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions shall be excluded from the Code by the omission of such portions from reprinted pages affected thereby. 
(Code 1977, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-11. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the board of commissioners. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the board of commissioners or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the term "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1977, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-12. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
(Code 1977, § 1-12) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Civil emergencies, ch. 26. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Depositories for city funds designated; treasurer to deposit all city funds therein. 
    Wells Fargo, Dothan, Alabama; Regions Bank, Dothan, Alabama; Community Bank & Trust, Dothan, Alabama; AB&T National Bank, Dothan, Alabama; BBVA Compass Bank, Dothan, Alabama; MidSouth Bank, Dothan, Alabama; SunSouth Bank, Dothan, Alabama; Trinity Bank, Dothan, Alabama; Banksouth, Dothan, Alabama; ServisFirst Bank, Dothan, Alabama; Hancock Bank, Dothan, Alabama; Troy Bank and Trust, Dothan, Alabama; and Ameris Bank, Dothan, Alabama are designated as depositories of city funds, and the treasurer is directed to deposit all city funds in such depositories. 
(Code 1977, § 2-9; Ord. No. 97-17, § 1, 1-14-97; Ord. No. 2001-332, § 1, 10-30-01; Ord. No. 2005-25, § 1, 1-25-05; Ord. No. 2007-289, § 1, 8-14-07; Ord. No. 2008-324, § 1, 11-4-08; Ord. No. 2010-227, § 1, 8-17-10; Ord. No. 2011-1, § 1, 1-4-11; Ord. No. 2015-259, § 1, 9-15-15; Ord. No. 2017-159, § 1, 5-16-17; Ord. No. 2018-250, § 1, 9-18-18) 
State Law reference- City may designate the depository for city funds, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-122. 
Sec. 2-2. - Sale of real property. 
(a)  Any real property owned by the city considered and determined by the board of commissioners to be no longer needed for public or municipal purposes shall be advertised for sale once a week for three consecutive weeks in a local newspaper of general circulation to the highest bidder for cash on sealed bids to be opened and read publicly at a time designated in the commission chambers at the Roy Driggers Municipal Building. The city shall reserve the right to waive any formalities or to reject any or all bids when in the best interest of the city. 
(b)  When the highest bid for such real property has been determined at a bid opening, the board of commissioners shall, in its discretion, accept the bid and, pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-20, as amended, direct the mayor to make title thereto by properly adopted ordinance authorizing the conveyance. 
(c)  The following exemptions are made to the bid requirement for the sale of real property: 
(1)  Real property of the housing authority of the city acquired through and governed by federal law. 
(2)  Real property transfers in exchange for other lands. 
(3)  Real property whose value is less than $2,000.00, as determined by the board of commissioners. 
(4)  Real property owned by the city located in industrial parks or located in other areas specifically designated by the board of commissioners for industrial development or industrial expansion purposes; provided, however, that any warranty deed given by the city to a grantee under this exemption shall contain a reversionary clause that if such property is not developed for the designated purpose within two years from date of the deed, title thereto shall revert to the city upon payment to the grantee of the original purchase price, plus interest at eight percent. 
(5)  Real property sold or transferred to other governmental entities. 
(Code 1977, § 2-12) 
State Law reference- Disposition of unneeded real estate generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-20. 
Secs. 2-3-2-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR/ COMMISSIONERS/CITY MANAGER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-36. - Commission meetings-Days, time and place of regular meetings. 
    Pursuant to Code of Alabama, 1975, § 11-44E-48, as amended, the board of commissioners shall hold its regular public meetings on the first and third Tuesday of each month at 10:00 a.m. in the commission chambers of the Roy Driggers Municipal Building effective Tuesday, August 3, 2010. 
(Code 1977, § 2-2; Ord. No. 97-277, § 1, 8-12-97; Ord. No. 2003-240, § 1, 9-2-03; Ord. No. 2005-314, § 1, 11-1-05; Ord. No. 2007-392, § 1, 11-13-07; Ord. No. 2008-143, § 1, 5-20-08; Ord. No. 2010-148, § 1, 6-1-10) 
Sec. 2-37. - Same-Special or called meetings. 
    There may be meetings called by the mayor or four associate commissioners at any time. 
(Code 1977, § 2-3) 
Sec. 2-38. - Same-Acting as a body; appointment of department heads; formulation of regulations and policies. 
    The board of commissioners shall act on all matters as a body in regular or regular adjourned meetings. Appointment of department heads provided for by law shall be by resolution in such a regular or regular adjourned meeting. The regulations and policies under which the various departments operate shall be fixed by ordinances adopted and codified under applicable laws of the state, and shall be readily available to the general public in the city clerk's office, and/or mayor's office or city manager's office, at all reasonable times. No official, either elected or appointed, or employee, shall vary from or make exceptions to such regulations or policies except as authorized by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1977, § 2-4) 
Sec. 2-39. - Determining rules and agenda, keeping journal-Authority and duty. 
    The commission shall determine its own rules and order of business and shall keep a journal of its proceedings. The journal shall be open for public inspection. 
(Code 1977, § 2-20) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-44E-50. 
Sec. 2-40. - Same-Altering, amending, rescinding. 
    These commission rules shall not be altered, amended or rescinded, except by a majority vote of all members of the commission. Any such alterations or amendments shall be submitted in writing at a regular meeting of the commission and shall be placed on the calendar under the order of "communications from city officials," for consideration at the next regular commission meeting. This requirement shall only be waived by unanimous consent and recorded vote of all members of the commission. 
(Code 1977, § 2-21) 
Sec. 2-41. - Compensation of mayor and associate commissioners. 
    Pursuant to Act No. 90-287, the mayor shall receive an annual salary of $42,000.00, and each associate commissioner shall receive an annual salary of $21,000.00. All such salaries shall be payable by the city in equal biweekly installments and at the same rate for every fraction of a year which the mayor and commissioners serve. The payment of all funds out of the treasury shall be by warrants signed by the city clerk and countersigned by the mayor; provided however, that a facsimile thereof may be used for such signatures. During the absence of the mayor from the corporate limits of the city, and necessity therefor arising, warrants may be countersigned by the mayor pro tem designated by the mayor to act in his stead. All such disbursements shall be authorized by resolution of the commission. 
(Code 1977, § 2-6) 
Secs. 2-42-2-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MAYOR[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Civil emergencies, ch. 26. 
State Law reference- Mayor generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-44E-70 et seq. 
Statutory Charter reference- Mayor, pt. I, art. IV. 

Sec. 2-71. - To act as the chair; powers and duties. 
(a)  The mayor shall take the chair at the hour appointed for the commission to meet, and shall immediately call the members to order. Following the invocation and flag ceremony, the roll shall then be taken, the clerk shall enter in the minutes of each meeting the names of the members present thereat. In the absence of a quorum at the time appointed for a meeting, the members present may, by a majority vote, take a recess or recesses, and cause the attendance of absent members. 
(b)  In case of the temporary absence of the mayor, the mayor shall appoint a mayor pro tem to serve during such absence. 
(c)  The chair shall preserve decorum and decide all questions of order, subject to appeal to the commission. In case of an appeal being taken, the question shall be: "Shall the decision of the chair stand as the decision of commission?" If any member shall transgress the rules of commission, the chair shall, or any member may, call him to order, in which case the chair shall render a decision as to the point of order. 
(d)  All questions are to be stated and put by the chair, who shall declare all votes, after the clerk shall have announced the number of each side, except in case of viva voce vote, the result of which the chair shall declare without reference to the clerk. 
(e)  The clerk and other employees and officers of commission shall be under the control and direction of the chair during sessions of commission. 
(Code 1977, § 2-22) 
Sec. 2-72. - Powers. 
    The mayor may remit fines and such costs as are payable to the city and commute sentences imposed by municipal judges or the court to which an appeal was taken for violations of city ordinances, and may grant pardons, after convictions, for violation of such ordinances, and he shall report his action to the board of commissioners at the next regular meeting with his reasons therefor in writing. 
Secs. 2-73-2-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Commission generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-44E-40 et seq. 
Statutory Charter reference- Commission, pt. I, art. III. 

Sec. 2-101. - Definition of majority. 
    Whenever the term "majority" is used in this division, unless otherwise expressly indicated, it shall be held to mean a majority of those elected to the commission. 
(Code 1977, § 2-29) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-102. - Reading and approval of journal of preceding meeting. 
    At each meeting the journal of the preceding meeting shall be read unless the reading shall be dispensed with and shall be approved by a majority of the members present. 
(Code 1977, § 2-23) 
Sec. 2-103. - Agenda-Order of business. 
(a)  The commission shall transact business in the following order: 
(1)  Call to order (reading of call of special meeting). 
(2)  Invocation. 
(3)  Pledge of allegiance. 
(4)  Approval of minutes. 
(5)  Proclamations and other presentations. 
(6)  Communications from mayor and city commissioners. 
(7)  Communications from city manager. 
(8)  Communications from city clerk. 
(9)  Presentation of ordinances. 
(10)  Presentation of resolutions. 
(11)  Miscellaneous business. 
(12)  Public hearing shall be heard at the times previously set by the commission. 
(b)  Privileges of the floor shall be granted at the end of the administrative meetings. In the event no administrative meeting agenda is prepared privileges of the floor will be heard after the adjournment of the commission meeting. 
(Code 1977, § 2-24; Ord. No. 99-227, § 1, 8-10-99; Ord. No. 2000-355, § 1, 11-21-00) 
Sec. 2-104. - Same-Placing items thereon. 
    All such communications, petitions, reports of officials, resolutions and ordinances shall be filed with the clerk not later than the Thursday preceding the meeting at 12:00 noon. The clerk shall include the same in the calendar of the meeting day in their order upon the agenda, and all such matters not filed with the clerk and introduced upon the agenda shall not be read or referred but shall lie over until the next meeting to be placed on the calendar and taken up on the regular call of the members unless leave for immediate consideration is granted by a majority vote of the commission. 
(Code 1977, § 2-25) 
Sec. 2-105. - Members; duties and privileges. 
(a)  No member shall be allowed to speak more than once upon any one subject until every member choosing to speak shall have spoken, nor more than twice upon any one subject, nor for a time longer than ten minutes without leave of the commission. 
(b)  Every member present, when a question is put, shall vote either "yea" or "nay" unless the commission shall, for special reasons, excuse him. Any member may demand a call of the roll upon the yeas and nays upon any question before the commission at any time before the decision is announced by the chair. It shall not be in order for members to explain their vote during the call of the roll. 
(c)  No member of the commission shall leave the commission chamber while in regular session without permission from the chair. 
(Code 1977, § 2-26) 
Sec. 2-106. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-79, § 1, adopted March 15, 2016, repealed § 2-106, which pertained to public character of meetings; speaking by others and derived from Code 1977, § 2-27. 
Sec. 2-107. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-79, § 1, adopted March 15, 2016, repealed § 2-107, which pertained to speaking time limits at hearings and privileges of the floor and derived from Code 1977, § 2-28. 
Sec. 2-108. - Quorum; compelling attendance. 
    A majority of all the members elected shall be a quorum to do business, but a lesser number may adjourn from day to day and compel the attendance of absent members in such a manner and under such penalties as may be prescribed by ordinance. 
(Code 1977, § 2-30) 
Sec. 2-109. - Legislative procedure. 
(a)  The affirmative vote of a majority of the members elected to the commission shall be necessary to adopt any ordinance or resolution. The vote upon the passage of all ordinances and upon the adoption of such resolutions as the commission by its rules shall prescribe shall be taken by "yeas" and "nays" and entered upon the journal. 
(b)  Ordinances and resolutions shall be introduced to the commission only in written or printed form. All ordinances and resolutions, except ordinances making appropriations, shall be confined to one subject which shall be clearly expressed in the title, except as provided in subsection (d) of this section. Ordinances making appropriations shall be confined to the subjects of appropriation. No resolution, bylaw or ordinance granting any franchise, appropriating any money for any purpose, providing for any public improvements, enacting any regulations concerning the public comfort, the public safety or public health, or of any other general or permanent nature, shall be enacted except at a regular or adjourned public meeting of the board. 
(c)  Every motion, resolution or ordinance introduced at any such meeting shall be reduced to writing and read before any vote thereon shall be taken, and the "yeas" and "nays" thereon shall be recorded. 
(d)  Ordinances may be revised, codified, rearranged and published in book form under appropriate titles, chapters and sections, and such revision and codification may be made in one ordinance containing one or more subjects. Any such publication of a revision or codification of ordinance in book form shall contain a certificate of the mayor and the clerk of the correctness of such revision, codification and publication. Such book, so published, shall be received in evidence in any court for the purpose of proving the ordinances therein contained, the same and for the same purpose as the original book of ordinances, minutes or journals would be received. 
(e)  No ordinance or resolution, or section thereof, shall be revised or amended unless the new ordinance or resolution contains the entire ordinance or resolution or section, revised or amended, and the original ordinance, resolution or section, so amended, shall be repealed. 
(f)  The commission may, by a majority vote of the members, pass emergency measures to take effect at the time indicated therein. An emergency measure is an ordinance or resolution for the immediate preservation of the public peace, property, health or safety, or providing for the usual daily operation of a municipal department, in which the emergency is set forth and defined in a preamble thereto. Ordinances appropriating money may be passed as emergency measures, but no measures making a grant, renewal or extension of a franchise or other special privilege, or regulating the rate to be charged for its service by any public utility shall ever be so passed. 
(g)  Any ordinance or resolution passed by the commission shall be signed by the mayor and commissioners and attested by the city clerk. 
(Code 1977, § 2-31) 
Sec. 2-110. - Committees. 
(a)  The committees of the commission are appointed by the mayor, except as otherwise provided by law. 
(b)  The reports of the committees shall, if at all possible, be in writing, be agreed to in the committee assembled, and documents referred shall be returned with the report. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the introduction of minority reports. 
(c)  Upon motion, and by a majority vote, the commission may relieve the committee of further consideration of any question. 
(d)  All questions shall be decided by a majority vote. 
(e)  All petitions, communications and reports, when referred to committee, shall be considered pending until such report is made by the committee. 
(f)  The committee as a whole shall consist of the entire commission presided over by the mayor or his replacement, as the case may be, and shall meet at a time called by the commission or any member thereof. No official motions may be made at any committee meeting, but must be made along with the committee recommendations at a regular meeting of the commission. 
(Code 1977, § 2-32) 
Sec. 2-111. - Policy for decorum during commission meetings; privileges of the floor. 
(a)  Every petition, communication or address to the commission at either a public hearing or privileges of the floor shall be in respectful language and is encouraged to be in writing. 
(b)  Privileges of the floor. 
(1)  Individuals or groups wishing to speak under privileges of the floor at a regular commission meeting shall submit a written request to the city clerk by 5:00 p.m. on Monday prior to the regular meeting date. The request shall include the speaker's name, address and the topic to be addressed. Any person wishing to speak on behalf of a group shall so indicate and shall identify the name and address of the group or organization. 
(2)  Privileges of the floor shall be for the purpose of allowing members of the public to present any matter which, in their opinion, deserves the attention of the commission. They shall not serve as a forum for debate with the commission. 
(3)  Remarks shall be addressed directly to the Commission and not to staff, the audience, or the media. 
(4)  The mayor shall open the privileges of the floor. 
(5)  Speakers shall be resident citizens of the City of Dothan, Alabama. 
(6)  Each speaker shall clearly state his or her name, address and topic. 
(7)  There shall be a time limit for each individual speaker of three minutes. 
(8)  A representative of a group shall identify the group at the beginning of his or her presentation. A group may have no more than one spokesperson. 
(9)  The maximum number of speakers who will be allowed to speak during privileges of the floor is five. 
(10)  Speakers are not permitted to donate time to other speakers. 
(11)  There shall be no comment during privileges of the floor on a matter for which a public hearing is scheduled during the same meeting. 
(12)  There shall be no comment during privileges of the floor on a matter that has already been the subject of a previous public hearing where no final vote has been taken. 
(13)  Commission members shall not discuss issues raised by the public during privileges of the floor. 
(14)  Once the commission has heard a presentation from an individual or organization on a particular subject, the individual or organization may not make another presentation on the same subject during privileges of the floor within three months of the first presentation unless permitted by the mayor. 
(15)  The above rules notwithstanding, members of the public may present written comments to the commission or to individual commission members. 
(c)  No citizen, except the mayor, commissioners or city officials may speak unless permission is first granted by the mayor during privileges of the floor. 
(d)  No speaker's time shall be extended except by consent of a majority of the commission members present during privileges of the floor. 
(e)  Persons appearing before the commission during privileges of the floor will not be allowed to: 
(1)  Campaign for public office; 
(2)  Promote private business ventures; 
(3)  Use profanity or vulgar language or gestures; 
(4)  Use language which insults or demeans any person. Citizens have the right to comment on the performance, conduct, and qualifications of public figures; 
(5)  Make statements unrelated to their topic; 
(6)  Interrupt other speakers or engage in behavior that disrupts the meeting including but not limited to applause, cheers, jeers, yelling, shouting, etc.; 
(7)  Engage in behavior that intimidates others or incites violence or disorder; 
(8)  Address the commission on issues that do not concern the services, policies or affairs of the city; 
(9)  Make unduly repetitive statements; 
(10)  Refuse to stop talking after the allotted time has expired; 
(11)  Address the commission on a matter to which the speaker is a party and is currently pending before a court, quasijudicial body, board or administrative forum. 
(f)  The mayor shall preserve order and decorum at commission meetings. Any citizen who fails to comply with the directive of the Mayor to comply with these rules may be held by the mayor to be out of order and ordered to leave the speaker's podium. The mayor may order the expulsion of any person who fails to comply with the mayor's directive and who engages in disruptive behavior. Any person so expelled shall not be readmitted for the remainder of the meeting from which expelled. 
    Any person who has been so expelled and who at a later meeting again engages in behavior justifying expulsion may also be barred from attendance at future commission meetings for a specified and reasonable period of time not to exceed six months, or upon a still subsequent expulsion a period not to exceed one year either by the presiding officer, subject to appeal to a majority vote of the commission members present, or by motion passed by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 2016-79, § 1, 3-15-16) 
Secs. 2-112-2-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CITY MANAGER[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- City manager generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-44E-90 et seq. 
Statutory Charter reference- City manager, pt. I, art. V. 

Sec. 2-141. - Creation of office. 
    The office of the city manager is created pursuant to the authority contained in Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-44E-90, as amended. 
(Code 1977, § 2-42) 
Sec. 2-142. - Appointment and qualifications; residence; noneligibility of elected officials for appointment. 
    Pursuant to Act No. 88-445 (pg. 660, § 5.02), the city manager shall be appointed by a majority vote of the board of city commissioners. He shall be chosen without regard to political beliefs and solely upon the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications, with special recognition of his actual experience in, or knowledge of, the duties of his office as defined by this division. The choice shall not be limited to inhabitants of the city or the state, but once appointed to the office the city manager shall reside within the city. No elected official of the city shall be appointed to the position of city manager during the term for which he shall have been elected nor within one year after the expiration of such term. 
(Code 1977, § 2-43) 
Sec. 2-143. - Powers and duties. 
    The city manager shall be the administrative head of the city. He shall devote all his working time and attention to the affairs of the city and shall be responsible to the commission for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city over which he has jurisdiction. He shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Administer the policies of the commission, the code of ordinances of the city and state and federal laws pertaining to the city as provided in this section. For the purpose of such administration, the commission does hereby authorize and direct the city manager to see that all duties and authority conferred upon it by law, all city ordinances, resolutions, policies and directives are carried out, and any and all of his acts shall be for and in the name of the city and/or the commission; provided, however, that there is hereby excepted and excluded those duties and authority given by the commission, state and federal laws to other boards, agencies and officials. 
(2)  Direct the affairs of all department heads and to appoint and, when necessary for the good of the service, discipline and remove all heads of departments, or other employees appointed by the city manager. Such appointments and removal shall be done only upon the recommendation of the city manager and subsequent approval by the commission. All such appointments shall be made upon merit and fitness alone. The city manager may, without notice, cause the affairs of any department head or employee to be examined. All appointments, removals or suspensions shall be subject to regulations, authority and provisions of any civil service act or merit system act relating to the city. 
(3)  Exercise control over all departments under his supervision now in existence or that may hereafter be created by the commission. 
(4)  Recommend to the commission the creating, consolidating and combining of offices, positions or departments of the administrative and operational departments of the city. 
(5)  Plan, organize and supervise the operations of the city's various department heads so as to promote harmony, economy, efficiency and cooperation among the departments and with the other agencies, commissions and committees as set forth in this article. 
(6)  Investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration and operation of the city government and services maintained by the public utilities of the city. 
(7)  See that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city or its inhabitants in any public utility franchise are faithfully kept and performed and, upon the knowledge of any violation thereof, to call the same to the attention of the commission. 
(8)  Prepare a report on the financial position of the city. On a day to be fixed by the commission, but in no case later than April 15 of each year, the city manager shall submit to the commission. 
a.  A report on the financial position of the city, which shall encompass new programs or activities, capital expenditures, and new personnel additions; and 
b.  When submitting the financial report to the commission, the city manager shall submit his recommendation of new sources of revenue or manner of increasing existing sources of revenue, sufficient to balance the budgets, if such additional revenue is necessary to accomplish that purpose. 
(9)  The city manager, or an officer appointed by him, shall be the purchasing agent for the city for purchases for departments under his control. 
(10)  Attend all meetings of the commission with the right to take part in the discussions but having no vote. The city manager shall be entitled to notice of all special meetings. 
(11)  Keep the commission fully advised at all times as to the financial condition and needs of the city. 
(12)  On a day to be fixed by the commission, but in no case later than September 1 at a minimum of every other year, the city manager shall submit to the commission a separate current revenue and expense budget for the general operation of the city government to be known as the operations budget. 
(13)  Cause to be prepared and presented to the commission semiannually a statement showing the exact financial condition of the city as of the end of the preceding quarter and showing the amounts appropriated, amounts expended and unexpended balance of the items of appropriation. 
(14)  Recommend to the commission adoption of such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient. 
(15)  Ensure that proper accounting procedures are established and followed. 
(16)  Seek to improve the relationship between the city government and the public by the formulation of an adequate program which shall include personnel training as well as public relations. 
(17)  Perform such other lawful duties as may be required by resolution or ordinance of the commission. 
(18)  Ensure that each administrative unit of the municipality develops written operating procedures for that unit. 
(19)  The city manager shall submit to the commission on an annual basis at least a five-year projection of revenue and expenses. In addition, the plan shall include a projection of personnel, program and capital needs along with a ranking of such by priority. This document shall be known as the five-year plan and, without binding the commission, shall be used as a budgeting tool. 
(Code 1977, § 2-44; Ord. No. 2003-46, § 1, 2-18-03; Ord. No. 2008-73, § 1, 3-25-08) 
Sec. 2-144. - Noninterference by mayor or commission with certain duties of city manager; dealings with administrative service. 
    Neither the mayor, commission nor any of its members shall direct the employment or removal of any person by the city manager or by any of his subordinates in the administrative service of the city. Appointments or removals of employees, not subject to a civil service or merit act, will be done in conformity with Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-44E-92(2). Except for the purposes of inquiry and investigation held in a manner firmly established by resolution or ordinance in advance of such inquiry and investigation, the commission and its members shall deal with the administrative service of the city solely through the city manager, and neither the commission nor any member of the commission shall give orders, either publicly or privately, to any employee under the supervision of the city manager, except in emergencies. 
(Code 1977, § 2-45) 
Sec. 2-145. - Political or other improper influences on and personnel under his authority; ineligibility of candidates for public office to continue employment. 
    Neither the city manager nor any person appointed by him or seeking appointment by him shall be appointed, promoted, reduced, removed or in any way favored or discriminated against because of his political opinions or affiliations. Neither the city manager nor any officer or employee directly appointed by the city manager shall continue in such position after becoming a candidate for nomination or election to any municipal public office. No person appointed by the city manager, or seeking appointment by him, shall either directly or indirectly give, render or pay any money, service or other valuable thing to any person for, or on account of, or in connection with, his test, appointment, proposed appointment, promotion or proposed promotion. 
(Code 1977, § 2-46) 
Sec. 2-146. - Bond. 
    The city manager, before entering upon the discharge of his duties, shall give bond in the penal sum of not less than $50,000.00, payable to the city and for the benefit of the city, and for the use and benefit of the public, to secure and indemnify the city and any of the public by reason of his default, misfeasance or nonfeasance in the performance of his duties. Expenses of providing such bond shall be paid by the city. 
(Code 1977, § 2-47) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-44E-95. 
Sec. 2-147. - Compensation. 
    The city manager shall receive such compensation as, from time to time, may be approved by the commission as is specified in any employment contract that may exist between the commission and city manager. 
(Code 1977, § 2-48) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-44E-96. 
Sec. 2-148. - Eligibility and participation in city retirement and insurance plans. 
    The city manager shall be eligible and may participate in the retirement system and the group insurance plan of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 2-49) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-44E-97. 
Sec. 2-149. - Contract with city. 
    The tenure, compensation, and duties as provided by law of the city manager shall be enumerated in a contract between the city manager and the city. The contract shall not exceed two years in length with two, one-year renewal options. Commencing on the effective date of this amendatory act, the contract shall not exceed four years in length with two, one-year renewal options. 
(Code 1977, § 2-50; Ala. Act No. 2009-355, 5-5-09) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-44E-98. 
Sec. 2-150. - Vacancies in office. 
    In the case of a vacancy in the office of city manager, the commission may appoint an acting city manager who shall possess the powers and duties of the city manager until such time as a new city manager is appointed by the commission. The acting city manager shall be compensated at no less than the level as the preceding city manager. 
(Code 1977, § 2-51) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-44E-99. 
Sec. 2-151. - Temporary absence or disability. 
    During the temporary absence or disability of the city manager, the city manager shall designate the appropriate department head to serve in his absence, with the city commission's approval. 
(Code 1977, § 2-52) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-44E-100. 
Secs. 2-152-2-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Office of animal control, § 10-51 et seq.; office of building official, § 14-86 et seq.; law enforcement, ch. 54; police, § 54-31 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-181-2-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CLERK 

Sec. 2-211. - Clerk; other officers and employees. 
(a)  The commission shall approve the clerk and such other officers and employees of its own body as are necessary. The clerk shall keep the records of the commission and perform such other duties as may be required by law or by the commission. All such officers and employees chosen by the commission shall serve during the pleasure of the commission. 
(b)  All officers and employees to be appointed, chosen or elected by the commission shall be so appointed, chosen or elected by a majority of those elected to the commission. 
(Code 1977, § 2-5) 
Secs. 2-212-2-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PURCHASING PROCEDURES 

Sec. 2-241. - Determined by commission policy and in harmony with state bid law. 
    Purchasing procedures for the city shall be determined by policy set by the board of commissioners; provided however, that procedures shall not be in contravention to the bid law of the state. 
(Code 1977, § 2-10) 
State Law reference- Public contractor generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 39-2-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-242. - Checks, drafts and credit cards in payment of city accounts. 
(a)  All checks given, drafts drawn or endorsed to the city and credit cards used in payment of assessments, accounts and claims due to the city shall be accepted subject to payment at par by the bank, firm or individual upon whom the check, draft or credit card is drawn. If any such check, draft or credit card is returned unpaid, the assessment, account or claim of the person by whom the check, draft or credit card is given or endorsed shall be accepted, and subject to applicable penalties if the assessment, account or claim is delinquent when returned, as though the check, draft or credit card had not been given, unless such check, draft or credit card shall be paid immediately upon either written or oral notice from the city. 
(b)  Returned items must be redeemed within 24 hours (the next working day) by cash, cashier's check or money order. A $30.00 collection fee, in addition to the face amount of the item, will be required unless there is a bank error involved. Proof of error is the responsibility of the customer to establish. 
(c)  A convenience fee of 1.6 percent per transaction will be charged for the use of credit cards. 
(Code 1977, § 2-11; Ord. No. 2002-299, § 1, 10-8-02; Ord. No. 2010-300, § 1, 11-2-10; Ord. No. 2017-113, § 1, 4-18-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2010-300, § 1, adopted Nov. 2, 2010, changed the title of § 2-242 from checks and drafts in payment of city accounts to checks, drafts and credit cards in payment of city accounts. 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18; law enforcement, ch. 54; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 62; taxation, ch. 94; zoning, ch. 114. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions in state law adopted by reference. 
    The definitions of alcoholic beverages, Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3-1 et seq., as amended, are adopted by reference in this section as if fully set forth herein. 
(Code 1977, § 5-60) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-2. - Adoption of state beverage control board regulations. 
    The rules and regulations adopted and promulgated by the state beverage control board, in effect as of October 25, 1965, and as may be adopted or amended thereafter by the state beverage control board, the violation of which constitutes a misdemeanor, are adopted as laws of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 5-61) 
Sec. 6-3. - Sale on public grounds prohibited. 
    Any person who gives away, sells, serves or has in his possession an open container or who drinks any alcoholic beverage in or on any city school buildings and grounds, recreation buildings excluding any private recreation rooms leased or rented to individuals or clubs or private parties, city playgrounds, school playgrounds, city parks, athletic fields and Rip Hewes Stadium and its complete ground area, of which all property is owned by the city, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-4. 
(Code 1977, § 5-62) 
Sec. 6-4. - Consumption of alcohol brought onto premises or "brown bagging". 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or possess alcoholic beverages at any establishment and/or public place that is not properly licensed for on premise consumption by the City of Dothan and the Alabama Beverage Control Board. If any "consideration" is involved in the consumption or possession of the alcoholic beverages, it shall require an "on premise license" issued by the city and the state ABC board. The term "consideration" is defined as anything of value exchanged for any goods and/or services provided by a proprietor or their agent to any customer, patron, or guest. 
    Events held at the National Peanut Festival Fairgrounds are exempt from this section. 
(Ord. No. 2011-213, § 1, 9-6-11; Ord. No. 2013-4, § 1, 1-15-13) 
Secs. 6-5-6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-31. - State unlawful acts and offenses adopted by reference. 
    The provisions of unlawful acts and offenses pertaining to alcoholic beverages, Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-25, as amended, are adopted by reference in this section as if fully set forth herein. 
(Code 1977, § 5-63) 
Sec. 6-32. - State tax levied on sale of beer and malt beverages. 
    Taxes on the sale of beer and malt beverages shall be made in accordance with Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-3-183 et seq., Excise Tax on Beer, as amended. 
(Code 1977, § 5-72) 
Sec. 6-33. - Location of establishment for on-premises retail sale. 
(a)  No privilege license shall be issued for the on-premises retail sales of whiskey, wine, liquor, malt or brewed beverages or other alcoholic beverages where the place or establishment for which application for such license is made is less than 600 feet from any church grounds, school grounds, public park or public playground, as measured by public access. Church grounds shall mean the building, parking lots, playgrounds and contiguous land associated with the main church structure and used principally for religious worship and instruction. Such definition shall also include vacant land owned by a church where the church has a bona fide, arms-length contract with a builder to construct a church on that vacant land. Measurement by public access shall be by the most direct and shortest route utilizing the public right-of-way to the public entrance point of the applicant's property, then continuing directly to the building or common wall of the building where the place or establishment for which application is made. However, this shall not apply to those certain licensees already legally licensed and engaged in business at locations within the prohibited area on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived or to the transferee of any such license within 12 months from the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. Any such licensee may continue in business at the location within the prohibited area with the following limitations: 
(1)  No expansion of the building presently existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall be permitted at the location unless such expansion is presently underway, with the authorized city building permit, or such expansion is undertaken within 12 months from the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived by the issuance of an authorized city building permit and unless such construction in either instance is completed within 12 months from the date of the building permit so issued. 
(2)  No renewal or reissuance of a license at the location shall be permitted if once discontinued by the licensee. 
(3)  If damage or loss of the building presently existing at the location occurs, restoration must be made within 12 months thereof and to an extent not to exceed 75 percent of the appraised value thereof for ad valorem taxes immediately prior to such loss or damage. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the city, a municipal corporation, individuals or clubs applying for a special retail liquor license or a special events retail license, when leasing or renting the civic center or a city-owned recreation building. Application for individuals or clubs shall state the date of the event. 
(Code 1977, § 5-64) 
Secs. 6-34-6-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 6-61. - Wine, liquor and beer license issuance restricted; application and approval generally. 
    No license for the sale of wine, liquor and beer or malt or brewed beverages or any of them shall be issued under this division, except to proper licensees, subject but not necessarily limited to regulations of the state beverage control board. Every application for a license shall be presented in writing at a regular meeting of the board of commissioners. No license shall be issued except on approval of the board of commissioners in a regular meeting. 
(Code 1977, § 5-65) 
Sec. 6-62. - Advertisement of pending application. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, for every application made to sell alcoholic beverages at any location within the corporate limits, in addition to other advertisement required by law, the applicant shall, at his own expense, post on the premises where the business of sale is to be conducted, continuously for a period of not less than seven days prior to the consideration of the application by the board of commissioners, a posted notice of the pending application meeting the following minimum specifications: The notice shall be painted or printed in black letters three inches or more in height against a white background on a board or metal sign having a surface of not less than six square feet; shall be placed with the bottom of the sign not more than three feet from the ground on the most conspicuous part of the premises facing the street, road or drive not more than ten feet therefrom; and shall state clearly the nature and purpose of the application and the name of the person making the application. The sign to be posted on the proposed location should read as follows: 
I, (applicant) have made application to the Board of Commissioners of the City of Dothan for a (type of license) (on)(off) premises consumption, at this location, _______ Dothan, Alabama. A public hearing will be held by the City Commission in the regular meeting in the Commissioners' Chamber in City Hall at _____ o'clock p.m., Tuesday ________, 19___. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, the applicant is required, at his expense, to publish in the local daily newspaper a copy of the publication as follows, which in size shall be two columns wide and two inches in depth and which shall be bordered in heavy black lines. Proof of publication of advertisements shall be mailed or personally delivered to the City Clerk, City of Dothan, P.O. Box 2128, Dothan, Alabama 36302 after advertisements have been published in three consecutive publications. After receipt of such proof of publication and a police survey report, the application will be placed on the agenda to be heard before the commission. 
I, (Applicant) have made application to the Board of Commissioners of the City of Dothan for a (type of license) (on)(off) premises consumption, at this location, _______ Dothan, Alabama. A public hearing will be held by the City Commission in the regular meeting in the Commissioners' Chamber in City Hall at _____ o'clock p.m., Tuesday ________, 19___. 
(c)  The requirements for posting notice on the premises and publication of notice in the newspaper under subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  An applicant for a retail table wine license for off-premises consumption who, at the time of the application, has a current retail beer or malt or brewed beverage license for off-premises consumption. 
(2)  An applicant for a retail table wine license for on-premises consumption who, at the time of the application, has a current retail beer or malt or brewed beverage license for on-premises consumption. 
(3)  The city, a municipal corporation, individuals or clubs applying for a special retail liquor license or special events retail license when leasing or renting the civic center or a city-owned recreation building. 
(Code 1977, § 5-65.1) 
Sec. 6-63. - License tax levied. 
    There is levied, in addition to all other taxes of every kind imposed by law, and shall be collected, as provided in this division, a privilege or license tax against the person on account of the business activities as follows: Upon every person, whether public or private, who is engaged in the business of selling liquor for on-premises consumption, there is levied a four-percent gross receipts tax on all such alcoholic beverages sold in establishments duly licensed under this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 5-66) 
Sec. 6-64. - License tax cumulative and additional. 
    Under this division, the tax shall not be construed to repeal any of the provisions of the general license code of the city or of any other city ordinance or Code provision imposing a license tax, and this tax shall be held to be cumulative to all other city ordinances and Code provisions. In particular, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, this tax shall not be deemed to amend, repeal, modify or affect any of the provisions of chapter 18 or any of the provisions of this chapter, and this tax is and shall be deemed to be in addition to and cumulative thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 5-70) 
Sec. 6-65. - License tax schedule. 
    The license tax schedule for the license required under this division shall be as follows: 
(1)  Importer's license ..... $250.00 
(2)  Liquor wholesale license ..... 400.00 
(3)  Wholesaler license, beer ..... 250.00 
(4)  Wholesaler license, wine ..... 275.00 
(5)  Lounge retail liquor license ..... 400.00 
(6)  Restaurant retail liquor license ..... 400.00 
(7)  Club liquor license ..... 400.00 
(8)  Retail table wine (off-premises) ..... 75.00 
(9)  Retail table wine (on-premises) ..... 75.00 
(10)  Retail beer (on-premises) ..... 50.00 
(11)  Retail beer (off-premises only) ..... 50.00 
(12)  Special retail license: 
a.  Thirty days or less ..... 100.00 
b.  More than 30 days ..... 300.00 
(13)  Special events retail license ..... 100.00 
(14)  Brew pub license ..... 500.00 
(15)  Warehouse license ..... 100.00 
(Code 1977, § 5-71; Ord. No. 2002-155, § 1, 5-21-02) 
Sec. 6-66. - Collection of license tax from purchasers. 
    All persons subject to the tax levied in this division may add the tax to the sales price of the liquor sold and collect from the purchasers, but this is not mandatory. The seller may pay the tax without collecting the tax from the purchasers. 
(Code 1977, § 5-67) 
Sec. 6-67. - License tax reports, payments and penalty. 
(a)  The tax levied under this division shall be due and payable in monthly installments on or before the 20th day of the month next succeeding the month in which the sales are made. On or before the 20th day of each month after the tax shall take effect, every person upon whom the tax is levied shall render to the city, on a form prescribed by the city, a true and correct statement showing the gross receipts of liquor sold during the next preceding month, which report shall accompany payment of the tax levied. 
(b)  Any person who fails to pay such tax within the time required under this section shall pay, in addition to the tax, a penalty of ten percent of the amount of tax due, together with interest thereon at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof from the date at which the tax became due and payable. Such penalty and interest shall be assessed and collected as part of the tax. However, the revenue officer, upon the approval of the board of commissioners if a good and sufficient reason is shown, may waive the penalty of ten percent and the interest or a portion thereof. Any tax not paid by the 20th of the month following the date due shall be considered delinquent, and the city clerk shall proceed to collect the delinquent tax in accordance with section 18-1. In addition, failure to pay this tax when due shall constitute grounds for revocation of any license issued under this division. 
(c)  Any person subject to this division who shall sell his business or stock of goods or who shall quit business shall be required to make out the return provided for under this section within 30 days after the date he sells his business or stock of goods or quits business, and his successor in business shall be required to withhold sufficient of the purchase money to cover the amount of the taxes due and unpaid until such time as the former owner shall produce a receipt from the department of revenue showing that the taxes shall be due and unpaid after the 30-day period allowed, and he shall be personally liable for the payment of the taxes accrued and unpaid on account of the operation of the business of the former owner. If in such cases the department of revenue deems it necessary in order to collect the taxes due the city, it may make a jeopardy assessment as provided in this division. 
(Code 1977, § 5-68) 
Sec. 6-68. - Records. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of each person subject to the license tax imposed by this division to keep full and complete records of all purchases, sales and deliveries of alcoholic beverages, from which records there can be readily obtained information as to the correct amount of license tax due to the city. As a part of such records, each retailer shall keep an individual ledger or card account showing the correct name and address of each person from whom he purchased alcoholic beverages, an invoice showing each purchase and the quantities thereof, and the date of each purchase. In addition, each person shall keep copies of his monthly state sales tax reports. 
(b)  The records shall be kept posted currently and shall be preserved for not less than five years. All such records shall be opened for inspection and audit by the city clerk during regular city business hours. 
(c)  If any retailer fails to keep such records or refuses to make the records available for inspection or audit, the city clerk shall proceed to levy and collect the license tax as provided in this division. The city clerk shall have the authority to use whatever information is deemed necessary and available to make the determination as to the amount of the tax due. Failure to keep any of the records required by this division or refusal to make any of the records available to the city clerk shall constitute grounds for revocation of any license issued under this division. 
(Code 1977, § 5-69) 
Secs. 6-69-6-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SEXUAL CONDUCT AND NUDITY 

Sec. 6-96. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages means any business establishment operating within the corporate limits of the city which sells, dispenses or otherwise allows the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
    Person means any individual, firm, association, joint venture, partnership, estate, trust, business trust, syndicate, fiduciary, corporation or any combination thereof or other entity. 
(Code 1977, § 5-74) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-97. - Purpose of division. 
    The purpose of this division is to prohibit sexual conduct and nudity in establishments dealing in alcoholic beverages and prohibit persons owning, maintaining or operating such establishments from permitting any such prohibited activity. 
(Code 1977, § 5-73) 
Sec. 6-98. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  No person shall expose to public view his or her genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage or any simulation thereof in an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  No female person shall expose to public view any portion of her breasts below the top of the areola or any simulation thereof in an establishment dealing with alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  No person maintaining, owning or operating an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages shall suffer or permit any person to expose to public view his or her genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage or simulation thereof within the establishments dealing in alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  No person maintaining, owning, or operating an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages shall suffer or permit any female person to expose to public view any portion of her breasts below the top of the areola or any simulation thereof within the establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages. 
(e)  Within an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages, no person shall engage in and no person maintaining, owning or operating an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages shall suffer or permit any sexual intercourse; masturbation; sodomy; bestiality; oral copulation; flagellation; any sexual act which is prohibited by law; touching, caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals; or the simulation thereof. 
(f)  Within any establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages, no person shall cause and no person maintaining, owning or operating an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages shall suffer or permit the exposition of any graphic representation, including pictures or the projection of film, which depicts human genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage; female breasts below the top of the areola; sexual intercourse; masturbation; sodomy; bestiality; oral copulation; flagellation; any sexual act prohibited by law; touching, caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals; or any simulation thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 5-75) 
Sec. 6-99. - Violation; penalty. 
    Any person violating section 6-98 shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-4. 
(Code 1977, § 5-76) 
ARTICLE III. - ENTERTAINMENT DISTRICTS 

Sec. 6-100. - Findings and intent. 
(a)  Effective May 16, 2012, the legislature of the State of Alabama enacted into law Act No. 2012-438 (hereinafter the "act") authorizing municipalities to create special entertainment districts. 
(b)  The act authorizes any city that has an incorporated main street program or downtown redevelopment entity to establish a maximum of two (2) entertainment districts. 
(c)  The city has heretofore established an incorporated main street program and a downtown redevelopment entity and is therefore eligible under the act to create an entertainment district. 
(d)  The commission has considered the merits of establishing a downtown entertainment district and believes a downtown entertainment district may benefit the city by promoting commercial development and enhancing pedestrian traffic in the downtown area. 
(e)  The commission finds that other cities, both within and without the state have had success with such districts, and believes it is in the best interest of the city to provide for the creation of a downtown entertainment district as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2014-46, § 1, 3-4-14) 
Sec. 6-101. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following terms, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section. 
(b)  "Alcoholic beverages" means any alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented, or other alcoholic beverage, or combination of liquors and mixed liquor, a part of which is spirituous, vinous, fermented, or otherwise alcoholic, and all drinks or drinkable liquids, preparations or mixture intended for beverage purposes, which contain one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume, and shall include liquor, beer, and wine, both fortified and table wine. 
(c)  "Board" means the Alcoholic Beverage Control Board. 
(d)  "City" means City of Dothan. 
(e)  "Container" means any bottle, can, glass or other receptacle suitable for or used to hold any liquid. 
(f)  "District" means the downtown entertainment district established by this article. 
(g)  "Licensee" means any person or business within the district which holds a license issued by the board and the city. 
(h)  "License" means any retail license authorized by Chapter 3A of Title 28, Code of Alabama, which allows the licensee to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 2014-46, § 1, 3-4-14) 
Sec. 6-102. - District description. 
    An entertainment district as provided by Act No. 2012-438 of the Legislature of the State of Alabama is hereby established for the portion of downtown Dothan bounded by: 
    Beginning at a point at the intersection of the north right-of-way (ROW) of West Main Street and the west ROW of North Foster Street; then westerly along the north ROW of West Main Street to a point on the property line between tax parcel ID number 09.06.24.2.102.001.000 (Houston County) and tax parcel ID number 09.06.24.2.402.005.000 (Houston County); thennortherly, easterly and northeasterly along the property line between the two (2) Houston County parcels to a point. This point also being the southwest corner of a parcel with tax parcel ID number of 09.06.24.2.402.001.000 (Dothan Downtown Redevelopment Authority); then northerly along the property line between tax parcel ID numbers (on the east side of line) 09.06.24.2.402.001.000 (Dothan Downtown Redevelopment Authority), 09.06.24.2.402.001.001 (Eagle Investments, LLP), 09.06.24.2.102.008.000 (Eagle Investments, LLP), 09.06.24.2.102.008.001 (Eagle Investments, LLP), 09.06.24.2.102.007.000 (Eagle Investments, LLP), 09.06.24.2.102.004.002 (Eagle Investments, LLP), 09.06.24.2.102.006.000 (Eagle Investments, LLP), 09.06.24.2.102.005.000 (Dothan Downtown Redevelopment Authority), 09.06.24.2.102.004.000 (Dothan Downtown Redevelopment Authority), and (on the west side of line) 09.06.24.2.102.001.000 (Houston County) to a point. This point is also the southernmost northeast corner of the Houston County property; then westerly along the property line between tax parcel ID number 09.06.24.2.102.004.001 (Houston County) and tax parcel ID number 09.06.24.2.102.001.000 (Houston County) to the east ROW of an unnamed alley; then northerly along the east ROW of an unnamed alley to the south ROW of West Troy Street; then northerly across West Troy Street to the North ROW of West Troy Street and the southwest corner of Tax ID parcel number 09.06.24.2.006.008.000 (Dothan Downtown Redevelopment Authority); then northerly along the western property line of Tax ID parcel numbers 09.06.24.2.006.008.000 (Dothan Downtown Redevelopment Authority), 09.06.24.2.006.008.001 (Scarlet & Nayereh Woods Properties LLC), 09.06.24.2.006.009.000 (Scarlet & Nayereh Woods Properties LLC), 09.06.24.2.006.002.000 (Scarlet & Nayereh Woods Properties LLC), 09.06.24.2.006.003.001 (Scarlet & Nayereh Woods Properties LLC) to the south ROW of West Adams Street; then northerly across the ROW of West Adams Street to the North ROW of West Adams Street to the southwest corner of Tax ID parcel Number 09.06.24.2.001.006.000 (Scarlet & Nayereh Woods Properties LLC); then northerly along the western property line of the Tax ID parcel numbers 09.06.24.2.001.006.000 (Scarlet & Nayereh Woods Properties LLC), 09.06.24.2.001.007.000 (Community Advancement Foundation), 09.06.24.2.001.008.001 (SDB&J LLC) to the northwest corner of Tax ID Parcel number 09.06.24.2.001.008.001 (SDB&J LLC); then easterly along the north line of Tax ID Parcel number 09.06.24.2.001.008.001 (SDB&J LLC) to the west ROW of North Foster Street; then easterly across North Foster Street to the East Row of North Foster Street and the northwest corner of Tax ID parcel number 09.06.24.2.001.002.000 (Sulekha P Patel); then easterly along the north property line of Tax ID parcel number 09.06.24.2.001.002.000 (Sulekha P Patel) to the westerly ROW of North Saint Andrews Street; then northerly along the west ROW of North Saint Andrews Street to the southerly ROW of East Burdeshaw Street; then easterly across the ROW of North Saint Andrews Street along the south ROW of East Burdeshaw to the westerly ROW of South Appletree Street; then southerly along the west ROW of South Appletree Street to a point on the property line between tax parcel ID number 09.06.24.1.005.002.000 (Crestar Capital LLC and Tilley Properties)and tax parcel ID number 09.06.24.1.005.029.000 (Zeta Phi Beta Sorority); then southwesterly along the property line between Crestar Properties LLC and Zeta Phi Beta Sorority to a point. This point is the northwest corner of the Zeta Phi Beta Sorority property; then southeasterly along the property line between tax ID parcel numbers (on the west side of line) 09.06.24.1.005.002.000 (Crestar Capital LLC and Tilley Properties) and 09.06.24.1.005.022.000 (Crestar Capital LLC and Tilley Properties) and tax parcel ID numbers (on the east side of line) 09.06.24.1.005.029.000 (Zeta Phi Beta Sorority), 09.06.24.1.005.028.000 (Zeta Phi Beta Sorority), 09.06.24.1.005.027.000 (Marcos and Pamela Long), 09.06.24.1.005.026.000 (ARK Dothan, Inc.) and 09.06.24.1.005.023.000 (J D and David Mendheim) to the northerly ROW of East Adams Street; then westerly along the north ROW of East Adams street to the East ROW of North Saint Andrews Street; then southerly along the east ROW of North Saint Andrews Street to the north ROW of East Troy Street; then easterly and northeasterly along the north ROW of East Troy Street to the west ROW of North Appletree Street; then southerly across the ROW of East Troy Street along the west ROW of North Appletree Street to the intersection of the west ROW of North Appletree Street and the west ROW of Museum Street which is at the intersection of North Appletree Street, North College Street, North Cherry Street and Museum Street; then easterly across the ROW of Museum Street to the intersection of the east ROW of Museum Street and the east ROW of North Cherry Street at the intersection of North Appletree Street, North College Street, North Cherry Street and Museum Street; then northeasterly along the east ROW of North Cherry Street to the south ROW of Monument Street; then easterly along the south ROW of Monument Street to a point on the property line between tax parcel ID number 09.06.24.1.011.002.000 (United Warehouse Co., Inc.) and tax parcel ID number 09.06.24.1.011.001.000 (Houston Paper and Janitorial); then southeasterly along the property line between United Warehouse Co., Inc. and Houston Paper and Janitorial to the north ROW of the Bay Line Railroad; then southwesterly along the north ROW of the Bay Line Railroad to the intersection of the north ROW of the Bay Line Railroad main track (and yard) and the north ROW of the Bay Line Railroad spur track; then southwesterly across the ROW of the Bay Line Railroad spur track to a point at the intersection of the north ROW of the Bay Line Railroad main track (and yard) and the south ROW of the Bay Line Railroad spur track. This point is also the northeast corner of tax parcel ID number 09.06.24.1.011.028.000 (David Ellis Parker); then southeasterly along the west ROW of the Bay Line Railroad main track (and yard) to a point on the north ROW of the Bay Line Railroad. This point is also the southeast corner of the David Ellis Parker property; then southwesterly along the north ROW of the Bay Line Railroad to a point on the east ROW of Museum Street which is at the intersection of Museum Street, East Main Street and Columbia Highway. This point is also the southwest corner of the David Ellis Parker property; then northwesterly across the ROW of Museum Street to the intersection of the west ROW of Museum Street and the ROW of the northwest flare of the intersection of Museum Street and East Main Street; then southwesterly along the ROW of the northwest flare of the intersection of Museum Street and East Main Street to the north ROW of East Main Street; then westerly along the north ROW of East Main Street to a point on the property line between tax parcel ID number 09.06.24.1.301.006.000 (City of Dothan) and tax parcel ID number 09.06.24.1.301.007.000 (City of Dothan); then southerly across the ROW of East Main Street to a point on the south ROW of East Main Street which is also on the property line between tax parcel ID number 09.06.24.1.304.004.000 (Michael J. Gamble) and tax parcel ID number 09.06.24.1.304.003.000 (Ewing Conner and Associates, Inc.). This point is also the northeast corner of the Michael J. Gamble Property. Then southerly along the property line between the Michael J. Gamble Property and the Ewing Conner and Associates, Inc. property to a point. This point is also the southeast corner of the Michael J. Gamble Property; then continue southerly along the property line between tax parcel ID number 09.06.24.1.304.008.000 (Ewing Conner and Associates, Inc.) and tax parcel ID number 09.06.24.1.304.003.000 (Ewing Conner and Associates, Inc.) and a projection of this line across the ROW of the Bay Line Railroad ROW to a point on the south ROW of the Bay Line Railroad; then northeasterly along the south ROW of the Bay Line Railroad to a point on the property line between tax parcel ID number 09.06.24.1.304.011.001 (AT Properties, LLC) and tax parcel ID number 09.06.24.1.304.002.000 (Russell W. Cook). This point is also the northeast corner of the AT Properties, LLC. property; then southerly along the property line between tax parcel ID numbers (on the west side of line) 09.06.24.1.304.011.001 (AT Properties, LLC.) and 09.06.24.1.304.011.000 (Ignacio and Kelly C. Handal) and tax ID parcel numbers (on the east side of line) 09.06.24.1.304.002.000 (Russell W. Cook) and 09.06.24.1.304.012.000 (Cook Properties, LLC.) to a point. This point is also the southwest corner of the Cook Properties, LLC property; then easterly along the property line between the Ignacio and Kelly C. Handal property and the Cook Properties, LLC. property to the west ROW of Holman Street; then southerly along the west ROW of Holman Street to the north ROW of East Crawford Street; then crossing the ROW of East Crawford Street to the Northeast corner of tax parcel ID number 09.06.24.1.007.004.000 (Dothan Rescue Mission Property); then southerly along the East line to the Southeast Corner of Dothan Rescue Mission Property and the Northeast Corner of tax parcel ID number 09.06.24.1.007.031.000 (Tidwell Furniture Property); then southeasterly along the East Line to the Southeast corner of the Tidwell Furniture property and the North line of tax parcel ID number 09.06.24.1.007.030.000 (Dothan Rescue Mission Property); then along the north line to the northwest corner of the Dothan Rescue Mission Property and the Northeast corner of tax parcel ID number 09.06.24.1.007.030.001(The Main Event LLC property); then southerly along the East property line to the southeast corner of The Main Event LLC property; then westerly along a line between tax parcels 09.06.24.1.007.030.001 (The Main Event LLC property) and 09.06.24.1.007.023.000 (Dothan Rescue Mission property) to the East ROW of South Saint Andrews Street; then across the ROW of South Saint Andrews Street to the west Row of South Saint Andrews Street; then northerly along the West ROW of South Saint Andrews Street across the ROW of East Crawford Street to the North ROW of East Crawford Street; then westerly along the north ROW of East Crawford Street, across the ROW of South Foster Street and along the north ROW of West Crawford Street to a point on the property line between tax parcel ID number 09.06.24.1.303.035.000 (Compliance Data Plus Corporation) and tax parcel ID number 09.06.24.2.403.010.000 (Wiregrass Mental Health Board, Inc.). This point is also the southwest corner of the Compliance Data Plus Corporation property; then northerly along the property line between tax parcel ID numbers (on the east side of line) 09.06.24.1.303.035.000 (Compliance Data Plus Corporation), 09.06.24.1.303.034.000 (Compliance Data Plus Corporation), 09.06.24.2.403.011.000 (Compliance Data Plus Corporation), and 09.06.24.1.303.030.000 (Charles Burch) and tax parcel ID numbers (on the west side of line) 09.06.24.2.403.010.000 (Wiregrass Mental Health Board, Inc.), 09.06.24.2.403.010.001 (Samuel A. Cherry, Jr. and J. Keith Givens), and 09.06.24.2.403.010.002 (Pam Properties, LLC.) to a point. This point is the northeast corner of the Pam Properties, LLC. property; then westerly along the property line between tax parcel ID number 09.06.24.1.303.030.000 (Charles Burch) and tax parcel ID number 09.06.24.2.403.010.002 (Pam Properties, LLC.) to a point. This point is the western most southwest corner of the Charles Burch property; then northerly along the property line between tax parcel ID numbers (on the east side of line) 09.06.24.1.303.030.000 (Charles Burch) and tax parcel ID numbers (on the west side of line) 09.06.24.2.403.009.001 ((Pam Properties, LLC.) and 09.06.24.2.403.009.000 (Pam Properties, LLC.) to the south ROW of the Bay Line Railroad; then easterly along the south ROW of the Bay Line Railroad to the west ROW of South Foster Street; then northerly across the ROW of the Bay Line Railroad, along the west ROW of South Foster Street and across the ROW of West Main Street to the point at the intersection of the north ROW of West Main Street and west ROW of North Foster Street, also being the point of beginning. 
    The boundaries of the entertainment district are depicted on the map attached hereto and marked Exhibit "A" [which is on file with the city clerk's office.] 
(Ord. No. 2014-46, § 1, 3-4-14; Ord. No. 2017-116, § 1, 4-18-17; Ord. No. 2017-295, § 1, 9-19-17; Ord. No. 2017-376, § 1,11-21-17) 
Sec. 6-103. - Rules. 
(a)  Within the entertainment district as herein defined, the Alabama Alcoholic Beverage Control Board may issue an entertainment district designation for any on-premises retail alcohol license which allows the licensee to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the licensed premises. 
(b)  Public possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages in the entertainment district shall be allowed on any date or dates specified on a parade/assembly permit lawfully issued by the city whereby the public streets are closed and barricaded but shall be subject to the rules established in this subsection. 
(1)  Patrons shall not be permitted to enter a licensed premise with open or closed containers of alcoholic beverages acquired elsewhere. 
(2)  Patrons may not exit licensed premises with open glass containers of alcoholic beverages. All alcoholic beverages sold for consumption outside the licensed premises shall be contained in an original aluminum container or other shatter resistant container such as a plastic cup. 
(3)  Pedestrians in the district shall not be permitted to possess or consume alcoholic beverages within the confines of the district as defined in section 6-102 above that are acquired outside the confines of the district. 
(4)  No person or motorist shall possess alcoholic beverages in an open container in the passenger area of a motor vehicle on a public street in the district in violation of § 32-5A-330, Code of Alabama. 
(5)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold at a licensed premise within the district beyond the hours as specified by the Alabama Beverage Control Board in Title 28 or as hereafter amended. 
(6)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to allow the sale of alcoholic beverages to minors as specified by the Alabama Beverage Control Board in Title 28 or as hereafter amended. 
(c)  A licensee who receives an entertainment district designation shall comply with all laws, rules, and regulations which govern its license type except as specifically provided in this article. Nothing in this section shall be construed to allow the sale and consumption of alcohol in the entertainment district beyond the hours specified by the Alabama Beverage Control Board in Title 28 or as hereafter amended or the sale of alcohol to minors as specified by the Alabama Beverage Control Board in Title 28 or as hereafter amended. 
(d)  No licensee shall offer for sale alcoholic beverages from any temporary location (i.e. street vendor) within one hundred (100) feet of another licensee. 
(e)  Applicants possessing an approved parade/assembly permit whereby the public streets are closed and barricaded shall arrange with the city police and fire departments any security and emergency medical services to be employed. If required, the cost of such services shall be paid by the applicant unless otherwise approved. 
(f)  Applicants possessing an approved parade/assembly permit whereby the public streets are closed and barricaded shall place trash receptacles at the boundary of the district. 
(g)  Applicants possessing an approved parade/assembly permit whereby the public streets are closed and shall file with the city manager a statement agreeing to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officials, representatives, agents, servants and employees from any and all claims, damages, judgments, cost or expenses, including attorney's fees which may be incurred or be required to pay because of any bodily injury, including death or property damage suffered by any person as a result of or in relation to an event on city property that involves the furnishing, serving or sale of alcohol. 
(h)  Unless otherwise modified by the city manager, applicants shall secure a special event insurance policy containing general liability and liquor liability coverage at the limits specified below for the full coverage period as listed on the assembly/parade permit. The city shall be named as additional insured on all policies. 
(1)  $2,000,000 general aggregate. 
(2)  $2,000,000 products/completed operations aggregate. 
(3)  $1,000,000 personal and advertising injury. 
(4)  $1,000,000 each occurrence. 
(5)  $300,000 damage to rented premises. 
(6)  $10,000 medical payments. 
(7)  $1,000,000 liquor liability. 
(Ord. No. 2014-46, § 1, 3-4-14) 
Secs. 6-104-6-150. - Reserved. 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-15, § 1, adopted January 17, 2017, amended chapter 10 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 10, §§ 10-1, 10-2, 10-26, 10-51-10-53, 10-81-10-85, 10-111-10-115, 10-141-10-146, pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Cross reference- Law enforcement, ch. 54; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 62. 
State Law reference- Animals generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 3-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal services officer means and includes the officer(s) appointed by the board of commissioners and their authorized agents. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15, § 1, 1-17-17) 
Sec. 10-2. - State rabies law adopted by reference. 
    There is adopted by reference Code of Ala. 1975, § 3-7A-1 et seq., and as such may be amended or modified from time to time by the state legislature. The animal services officer may be appointed a deputy to the rabies inspector as provided in such statute. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15, § 1, 1-17-17) 
Secs. 10-3-10-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-26. - Animal shelter provided. 
    A city animal shelter shall be provided by the city, either directly or by agreement with any agency or organization, with the proper facilities for maintaining and caring for all animals which come into the custody of the animal services officer. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15, § 1, 1-17-17) 
Secs. 10-27-10-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ANIMAL SERVICES OFFICER 

Sec. 10-51. - Office created; duties. 
(a)  The office of animal services officer is created. The Animal Services Officer shall be charged with all duties, including the issuing of citations, pertaining to the enforcement of ordinances regulating or controlling the keeping of animals and fowl within the city and within its police jurisdiction and is vested with all necessary and proper enforcement powers of a special officer for the purpose of performing such function. 
(b)  Duties of the animal services officer shall be to: 
(1)  Take up and impound any animal or fowl authorized to be impounded by this Code or by other city ordinances. 
(2)  Investigate all reported violations of the animal services ordinances and attempt to resolve such problems through conference and advice. In connection with such conference, the animal services officer shall make such recommendations or take such actions as may be authorized by law or ordinance to resolve the problem in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15, § 1, 1-17-17) 
Sec. 10-52. - Interference with, obstruction of enforcement of chapter. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person having charge, custody or control of any animal or fowl to fail or refuse to permit the animal services officer or health officer to inspect such animal and the premises on which it is kept to determine compliance with this chapter. 
(b)  Any person who resists, obstructs or impedes the animal services officer or health officer or any other city officer while engaged in the enforcement of this chapter or while engaged in the performance of any duty or in the exercise of any authority authorized by city ordinance or state law shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15, § 1, 1-17-17) 
Sec. 10-53. - Inspections; compliance. 
    Every person who keeps any animal or fowl within the city limits or its police jurisdiction shall permit the animal services officer or health officer to go on the premises at any reasonable time to inspect such premises and to comply with all reasonable requirements and directions given by the animal services officer or health officer pertaining to sanitation, fly or insect larvae control and the prevention of offensive odors. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15, § 1, 1-17-17) 
Secs. 10-54-10-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SETTLEMENT PROCEDURES FOR MINOR VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 10-81. - Authority to establish penalty amounts. 
    The board of commissioners may by resolution establish and from time to time amend a list of briefly described offenses against the provisions of this chapter, with a basic fine amount set opposite each of these such described offenses. The list and the amount so established shall be known as the "animal services ordinance violations penalty sheet." A certified copy of the resolution establishing such fines as last amended shall remain at all times posted at the police department. Upon any violation the offender will be issued a citation which may be paid to the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15, § 1, 1-17-17) 
Sec. 10-82. - Payment of fine. 
    Any person who is alleged to have committed any offense described in the animal services ordinance penalty sheet and who has not appeared or executed a bond for appearance in municipal court or who has been incarcerated and who desires to waive trial of the question of his guilt or innocence of such alleged offense may pay the fine to the municipal court, in settlement of such alleged offense, the amount prescribed by the animal services ordinance violations penalty sheet, and the municipal court magistrate is authorized and instructed to receive such amount. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15, § 1, 1-17-17) 
Sec. 10-83. - Penalty amounts for subsequent offenses. 
    Under this division, if the alleged offender has previously been convicted of the offense for which he is charged within 12 months prior to the date of the instant alleged offense, the amount of the fine for the instant alleged offense shall be the basic amount set opposite the description of the offense in the animal services violations penalty sheet multiplied by the number of times plus one that the alleged offender has previously been convicted of the offense within 12 months prior to the date of the instant alleged offense. However, if the offender shall have previously thrice been convicted of the offense within 12 months prior to the date of the instant alleged offense, he shall not be permitted to settle the instant alleged offense, but shall be required to stand trial in the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15, § 1, 1-17-17) 
Sec. 10-84. - Due date of settlement amount. 
    Under this division, if the offender fails to make payment of the fine within seven days after being cited, a warrant will be issued by the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15, § 1, 1-17-17) 
Sec. 10-85. - Appearance bond in lieu of payment of fine. 
    Any person who is alleged to have committed any offense listed in the animal services violations penalty sheet may, in lieu of voluntary settlement, sign and deliver to the desk sergeant or other officer at the time in charge at police headquarters a bond for appearance in municipal court in such reasonable amount as may be prescribed. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15, § 1, 1-17-17) 
Secs. 10-86-10-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LIVESTOCK, RABBITS, FOWL 

Sec. 10-111. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal means and includes any horse, hog, cow, sheep, rabbit or any other animal of the equine, swine, bovine, ovine or hare type of family. 
    Enclosure means the entire housed or fenced area where animals or fowl are confined. 
    Fowl means and includes chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese, guineas, pheasants and other fowl. 
    Health officer means the county health officer or his authorized agents. 
    Running at large means that such animal or fowl is off the controlled premises of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15, § 1, 1-17-17) 
Sec. 10-112. - Running at large prohibited; impoundment. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person having charge, custody or control of any animal or fowl to permit such animal or fowl to run at large or to fail to prevent such animal or fowl from running at large in the city limits or the police jurisdiction thereof. 
(b)  The animal services officer is authorized to impound any animal or fowl running at large in violation of this section. Any animal or fowl so impounded may be redeemed by the owner by paying a reasonable redemption fee to cover the cost of transportation, shelter, care and feeding of the animal. When an animal or fowl is impounded under this section, the animal services officer shall give notice that such animal or fowl has been impounded. If the animal or fowl is not redeemed by the owner within seven days, after notice is duly given as required in this section, it becomes the property of the City of Dothan. The City of Dothan encourages and expedites the adoption and placement of such animals through the city's animal services division or approved rescue groups. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15, § 1, 1-17-17) 
Sec. 10-113. - Enclosures required. 
    It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a public nuisance for any person having charge, custody or control of any animal or fowl to keep or maintain such animal or fowl in any enclosure in the city or its police jurisdiction, unless such enclosure is so constructed and maintained that any such animal or fowl kept therein is securely confined and prevented from escaping therefrom. The running at large of any animal or fowl shall be prima facie evidence that the enclosure wherein such animal or fowl is kept is not constructed and maintained according to the requirements of this section and that the keeping of such animal or fowl in such enclosure is unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15, § 1, 1-17-17) 
Sec. 10-114. - Location restrictions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a public nuisance for any person to keep within the city any animal or fowl, unless such animal or fowl is kept at all times at a distance of not less than 35 feet from the residence of any other person or any church, school, public building, park or public playground. 
(b)  The restriction provided in subsection (a) of this section, insofar as it applies to the place where any animal or any fowl may not be kept in the city or in the police jurisdiction, shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Animal or fowl slaughterhouses licensed under a permit by a regulatory agency. 
(2)  Animals or fowl kept at or on the premises of any veterinary hospital operated by a duly licensed veterinarian. 
(3)  Animals or fowl kept at or on the premises of any laboratory, hospital or scientific institution for scientific purposes. 
(4)  Animals with circuses, carnivals, fairs, rodeos, horse shows or other animal shows operating within the city, which have been issued a permit by the animal services officer. 
(5)  Horses or animals of like kind kept by a public or private riding club or by any person or group of persons for riding or show, provided at least one person is employed to clean the premises and provided, further, that a permit for such keeping shall first be obtained from the animal services officer, such permit to be granted on application to and inspection by the animal services officer and health officer. 
(6)  Animals or fowl kept on the premises of the animal shelter designated by the board of commissioners as provided in this Code or state law. 
(c)  Any person who keeps any animal or fowl in the city or its police jurisdiction, by virtue of the exceptions set out in subsection (b) of this section, shall comply with and shall be held responsible for the compliance with all of the sanitary and other requirements of this article and shall be subject to all of the requirements and controls provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15, § 1, 1-17-17) 
Sec. 10-115. - Maintenance of premises. 
(a)  For the protection of the public health, every person who keeps any animal or fowl within the city or its police jurisdiction shall, at all times, maintain the premises where any such animal or fowl is kept in a sanitary condition to prevent the hatching of fly or insect larvae and to prevent offensive odors emanating therefrom. 
(b)  Any person having charge, custody or control of any premises where any animal or fowl is kept who is given written notice by the animal services officer or health officer pointing out any conditions which exist in violation of this article and who fails to remedy such condition within five days from the receipt of such notice shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, within five days after the receipt of such notice from the animal services officer or health officer to correct the conditions pointed out therein, to further keep or maintain such animal or fowl within the city or its police jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15, § 1, 1-17-17) 
Secs. 10-116-10-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DOGS, CATS 

Sec. 10-141. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal means and includes all members of the canine (dog) family and all members of the feline (cat) family. 
    Enclosure means the entire housed or fenced area where an animal is confined and also means the area where an animal is tied, chained or tethered. 
    Owner means any person having control or purporting to have control over an animal; the occupant of the premises where the animal is usually kept or allowed to remain about their premises for a period of three consecutive days or more. The parent or guardian of an owner under 18 years of age shall be deemed the owner as defined herein. If an animal has more than one owner, all persons are jointly and severally liable for all acts or omissions of an owner under this chapter, even if the animal was in the possession of or under the control of a keeper at the time of offense. 
    Serious injury means a physical injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious or protracted disfigurement, and protracted impairment of health, impairment of the function of a bodily organ, or requiring a plastic surgery or at the discretion of the director or administrator. 
    Vicious or dangerous means and includes any animal known to have attacked any person or known to have attacked any animal or fowl without provocation or otherwise having exhibited vicious tendencies. 
    Vicious dog means any dog whose actions according to the records of the animal services officer after investigation, meet at least one of the following: 
(1)  On public or private property, including the owner's property, unprovoked aggressively attacks and inflicts serious injury on a person, excluding person engaged in criminal behavior. 
(2)  On public or private property, unprovoked aggressively attacks and causes serious injury to another domesticated animal, excluding self-defense. 
(3)  A dog trained for dog fighting or is being used or has been used for the purpose of dog fighting. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15, § 1, 1-17-17) 
Sec. 10-142. - Dogs at large. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to allow such dog to be at large (off the owner's property), upon the property of another without the property owner's permission, upon the public streets or rights-of-way unless under the restraint of a leash or chain. 
    Any unspayed female dog or cat in estrus cycle (heat) shall be confined during such period of time in a house, building or secure enclosure. Such enclosure shall be so that no other dog or cat can gain access to the confined animal, except for intentional breeding purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15, § 1, 1-17-17) 
Sec. 10-143. - Enclosures. 
(a)  Every enclosure in which animals are kept shall be in size not less than 25 square feet per animal or a minimum of four square feet per pound of body weight for each animal kept in such enclosure to a maximum of 100 square feet per animal or as determined by the animal services officer or health officer. 
Every enclosure in which animals are kept shall follow these guidelines per animal: 
Extra large-Over 26" or over 75 lbs. should have a 10 ft. × 10 ft. enclosure. 
Large-Over 20" or under 75 lbs. should have a 7 ft. × 7 ft. enclosure. 
Medium-Over 12" or under 50 lbs. should have a 6 ft. × 6 ft. enclosure. 
Small-Under 12" or under 20 lbs. should have a 5 ft. × 5 ft. enclosure. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person who fails, within five days after the receipt of such notice from the animal services officer or the health officer, to correct the conditions pointed out therein to further keep or maintain such animal within the city. 
Shelter: A shelter must have enclosed sides, complete roof and doorway. The shelter should be placed where it will have the best protection from the wind and cold weather. Shelter should be in compliance with section 10-143(a). 
(Ord. No. 2017-15, § 1, 1-17-17) 
Sec. 10-144. - Disturbances. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal kept within the city to permit the loud and frequent or continued meowing, barking, howling or yelping of such animal which annoys and disturbs others. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15, § 1, 1-17-17) 
Sec. 10-145. - Redemption or adoption of impounded animals. 
(a)  Any animal impounded may be redeemed by the owner thereof within seven days upon payment of a daily impoundment fee of $3.00, plus a penalty fee of $15.00. If any such animal has been previously impounded, the impoundment fee shall be increased by $10.00 for each subsequent impoundment, not to exceed $50.00 for any one impoundment. Payment of impoundment fees is not considered to be in lieu of any fine, penalty or other fees as may be established. 
(b)  The following adoption fee will be assessed at the time of the adoption: Dogs $85.00 and cats $55.00. The adoption fee covers the cost of having the animal spayed/neutered, micro-chipped, parvo vaccine/feline distemper and heartworm tested. The adoption fee shall be paid in advance and no animal shall be released for adoption as a pet until these procedures are completed. 
(c)  No animal may be redeemed or adopted without compliance with this section. 
(d)  Animals transported through rescues are not required to be spayed/neutered. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15, § 1, 1-17-17; Ord. No. 2017-395, § 1, 12-5-17) 
Sec. 10-146. - Destruction of impounded or vicious animal. 
(a)  Any animal impounded for a period of at least seven days may be destroyed in a humane manner, under the supervision of the animal services officer. 
(b)  Any police officer or other city officer exercising proper authority is authorized to destroy any animal when such animal is found to be vicious or dangerous or for humane purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15, § 1, 1-17-17) 
Sec. 10-147. - Abandonment. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandonment means to set loose with the intent of avoiding responsibility for custody and care. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person to abandon any animal on any public or private property in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15, § 1, 1-17-17) 
Sec. 10-148. - Tethering. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Tethering means something (as a rope or chain) by which an animal is fastened so that it can range only within a set radius. 
    Tether shall not be less than ten feet in length and shall not allow animals to approach four feet of the owner's property line. It is against the City Ordinance to tether your dog if the following is true: dog is less than six months of age, dog is sick or injured or if your dog is not spayed or neutered unless you are an adult and your dog is in visual range and you are outside with your dog. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15, § 1, 1-17-17) 
Sec. 10-149. - Animal curbing requirements. 
    No person shall knowingly allow an animal which is kept by a person to urinate or defecate upon a public street right-of-way, public or private property, in the city without prior permission of the owner; however, it shall be a defense to said violation if: 
(1)  When an animal defecated on property described in the subsection, the animal's owner or keeper immediately shall remove any feces to a waste container. 
(2)  It is a service animal. 
(3)  If the dog is on official police business. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15, § 1, 1-17-17) 
Sec. 10-150. - Quantity of pet animals restriction. 
    In no event shall any person keep at his or her premises more pet animals than can be properly maintained in a healthy condition without presenting a health or safety hazard to the owners, keepers or others without constituting a nuisance to the occupants or neighboring properties. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15, § 1, 1-17-17) 
Sec. 10-151. - Breeding, training, boarding. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of breeding, buying, selling, trading, training or boarding without a special permit (business license) from the City of Dothan. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15, § 1, 1-17-17) 
Sec. 10-152. - Public nuisance. 
(a)  For the protection of the public health, every person who keeps any animal or animals on their property within the city shall at all times maintain the premises where the animals are in a sanitary condition to prevent the hatching of fly or insect larvae, to prevent offensive odors emanating therefrom, to permit the animal services officer or health officer to go on the premises at any reasonable time to inspect such premises and to comply with all reasonable requirements and directions given by the animal services officer or health officer pertaining to sanitation, fly or insect larvae control and the prevention of offensive odors. 
(b)  Any person, having the care, custody or control of any such premises where any animal is kept confined or in an enclosure, who is given written notice by the animal services officer or health officer pointing out any conditions which exist in violation of this section and who fails to remedy such conditions within five days from the receipt of such notice shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep within the city any animal that creates offensive odors so that it interferes with the use and enjoyment of adjacent property or neighboring premises. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15, § 1, 1-17-17) 
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, adopted April 18, 2017, repealed the former Ch. 14, §§ 14-1-14-13, 14-21-14-29, 14-41-14-43, 14-51-14-57, 14-66-14-72, 14-81, 14-82, and enacted a new Ch. 14 as set out herein. The former Ch. 14 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

ARTICLE I. - PURPOSE, ADMINISTRATION, PERMITTING AND INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS, FEES, PENALTIES 
DIVISION 1. - PURPOSE, ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 14-1. - Purpose of this chapter. 
    In order to serve and protect the public health, safety and provide for the general welfare, the declared purpose of this chapter is to adopt the various International Code Council (ICC) Codes and National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Codes relating to amusement devices, building, land disturbance, electrical, gas, housing, mechanical, plumbing and swimming pool codes to facilitate proper permitting and inspection activities relating to construction and maintenance of buildings and other miscellaneous structures within the City of Dothan. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-2. - Administering authority. 
    The building official under general direction of the director of the planning and development department shall be responsible for administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT AND INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 14-3. - Notification required. 
    It shall be unlawful to construct, erect, or otherwise place any structure, demolish, alter, repair or move any structure or part thereof, or perform any land disturbance plumbing, electrical or heating and air conditioning work in the city without first notifying the building official, who will determine whether a permit for such activity is required in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-4. - Inspection notice in general. 
    When any of the trade work is ready for inspection, it shall be the duty of the contractor/subcontractor of that trade or owner doing his own work to notify the inspection office orally, by telephone or in writing, not less than 12 working hours before the work is to be inspected or tested. All work shall be left uncovered, where it applies until approved as having been done in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-5. - Requirements. 
    Where the building official determines that construction permits are required, application for said work must be made to the building official in accordance with provisions of this article. The building official shall establish procedures for making application and issuing required permits and performing inspections of building construction, alteration, repair, moving, and demolition activities in the city. 
    The following activities, in addition to others specified herein, require permits, the cost of which shall be in accordance with section 14-6: 
(1)  Building construction or demolition including placement of any accessory structure either constructed or placed (pre-fabricated) on the site; 
(2)  Trades; plumbing, electrical including low voltage, hard wired, security and alarm system, mechanical (HVAC, gas); 
(3)  Curb cuts/driveway turnout; 
(4)  Fence erection or construction; 
(5)  Land disturbance; 
(6)  Gasoline and bottled gas installation; 
(7)  Manufactured housing placement and set-up; 
(8)  Roofing; 
(9)  Sewer connections; 
(10)  Signs; 
(11)  Any fixed fire suppression system installation, commercial or residential included but not limited to sprinklers, hood and paint booth; 
(12)  Irrigation sprinkler system installation if "backflow" valve installed by the owner or a contractor; 
(13)  Siding; 
(14)  Awnings; 
(15)  Paving. 
(16)  Swimming Pools. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT FEES 

Sec. 14-6. - Permit fees; in general. 
    Permit fees shall be based upon the cost of construction or other valuation defined in this article and in accordance with the fee schedule defined herein unless otherwise noted. On all buildings, structures or alterations requiring a building permit, as set forth herein, fee shall be paid as required at the time of filing of an application and before any construction begins. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-7. - Permit fee schedule. 
(a)  For valuation less than $1,000.00, no fee shall be required, unless a permit is necessary as required by section 14-5, in which case there shall be a minimum fee of $50.00. 
(b)  For valuation over $1,000.00, up to and including $500,000.00, the fee shall be 0.20 percent of the total valuation with a minimum fee of $50.00. 
(c)  For valuation over $500,000.00, up to and including $2,000,000.00, the fee shall be $1,000.00 plus 0.15 percent of the cost above $500,000.00. 
(d)  For valuation over $2,000,000.00, the fee shall be $3,250.00 for the first $2,000,000.00 plus 0.10 percent of the cost above $2,000,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-8. - Commercial/industrial and apartment valuations for permit fees. 
(a)  New construction. Permit fees for new commercial/industrial and apartment projects, including additions, shall be based upon valuation and permit fee schedule herein. Valuation of commercial/industrial buildings, including apartments shall be the estimated cost as per section 14-10 or the certified cost of the project excluding the cost of land. The contractor shall submit separate costs for construction provided by the various building trades at the time application is made for a building permit. 
(b)  Remodeling and repairs. Permit fees for remodeling or repairs of existing buildings in this section shall be based upon the certified construction cost provided by the contractor at the time of permit application. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-9. - Single-family residential valuations for permit fees. 
(a)  New construction. Permit fees for new construction, of one-and-two family residential dwellings, including townhouses shall be based upon building valuation and permit fee schedule herein. Valuation of single-family residential construction, including townhouses, shall be as per section 14-10 for heated and unheated area. 
(b)  Additions, remodeling and repairs. Permit fees for additions, remodeling or repairs of existing buildings in this section shall be based upon the certified construction cost provided by the contractor at the time of permit application. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-10. - Building valuation data (BVD). 
    Contractor/builder is to estimate the cost of commercial/industrial and apartment valuations as called for in section 14-8 and one-and two-family dwelling as called for in section 14-9, using building valuation data, herein after called "BVD", as published by International Code Council (ICC) during the middle of each year. 
    Each year in January, the contractor is to start using the BVD that was published by ICC during the middle of the previous year. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-11. - Churches exempt. 
    Churches will be exempt from payment of fees on the first $15,000.00 of value with a minimum fee of $50.00. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-12. - Miscellaneous fees. 
(a)  House or building moving permit. (Moving from a location in the city to another location either inside or outside the city, or moving from a location outside the city into the city) fee shall be $200.00 plus $40.00 per hour for each additional hour of police department support in excess of two hours. The fee for only passing through the city and not placing the structure within the city is $100.00 plus $40.00 per hour in excess of two hours for police support. The additional charges for the extra hours of police officer will be billed to the contractor by the police department. 
(b)  Plan examination (plan review) fee. When submitted plans are of such complexity and magnitude that neither the building official nor staff have the time and/or capability to examine said plans to determine conformance of the construction described with building codes and all other pertinent laws and ordinances, a plan-examination fee shall be paid to the city at the time of submitting plans and specifications for examinations. Said plan-examination fee shall be as charged by an outside approved agency plus 15 percent. 
(c)  Special or repeat inspection fee is $50.00 per inspection. 
(d)  Demolition of buildings and structures. The permit fee for demolition shall be based upon cost of the demolition and permit fee schedule herein with a minimum fee of $50.00. 
(e)  Water well. Permit fee for water well shall be $50.00 per well. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-12.1. - Waiver of fees. 
    Projects being constructed to advance the general governmental interest of the community and that are undertaken in the interest of the health, safety and welfare of the general public shall be exempt from fees. Projects that are the result of an extreme natural event after which a disaster declaration is issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency shall not be required to pay permitting fees for the first $25,000.00 of value for any related repair project but shall be required to obtain a permit, submit plans and schedule inspections to monitor progress. 
    Permit fees for nonprofit agencies with 501c(3) certification may be waived by the city manager subject to the following criteria: 
(1)  An explanation from the requesting agency detailing how the project fills a community need, will revitalize a neighborhood, or contributes to fulfilling a goal in the city plan; 
(2)  The project creates at least five permanent jobs; or 
(3)  The value of the project is at least $25,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
DIVISION 4. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 14-13. - Penalties. 
(a)  Construction or other activities requiring permits before obtaining a permit. Any contractor or others working without first obtaining a required permit for the work being done will be charged the lesser of $500.00 or double the permit fee for the first two offenses in a 12-month period and the greater of double the permit fee or $500.00 for the third or any additional offenses during any subsequent 12-month period. In addition thereto violators will be subject to punishment as prescribed in section 1-4 of this Code of Ordinances. Penalty charge shall be added to the actual cost of the permit fee. 
(b)  Other violations. Persons violating any section of the provisions of this Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this code is committed, and upon conviction for any such violation such person will be punished as provided in section 1-4 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Secs. 14-14-14-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INTERNATIONAL CODES AND NFPA CODES ADOPTION AND AMENDMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - ADOPTION 

Sec. 14-21. - International Codes and National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Codes adopted. 
    That certain documents, a copy of each which is on file in the office of the city clerk of the City of Dothan, Alabama, being marked and designated as the International Code Council (ICC) Codes, 2015 Edition (as published by the International Code Council, Inc., and copyrighted in 2014), and Codes published by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA): National Electric Code, 2015 Edition that are hereby incorporated by reference as a part of this article as though fully set forth herein, are hereby adopted as the "Building Codes of City of Dothan", regulating and governing the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said building codes with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in the following sections of this article. 
    Applicable law for adoption in such a manner having been complied with, the following codes, as amended herein, are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied herein fully. 
Codes published by the International Code Council: 
2015 International Building Code (IBC) without Appendices 
2014 National Electric Code (NEC) 
2015 International Existing Building Code (IEBC) 
2015 International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC). 
2015 International Mechanical Code (IMC) 
2015 International Plumbing Code (IPC) 
2015 International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC) 
2015 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code (ISPSC) 
2015 International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings (IRC) including Appendices "A (IFGS)", "B (IFGS)", "C (IFGS)", "D (IFGS)", "E", "G", "H", "J (EB)", "M" and "N". Section R313 deleted. 
2015 International Fire Code, Appendices "B through E", and Appendix "I" 
The National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Standards. For additional information, please refer to Chapter 38 of the City of Dothan Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
DIVISION 2. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 14-22. - Amendments to International Building Code (IBC). 
(a)  Section 101.1 Insert: City of Dothan. 
(b)  Section 113.1 General. Amended to read as follows: The board of appeals shall mean the Board of Adjustments and Appeals as established in this chapter, and said duties and responsibilities as set forth therein. Where reference is made to the board of appeals in this code it shall mean the Board of Adjustments and Appeals. 
(c)  Section 1612.3 Insert: City of Dothan. 
(d)  Section 1612.3 Insert: September 3, 2014. 
(e)  Section 3410.2 Insert: July 1, 2007. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-23. - Amendments to International Code Council Electrical Code. 
(a)  Section 101.1 Insert: City of Dothan. 
(b)  Section 404.2 Insert: Fee Schedule as set forth elsewhere in this chapter. 
(c)  Section 1101 Board of appeals established: Amended to read as follows: The board of appeals shall mean the Board of Adjustments and Appeals as established in this chapter and said duties and responsibilities as set forth therein. Where reference is made to the board of appeals in this code it shall mean the Board of Adjustments and Appeals. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-24. - Amendments to International Existing Building Code. 
(a)  Section 101.1 Insert: City of Dothan. 
(b)  Section 112.1 General. Amended to read as follows: The board of appeals shall mean the Board of Adjustments and Appeals as established in this chapter, and said duties and responsibilities as set forth therein. Where reference is made to the board of appeals in this code it shall mean the Board of Adjustments and Appeals. 
(c)  Section 1401.2 Insert: July 1, 2007. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-25. - Amendments to International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC). 
(a)  Section 101.1 Insert: City of Dothan. 
(b)  Section 106.6.2 Insert: Fee Schedule as set forth elsewhere in this chapter. 
(c)  Section 106.6.3 Insert: Fee Refunds as per Administrative Policy of the City of Dothan. 
(d)  Section 108.4 and Section 108.5 Insert: Violations & Penalties as per City of Dothan Code of Ordinances. 
(e)  Section 109.1. Application for Appeal: Amended to read as follows: The board of appeals shall mean the Board of Adjustments and Appeals as established in this chapter, and said duties and responsibilities as set forth therein. Where reference is made to the board of appeals in this code it shall mean the Board of Adjustments and Appeals. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-26. - Amendments to International Mechanical Code. 
(a)  Section 101.1. Insert: City of Dothan. 
(b)  Section 106.5.2 Insert: Fee Schedule as set forth elsewhere in this chapter. 
(c)  Section 106.5.3 Insert: Fee Refunds as per Administrative Policy of the City Of Dothan. 
(d)  Section 108.4 and Section 108.5 Insert: Look for Violations and Penalties elsewhere in this chapter. 
(e)  Section 109.1 Application for Appeal: Amended to read as follows: The board of appeals shall mean the Board of Adjustments and Appeals as established in this chapter, and said duties and responsibilities as set forth therein. Where reference is made to the board of appeals in this code it shall mean the Board of Adjustments and Appeals. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-27. - Amendments to International Plumbing Code. 
(a)  Section 101.1 Insert: City of Dothan. 
(b)  Section 106.6.2 Insert: Fee Schedule as set forth elsewhere in this chapter. 
(c)  Section 106.6.3 Insert: Fee Refunds as per Administrative Policy of the City of Dothan. 
(d)  Section 108.4 and Section 108.5 Insert: Look for Violations & Penalties elsewhere in this chapter. 
(e)  Section 109.1 Application for Appeal: Amended to read as follows: The board of appeals shall mean the Board of Adjustments and Appeals as established in this chapter, and said duties and responsibilities as set forth therein. Where reference is made to the board of appeals in this code it shall mean the Board of Adjustments and Appeals. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-28. - Amendments to International Property Maintenance Code. 
(a)  Section 101.1 Insert: City of Dothan. 
(b)  Section 103.5 Insert: Fee Schedule as set forth elsewhere in this chapter. 
(c)  Section 111.1 Application for Appeal: Amended to read as follows: The board of appeals shall mean the Board of Adjustments and Appeals as established in this chapter, and said duties and responsibilities as set forth therein. Where reference is made to the board of appeals in this code it shall mean the Board of Adjustments and Appeals. 
(d)  Section 302.4 Insert: (12 inches high covering 30% of the lot or 3000 square feet whichever is less). 
(e)  Section 304.14 Insert for the dates: "The entire year." 
(f)  Section 602.3 Insert for the dates: "The entire year." 
(g)  Section 602.4 Insert for the dates: "The entire year." 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-29. - Amendments to International Residential Code (IRC). 
(a)  Adopted with IRC are the following appendices: 
i.  Appendix A (IFGS). Sizing and capacities of gas pipping. 
ii.  Appendix B (IFGS). Sizing of venting system serving appliances equipped with draft hoods, category I appliances, and appliances listed for use with type B vents. 
iii.  Appendix C (IFGS). Exit terminals of mechanical draft and direct-vent venting systems. 
iv.  Appendix D (IFGS). Recommended procedure for safety inspection of an existing appliance installation. 
v.  Appendix E. Manufactured housing used as dwellings. 
vi.  Appendix H. Patio covers. 
vii.  Appendix J (EB). Existing buildings and structures. 
viii.  Appendix M. Home day care-R-3 occupancy. 
ix.  Appendix N. Venting methods. 
(b)  Section R101.1. Insert: City Of Dothan. 
(c)  Section R105.2. (2) Delete: "Fence not over 7 feet high." 
(d)  Section R112.1. General. Amended to read as follows: The board of appeals shall mean the Board of Adjustments and Appeals as established in this chapter, and said duties and responsibilities as set forth therein. Where reference is made to the board of appeals in this code it shall mean the Board of Adjustments and Appeals. 
(e)  Section R301.2. (1) Insert the following table: 
Ground Snow Load Wind Speed (mph) Seismic Design Category Subject to damage from Winter Design Temp Ice barrier Underlayment Required Flood Hazards Air Freezing Index Mean Annual Temp Weathering Frost Line depth Termite 0 105 A Moderate 0 Very Heavy 0 0 0 32° F 72.8° F  
(f)  Section R313: deleted 
(g)  Section P2603.5.1 Insert: 12 inches. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Secs. 14-30-14-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 14-41. - License and bonding requirement. 
(a)  Any person or organization engaging in the business of or doing any contracting or contract work for others in the city for construction, demolition, repairs, furnishing, etc. for any building/structure, plumbing, electrical and other trades under provisions of the International Codes and National Fire Protection Association Codes adopted herein, must be licensed by the city under provisions of chapter 18 before doing any such work in the City of Dothan, unless otherwise excepted herein. Certain construction related city licenses will require bonds and proof of competency, or State of Alabama required licenses and certifications before issuance of a city license. 
(b)  Owner's privilege. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit any bona fide owner from personally constructing/repairing his own building or installing appurtenances and devices regulated by standard codes adopted herein, provided such owner shall: 
(1)  File plans and specifications to be approved by the building official. 
(2)  Pay required fees. 
(3)  Apply for and obtain a permit. 
(4)  Do the work in accordance with the applicable code(s). 
(5)  Apply for inspections. 
(6)  Receive approval of the inspector. 
(7)  Receive a certificate of occupancy (C.O.). 
(8)  Personal installation by the owner shall be by himself, for himself, in his own building, without compensation or pay from any person for such labor or installation. The owner exercising this privilege shall conform to all the requirements of this chapter. The owner exercising this privilege shall not set himself up as a contractor nor shall be employ journeyman tradesmen. 
(c)  Bonding. All contractor licensees, as a condition of obtaining and holding a valid city license, must deposit with the board of commissioners a good and sufficient bond in the sum defined herein to be approved by the city attorney, conditioned that the person engaged in the designated business will faithfully observe all the laws pertaining to the designated business, that the board of commissioners shall be indemnified and saved harmless from all claims arising from accidents and damage of any character whatsoever caused by the negligence of such engaged in the designated business or by any other unfaithful, inadequate work done either by licensee or his agents or employees. Bonding requirements by trades is as follows: 
(1)  General contractors- $10,000.00 (Contractor as defined in chapter 18). 
(2)  Subcontractors, contractors and homeowners exercising owner's privilege- $2,000.00 (Contractor as defined in chapter 18). 
(3)  Homebuilding contractors- $10,000.00. 
(4)  All others- $5,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-42. - Use of license by others. 
    It shall be unlawful to transfer a license from one person to another or for a licensed contractor to use or allow his license to be used to obtain permits for others. All licenses issued shall be in the name of the individual doing business as (name of business). 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-43. - Revocation of license. 
    City issued licenses requiring state issued certification/license are automatically suspended if state certification or license has lapsed, been suspended or been revoked. A license may be revoked under separate provisions in chapter 18. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Secs. 14-44-14-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTRICAL WORK 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL 

Sec. 14-51. - Damage to electrical systems. 
    It shall be unlawful to cut down or trim any tree so that the tree or limb falls on or damages any electric distribution or service line, electric pole or attachment thereto, transformers or other appurtenances of any public electric utility in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 14-52. - Fees for electric current used during installations; refusal of permits, revocation of license for nonpayment. 
(a)  The electrical contractor doing electrical work shall be liable to the city for the payment of all fees and charges for electrical current in and about the construction and installation of such work. Upon the final inspection of any job or installation, if the inspector finds that the inspection fees paid were not a sufficient amount to cover the amounts due as provided for in this article, the electrician or electrical contractor shall be called upon for the payment of such unpaid fees. If the fees are not paid, the building official shall not issue another permit to such electrician or electrical contractor until all fees in arrears are paid in full. Upon failure to pay such delinquent fees, the electrician or electrical contractor's license may be forfeited and declared null and void by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  If required fees are not fully paid or the electric current used during construction is not fully paid for, the city or other electric utility providing service shall not connect electric energy to the building or installation until the charges are fully paid. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-53. - Inspections. 
    It shall be unlawful for any public electric utility or other entity furnishing electrical current to connect current to the service point of any building, structure, equipment or apparatus within the city limits of Dothan until the city electrical inspector has inspected and approved the building, structure, equipment or apparatus for connection to the electrical current source. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-54. - Notice of inspection. 
(a)  When electrical work is ready for inspection, it shall be the duty of the electrical contractor or owner doing his own work to notify the electrical inspector orally, by telephone or in writing, not less than 12 working hours before the work is to be inspected or tested. All work shall be left uncovered until approved as having been done in accordance with this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to lath, ceil or in any manner conceal any electrical wiring or equipment until such has been inspected and the inspection notice posted as required in this section. 
(c)  If any electrical work or part thereof is covered before being inspected, tested and approved, it shall be uncovered upon the order of the electrical inspector. 
(d)  Upon approval of the electrical installation, services, wiring equipment, apparatus, etc., the electrical inspector will release the electrical service for connection to the electrical utility company's supply lines. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-55. - Temporary services. 
(a)  Where electric distribution lines are already installed along the street or public way adjacent to a building site, deposits for temporary service, if it is for commercial account the deposit shall be made at the permit and inspection office, otherwise it shall be shall be made at the city utility billing and collection office at least 48 hours prior to the time the city will be expected to provide service. 
(b)  Where new distribution lines must be constructed to the site, deposits must be made at least ten working days prior to the time such service will be expected. 
(c)  The city assumes no responsibility for damage to property, or injury to persons in or about the use of the temporary installation or equipment therein, and the owner and the responsible contractor shall provide locks to switch boxes and other safeguards against the use of or handling the installation of equipment by unauthorized persons. Prior to such temporary electrical installation by the utility, the owner or contractor requesting such service shall execute and leave in the city office an agreement in writing to hold the city harmless from all claims, losses or actions for damage to property or injury to persons which may arise out of the presence or use of such temporary electrical installation or equipment so installed as authorized by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
DIVISION 3. - ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS LICENSES 

Sec. 14-56. - License required. 
(a)  Before engaging in the business of or doing any electrical installation or repair work for others in the city, each person must possess a current city electrical license. 
(b)  Every applicant for a license to engage in the business of or doing any electrical work for others in the city must possess a master electricians' certificate issued by the state electrical contractor's board as prescribed in the Code of Ala. 1975, § 34-36-3 et seq. Where contract electrical work is being done, a master electrician must be on site. The city inspector may require that state certificate be shown as evidence of compliance. Noncompliance will result in job shutdown. 
(c)  Those who are presently licensed by the city to do electrical work are exempt from the requirement of state certification as set out in subsection 14-25(b), so long as, they do not let their current electrical license lapse. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-57. - Duration, renewal of license. 
    Electrical contractor's licenses shall be issued for no more than one year. Licenses obtained by examination under provisions of this division may be renewed from year to year without re-examination, except when said license has lapsed for more than 12 months after the renewal date. No renewal shall be for less than the cost of one year, based on the city's fiscal year together with the penalty provided in chapter 18 as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Secs. 14-58-14-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS WORK 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-66. - Rules and regulations for liquefied petroleum gas. 
    This article shall be cumulative of the liquefied petroleum gas rules and regulations promulgated by authority of Code of Ala. 1975, § 9-17-100 et seq., as to methods and specifications for making installations. Nothing contained therein, however, shall be construed to relieve an owner, gas company or supplier, pipe fitter or equipment installer from the requirements of securing permits, certificates of inspection and paying fees charged for such permits as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-67. - Location of meters. 
    After consulting the owner or his authorized representative, the gas company or supplier with the assistance of the gas inspector will decide on proper location of meters. Fitters shall extend the riser to terminate within six inches of such location and to the right of such location, attaching it to the meter bar. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-68. - Separate meters for separate consumers. 
    To accommodate different tenants, the gas company or supplier will set as many meters as there are separate consumers in a given building, connecting the meters to one service pipe, provided the service pipe is large enough to provide ample supply and provided, further, the cost of this yard service line, of meter loops and of piping from the meter to the appliance shall be done at the expense of the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-69. - Connections made by gas company. 
    Only the gas company or supplier will make the necessary connections with the street main, run pipe to the regulator from the main and set the regulator, at the expense of the consumer. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-70. - Testing, inspection required, approval. 
    When the system of piping and yard lines on the premises of the owner has been completed and all fuel drop and bracket extensions firmly and permanently fastened, the gasfitter shall test the piping. If he finds it to be tight, he shall submit a written application to the gas inspector for test at least eight working hours before testing time. If the pipes are verified to be tight and in accordance with the requirements of this article, the gas inspector shall approve work and issue a certificate therefor. During the inspection, the fitter or his representative shall be present. No certificate shall be issued until all inspection fees are paid. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-71. - Certificate of inspection. 
    Connections to the owner's installation by the gas company are not allowed until a certificate of inspection has been issued, a copy of which shall be kept on file in the gas inspector's office. Oral clearances will not be considered as a release. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
DIVISION 2. - GASFITTERS' LICENSES 

Sec. 14-72. - Certification required. 
    Every applicant for a license to engage in the business of or doing any gasfitting work for others in the city must possess a gasfitter's certificate issued by the state plumbers and gasfitters examining board as prescribed in Code of Ala. 1975, § 34-37-1 et seq. Where gasfitting work is being done, a master or journeyman gasfitter must be on site. The city inspector may require that the state certificate be shown as evidence of compliance. Noncompliance will result in job shutdown. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Secs. 14-73-14-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MECHANICAL WORK, HEATING AND AIR CONDITIONING AND REFRIGERATION 
DIVISION 1. - HEATING AND AIR CONDITIONING AND COMMERCIAL REFRIGERATION CONTRACTORS' LICENSES 

Sec. 14-81. - License required. 
(a)  Before engaging in the business of or doing any heating and cooling or commercial refrigeration installation or repair work for others in the city, each person must possess a current city mechanical contractor's license. 
(b)  Every applicant for a license to engage in heating and air conditioning installation, maintenance and repair work must possess a current certification issued by the state board of heating and air conditioning contractors. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-82. - Commercial refrigeration competency requirements. 
    All applicants for a license to engage in commercial refrigeration system installation, maintenance and repair work must submit certified evidence of having taken and passed an examination developed and administered by an approved testing agency covering commercial refrigeration as proof of competency to receive a license. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Secs. 14-83-14-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PLUMBING WORK 
DIVISION 1. - PLUMBERS' LICENSES 

Sec. 14-91. - License required. 
(a)  Before engaging in the business of or doing any plumbing installation or repair work for others in the city, each person must possess a current city plumber's license. 
(b)  Every applicant for a license to engage in the business of or doing any plumbing work for others in the city must possess a master plumbers' certificate issued by the state plumbers and gasfitters examining board as prescribed in Code of Ala. 1975, § 34-37-1 et seq. Where contract plumbing work is being done, a master or journeyman plumber must be on site. The city inspector may require that state certificate be shown as evidence of compliance. Noncompliance will result in job shutdown. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-92. - Payment of inspection and connection fees and charges. 
    If required inspection fees and connection costs are not paid in full, the city water utility department shall not furnish water service to the building or structure until the charges are fully paid. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Secs. 14-93-14-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS AND APPEALS 
DIVISION 1. - ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE 

Sec. 14-96. - Established; membership; terms. 
(a)  There is established a board of adjustments and appeals, which shall consist of seven members as follows: one architect, one structural engineer, one mechanical engineer, one electrical engineer, one fire protection engineer, one fuel gas engineer and one member at large from the business community. These members should be selected to represent the building industry, the general contractors and the licensed homebuilders. Each of the six members of the board of commissioners shall appoint one member, and one member shall be appointed by the mayor. 
(b)  The terms of the members of the board shall be four years or until their successors take office. Any member may be reappointed by resolution of the board of commissioners. 
(c)  All members shall serve as such without compensation. 
(d)  Chairman. The board shall annually select one of its members to serve as chairman. No member shall be elected as a chairman for more than two consecutive terms. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-97. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the board of adjustments and appeals is to allow for the appeal of the decision of the building official or his agents with respect to the materials, mode or manner of construction required by the city's adopted codes for building, electrical, plumbing, gas and HVAC work in the city. The board shall review recommended exceptions to the codes and make recommendations for adoption as appropriate for local conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
DIVISION 2. - APPEALS 

Sec. 14-98. - Appeals. 
    Rulings of the building official. Whenever the building official shall reject or refuse to approve the mode or manner of building, electrical, plumbing or mechanical (HVAC) construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building or structure or when it is claimed that the provisions of the applicable code does not apply or that any equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case or when it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of the code or any of the regulations there under have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted, the owner of such building or structure or his duly authorized agent may appeal from the decision of the building official to the board of adjustments and appeals. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within ten days after the building official renders the decision. Appeals shall be on forms provided by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-99. - Decisions. 
    The board of adjustments and appeals, when after hearing an appeal, may reverse or modify the decision of the building official if in the opinion of the board, there has been an erroneous interpretation, construction or application of any provision of the applicable code by the building official. If a decision of the board reverses or modifies a refusal or order or disallowance of the building official or varies the application of any provision of the code, the building official shall immediately take action in accordance with the decision. The board shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the board shall be in writing and shall include the reasons for the decision. Every decision of the board shall be final, subject, however, to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Secs. 14-100-14-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ABATEMENT OF STRUCTURES 

Sec. 14-111. - Legislative findings. 
    Pursuant to and under the authority contained in Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-53B-1 et seq., as a municipality of the State of Alabama, the City of Dothan is authorized to proceed with the demolition or repair of a structure based on its own findings. A method is herein set out for collecting the assessment liens so imposed. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-112. - Article cumulative. 
    This article shall be cumulative in its nature and in addition to any and all power and authority that the city may have under any other ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-113. - Definitions. 
(a)  An "appropriate city official"(ACO) shall mean the manager of building inspection services as designated by the mayor or other chief executive officer of the municipality as the person to exercise the authority and perform the duties delegated by this article. 
(b)  The term "assessment" as used in this chapter shall refer to the cost of repair or demolition. 
(c)  As used herein "permanent improvements" shall include, but not be limited to, all repairs, improvements, and equipment attached to the property as fixtures. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-114. - Public nuisance finding. 
    Upon a finding of necessity by the governing body of any incorporated municipality, after giving notice as provided herein, the municipality may demolish or repair a building or structure or parts of buildings and structures, party walls, and foundations which have been determined by the appropriate city official (hereafter "ACO") and found by the governing body of the municipality to be unsafe to the extent of being a public nuisance from any cause. The cost of any action taken by the municipality shall be assessed against the property as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-115. - Appropriate city official. 
(a)  An "appropriate city official"(ACO) shall mean the manager of building inspection services as designated by the mayor or other chief executive officer of the municipality as the person to exercise the authority and perform the duties delegated by this chapter. The term "assessment" as used in this chapter shall refer to the cost of repair or demolition. The ACO determines whether a building, structure, or part thereof, party wall, or foundation situated in the city is unsafe to the extent that it is a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-116. - Notice from appropriate city official; failure to comply. 
(a)  Whenever the ACO shall find that any building, structure, part of building or structure, party wall, or foundation situated in the city is unsafe to the extent that it is a public nuisance, the official shall give the person or persons, firm, association, or corporation who is the record owner, notice to remedy the unsafe condition of the building or structure by certified mail to the owner's last known address and to the owner at the address of the property. 
(b)  Notices, orders, and other communications shall be given by certified mail to the owner, to the owner of an interest in the property, the person last assessed for property taxes, all mortgagees of record to the address in the mortgage, or if no address for the mortgagee is set forth in the mortgage, to the address determined to be the correct address by the person responsible for the notice or other communication. 
(c)  The notice shall detail the basis for the ACO's determination and shall direct the owner to take either of the following actions: 
(1)  In the case of repair, specified repairs or improvements shall be completed within 45 days of the date of the notice. If the repair cannot be completed within that time-frame, then a work plan shall be submitted within 45 days and be subject to the city's approval. 
(2)  In the case where demolition is required, the structure shall be demolished within 45 days of the notice. 
a.  The notice shall state that if the owner does not comply within the time specified therein, the repairs or demolition shall be accomplished by the municipality and the cost thereof assessed against the property. 
b.  Mailing of the notice, properly addressed and postage prepaid, shall constitute notice. Notice of the order, shall be also be posted within three days of the date of the mailing within three feet of the entrance to the building or structure. 
c.  If the owner fails to comply with the notice, the municipality may either: 
i.  Repair the structure and assess the expenses to the land on which the building stands or is attached. 
ii.  Demolish the structure and assess the expenses against the land on which the building stands or is attached. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-117. - Hearing; appeal. 
    Within 30 days from the date the notice is given, any person, firm, or corporation having an interest in the building or structure may file a written request for a hearing before the governing body of the city, together with that person's objections to the finding by the ACO that the building or structure is unsafe to the extent of becoming a public nuisance. The filing of the request shall hold in abeyance any action on the finding of the ACO until determination thereon is made by the governing body. 
(a)  Upon holding the hearing, which shall be held not less than five nor more than 30 days after the request, or in the event no hearing is timely requested, after the expiration of 30 days from the date the notice is given, the governing body of the municipality shall determine whether or not the building or structure is unsafe to the extent that it is a public nuisance. 
(b)  In the event that it is determined by the governing body that the building or structure is unsafe to the extent that it is a public nuisance, the governing body shall order the building or structure to be repaired or demolished, as the case may be. The repairs or demolition may be accomplished by the municipality by contract for the repairs or demolition. The municipality shall have authority to sell or otherwise dispose of salvaged materials resulting from any demolition hereunder. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the governing body at the hearing may, within 10 days thereafter, appeal to the circuit court upon filing with the clerk of the court notice of the appeal and bond for security of costs in the form and amount to be approved by the circuit clerk. Upon filing of the notice of appeal and approval of the bond, the clerk of the court shall serve a copy of the notice of appeal on the clerk of the city and the appeal shall be docketed in the court, and shall be a preferred case therein. 
(d)  The clerk of the city shall, upon receiving the notice, file with the clerk of the court a copy of the findings and determination of the governing body in proceedings and trials shall be held without jury upon the determination of the governing body that the building or structure is unsafe to the extent that it is a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-118. - Fixing and assessment of costs. 
(a)  Upon demolition or repair of the building or structure, the ACO shall make a report to the governing body of the cost thereof, and the governing body shall adopt a resolution fixing the costs which it finds were reasonably incurred in the demolition or repair and assessing the same against the property; provided, however, the proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials from the building or structure shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition; and provided further, that any person, firm, or corporation having an interest in the property may be heard at the meeting as to any objection he or she may have to the fixing of such costs or the amounts thereof. 
(b)  The clerk of the municipality shall give notice of the meeting at which the fixing of the costs is to be considered by first-class mail to all entities having an interest in the property whose address and interest is determined from the tax assessor's records on the property or as otherwise known to the clerk. The fixing of the costs by the governing body shall constitute an assessment against the lot or lots, parcel or parcels of land upon which the building or structure was located, and as made and confirmed shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment ("the final assessment"). The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property except liens for taxes, and except for mortgages recorded prior to the creation of the lien for the assessment, and shall continue in force until paid. A certified copy of the resolution fixing the final assessment shall also be recorded in the office of the judge of probate of the county in which the municipality is situated. 
(c)  The municipality shall have the power to assess the costs authorized herein against any lot or lots, parcel or parcels of land purchased by the State of Alabama at any sale for the nonpayment of taxes, and where such an assessment is made against the lot or lots, parcel or parcels of land, a subsequent redemption thereof by any person authorized to redeem, or sale thereof by the state, shall not operate or discharge, or in any manner affect the lien of the city for the assessment, but any redemptioner or purchaser at any sale by the state of any lot or lots, parcel or parcels of land upon which an assessment has been levied, whether prior to or subsequent to a sale by the state for the nonpayment of taxes, shall take the same subject to the assessment. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-119. - Payment of costs; failure to make payment. 
(a)  The municipality, in ordering any repair or demolition the cost of which or any part thereof is to be assessed against any property in accordance with this chapter, may provide that the same shall be paid in cash within 30 days after the final assessment; provided, however, that if the assessed amount is greater than $10,000.00, the property owner may, at his or her election, to be expressed by notifying the municipal official charged with the duty of collecting the assessments in writing within 30 days after the final assessment is determined, pay the final assessment in ten equal annual installments, which shall bear interest at a rate not exceeding 12 percent per annum. Interest shall begin to accrue upon the expiration of 30 days from the date on which the final assessment is set by the governing body and the interest shall be due and payable at the time and place the assessment is due and payable. 
(b)  Any person who elects to make installment payments may pay the outstanding balance of the final assessment together with all accrued interest thereon at any time during the installment payment schedule. The first installment shall be payable within 30 days after the final assessment is determined, and all installments thereof shall be payable at the office of the clerk, finance office, or treasurer of the city or town as may be prescribed. Upon full payment of the final assessments and accrued interest thereon, the municipality shall record a satisfaction of the lien in the office of the judge of probate of the county in which the municipality is located. 
(c)  If the property owner fails to pay the assessment lien within 30 days, or having elected to make installment payments, fails to make any installment payment when due, the whole assessment lien shall immediately become due and payable, and the officer designated by the municipality to collect the assessment lien shall proceed to sell the property against which the assessment lien is made to the highest bidder for cash, but in no event less than the amount of the lien plus interest through the date of default. Prior to the sale, notice shall be given by publication once a week for three consecutive weeks in a newspaper published in the municipality or of general circulation therein, setting forth the date and time of the sale and the purpose for which the same is made, together with a description of the property to be sold. If the officer shall fail to advertise and sell any property on which the payments are past due, any taxpayer of the issuing municipality shall have the right to apply for a writ of mandamus requiring the official to take such action to any court of competent jurisdiction, and the court shall, on proof, issue and enforce the writ. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-120. - Sale of property upon default. 
(a)  Any property owner, notwithstanding his or her default, may pay the assessment lien with interest and all costs if tendered before a sale of the property. 
(b)  The cost of any notice and sale resulting from a default on paying an assessment shall constitute a charge against the property to be sold and shall be retained out of the proceeds of the sale. 
(c)  The officer making the sale shall execute a deed to the purchaser, which shall convey all the rights, title, and interest which the party against whose property the assessment was made had or held in the property at the date of making the assessment or on the date of making the sale. Any surplus arising from the sale shall be paid to the city or municipal treasurer to be kept as a separate fund by the treasurer for the owner upon the responsibility of his or her official bond. The municipality may, by its agents, purchase real estate sold as provided under this chapter and, in the event of the purchase, the deed for the same shall be made to the municipality. 
(d)  No mistake in the notice of sale in the description of the property or in the name of the owner shall vitiate the assessment or the lien and if for any reason, the sale made by the municipality is ineffectual to pass title, it shall operate as an assignment of the lien, and, upon the request of the purchaser, supplementary proceedings of the same general character as required in this chapter may be had to correct the errors in the proceedings for his or her benefit or the lien so assigned to him or her may be enforced by civil action. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-121 - Redemption of property. 
(a)  Any real property heretofore or hereafter sold for the satisfaction of an assessment lien imposed thereon by the governing body of a municipality may be redeemed by the former owner, or his or her assigns, or other persons authorized to redeem property sold for taxes by the state, within two years from the date of the sale by depositing with the officer designated by the municipality to collect the assessments the amount of money for which the lands were sold, with interest thereon at the rate of 12 percent per annum from the date of the sale through the date of the payment. 
(b)  In addition to any other requirements set forth in this section, the proposed redemptioner must pay or tender the purchaser or his transferee all insurance premiums paid or owed by the purchaser with accrued interest on the payments computed from the date the premiums were paid at 12 percent per annum through the date of payment. 
(c)  In addition to any other requirements set forth in this section, the proposed redemptioner must pay or tender to the purchaser or his transferee the value of all permanent improvements made on the property determined in accordance with this section. The proposed redemptioner shall make written demand upon the purchaser of a statement of the value of all permanent improvements made on the property since the assessment sale. In response to written demand made pursuant to this section, the purchaser shall within ten days from the receipt of the demand, furnish the proposed redemptioner with the amount claimed as the value of the permanent improvements, and within ten days after receipt of the response, the proposed redemptioner either shall accept the value so stated by the purchaser, or disagreeing therewith, shall appoint a referee to ascertain the value of the permanent improvements. The proposed redemptioner shall in writing (i) notify the purchaser of his or her disagreement as to the value; and (ii) inform the purchaser of the name of the referee appointed by him or her. Within ten days after the receipt of the notice, the purchaser shall appoint a referee to ascertain the value of the permanent improvements and advise the proposed redemptioner of the name of the appointee. The two referees shall, within ten days after the purchaser has appointed his or her referee, meet and confer upon the award to be made by them. If they cannot agree, the referees shall at once appoint an umpire, and the award by a majority of the body shall be made within ten days after the appointment of the umpire and shall be final between the parties. 
(d)  If the proposed redemptioner fails or refuses to nominate a referee as provided in subsection (c), he or she shall pay the value put upon the improvements by the purchaser. If the purchaser refuses or fails to appoint a referee, as provided in subsection (c), the purchaser shall forfeit his or her claim to compensation for the improvements. The failure of the referees or either of them to act or to appoint an umpire shall not operate to impair or forfeit the right of either the proposed redemptioner or the purchaser in the premises. In the event of failure without fault of the parties to affect an award, the appropriate court shall proceed to ascertain the true value of the permanent improvements and enforce the redemption accordingly. 
(e)  In addition to all other payments provided hereunder, the proposed redemptioner shall also pay interest to the purchaser on the value of all permanent improvements computed from the date the improvements were made at the rate of 12 percent per annum through the date of the payment. 
(f)  The fixed two-year period of redemption as provided herein for the redemption of any property heretofore or hereafter sold for the satisfaction of any assessment lien may be extended to a date 60 days after the date of the certificate of warning to redeem as provided below, but in no event for a longer period than six years from the date of such sale. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-122. - Certificate of warning to redeem. 
(a)  At any time after an assessment sale deed has been recorded in the office of the judge of probate of the county in which the property therein described lies and after expiration of the fixed two-year period of redemption as provided for in this section, any person may apply to the judge of probate for the certificate of warning to redeem, which references the recorded volume and page number of the deed to be recorded in the real estate records, in substantially the following form: "I hereby certify that on or prior to the date of this certificate, I mailed a certified copy of the deed here recorded, together with notice that the same is here recorded, and a warning to redeem to each of the one or more persons other than the grantee in said deed, to whom the property therein described was last finally assessed for ad valorem taxation at the address of each such person as shown by said ad valorem tax assessment records. This ___ day of ____, 2___, Judge of Probate, ___ County, Alabama." 
(b)  At the time of application for entry of the certificate of warning to redeem, the applicant shall deliver to the judge of probate three certified copies of the recorded deed and shall pay to the judge of probate a fee of $1.00. Copies of the deed need not include any certificate of acknowledgment. The applicant shall also deliver to the judge of probate a certified copy of the ad valorem tax assessment records of the county containing the name of the person or persons other than the grantee in the deed to whom the property described in the deed was last finally assessed for ad valorem taxation, together with the address of each person as shown by the tax assessment records, or an affidavit that there is no one else. The judge of probate shall promptly mail to each person at such address one of the aforesaid certified copies of the deed, together with an attached warning to redeem in substantially the following form: "Take notice that there is recorded in my office in Deed Book ___ at page ___ a deed of which the attached is a correct copy. You are warned that unless you, or those claiming under you, take prompt steps to redeem from those claiming under the deed, all rights of redemption may be lost. This ___ day of ___, 2___, Judge of Probate, ____ County, Alabama." 
(c)  Promptly upon or after mailing the notice or notices and certified copy or copies of the deed, it shall be the duty of the judge of probate to record in the real estate records the signed and dated certificate of warning substantially as prescribed above. At the expiration of 60 days after the date of the certificate, all rights to redeem from the sale shown by the deed shall cease and desist. 
(d)  Redemption may be effected after expiration of the fixed two-year period of redemption allowed or provided by section 14-118 and before the extended period of redemption has expired in the same manner and at the same redemption price as provided in section 14-118 above; provided, that if the judge of probate has made the certificate of warning to redeem as provided in section 14-119, said redemption price shall be increased by $1.00. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 14-123. - Emergency action. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, a municipality shall have authority to enact, and may by ordinance authorize, the ACO to initiate immediate repair or demolition of a building structure when, in the opinion of the official so designated, such emergency action is required due to imminent danger of structural collapse endangering adjoining property, the public right of way, or human life or health. The cost of the emergency action shall be fixed by the municipal governing body and shall be assessed as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Secs. 14-124-14-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - CONTRACTORS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL CONTRACTORS AND CONTRACTORS 

Sec. 14-126. - License required. 
    Before engaging in the business of or doing any general contracting or contracting work for others in the city, as defined in the business privilege license tax schedule adopted in section 18-22, each person shall apply for and receive a license, the amount of which shall be fixed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
DIVISION 2. - HOMEBUILDING CONTRACTORS 

Sec. 14-127. - License and state certification required. 
    Before engaging in the business of or doing any homebuilding work for others in the city, each person shall produce a current state certificate issued by the state homebuilder's license board and apply for and receive a license, the amount of which shall be fixed by the city. 
    Exception: General contractors possessing a state general contractor's license with a license number below 18908 may construct homes without obtaining a state homebuilders certification. 
(Ord. No. 2017-114, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Chapter 18 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, adopted Nov. 13, 2007, amended ch. 18 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 18, §§ 1-408, pertained to similar matter, and derived from Code 1977, §§ 5-1-5-573. 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; Sale of produce from temporary structures, § 46-66 et seq.; alarm systems, § 54-61 et seq.; obstructing streets, sidewalks, etc., with goods, etc., § 86-1; taxation, ch. 94; vehicles for hire, ch. 110. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Levy of tax. 
    Pursuant to the Code of Alabama, the following is hereby declared to be and is adopted as the business license code and schedule of licenses for the municipality for the year beginning January 1, 2008, and for each subsequent year thereafter. There is hereby levied and assessed a business license fee for the privilege of doing any kind of business, trade, profession, exhibition, or other activity in the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-2. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the following terms shall have the following meaning as set forth below: 
    Business means and includes all activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in within the municipality, including any commercial or industrial enterprise, trade, profession, occupation, calling, or livelihood, including the lease or rental of residential or nonresidential real estate, and every other kind of activity whether or not carried on for gain or profit, and whether or not engaged in as a principal or as an independent contractor, but shall not include services rendered by an employee to his or her employer. 
    Business license means an annual license issued by the municipality for the privilege of doing any kind of business, trade, profession, or any other activity in the municipality, by whatever name called, which document is required to be conspicuously posted or displayed except to the extent the taxpayer's business license tax or other financial information is listed thereon. 
    Business license remittance form means any business license return, renewal reminder notice, or other writing on which the taxpayer calculates the business license tax liability for all or part of the license year and remits the amount so calculated with the form. 
    Department or department of revenue means the Alabama Department of Revenue, as created under § 40-2-1 et seq. 
    Designee means an agent or employee of the municipality authorized to administer or collect, or both the municipality's business license taxes, which may include another taxing jurisdiction, the department of revenue, or a "private auditing or collecting firm" as defined in the Code of Ala. § 40-2A-3. 
    License form means any business license application form, renewal reminder notice, business license remittance form, or business license return by whatever name called. 
    License officer or municipal license officer means the municipal employee charged by the municipality with the primary responsibility of administering the municipality's business license tax ordinance and related matters thereto. 
    License year means the calendar year. 
    Municipality means any town or city in this state that levies a business license tax from time to time. The term shall also include the town's or city's police jurisdiction, where the business license tax is levied in the police jurisdiction. 
    Other terms means other capitalized or specialized terms used in this section, and not defined above, shall have the same meanings ascribed to them in Alabama Code, § 40-2A-3, unless the context therein otherwise specifies. 
    Person means any individual, association, estate, trust, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other entity of any kind, except for any nonprofit corporation formed under the laws of Alabama which is operated to enable municipalities that become members of such nonprofit corporation to finance or refinance capital projects and related undertakings, on a cooperative basis, and whose board of directors of other governing body consists primarily of elected officials of the municipality. 
    Revenue officer means the municipal employee charged by the municipality with the primary responsibility of administering the municipality's business license tax ordinance and related matter thereto. 
    Schedule of licensees or schedule means the classifications included herewith which describes the various business activities subject to this business license ordinance and specifies the applicable license tax rate for each activity. 
    Taxing jurisdiction means any municipality that levies a business license tax, whether or not a business license tax is levied within its police jurisdiction, or the department of revenue acting as agent on behalf of a municipality pursuant to Alabama Code, § 11-51-180 et seq., as the context requires. 
    Taxpayer means any person subject to or liable under this chapter for any business license tax; any person required to file a return with respect to, or pay or remit the business license tax levied under this chapter or to report any information or value to the taxing jurisdiction; or any person required to obtain, or who holds any interest in, any business license issued by the taxing jurisdiction; or any person that may be affected by any act or refusal to act by the taxing jurisdiction under this chapter, or to keep any required by this chapter. 
    U.S.C. means the applicable title and section of the United States Code, as amended from time to time. 
    Willfully means an act is done willfully when it is done voluntarily, with a conscious motion of the will. Willfulness does not require knowledge that the conduct was unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-3. - License term. 
    The license term for a business license is as follows: 
(a)  Full year. Every person who commences business before the first day of July shall be subject to and shall pay the annual license for such business in full. 
(b)  Half year. Every person who commences business on or after July 1, shall be subject to and shall pay one-half the annual license for such business for that calendar year. 
(c)  Issue fee. For each license issued there shall be an issue fee collected in an amount equal to the maximum amount allowable by the department of revenue which shall be adjusted every five license years by an amount equal to the percentage increase in the U.S. Department of Labor's Producer Price Index, with the base year being 2006. The said issue fee shall be collected in the same manner as the license tax. 
(d)  Annual renewal. Except as provided in subsections (1) or (2), the business license shall be renewed annually on or before the 31st day of January each year. 
(1)  If the due date for payment of any business license falls on a weekend or a holiday recognized by the municipality from time to time, the due date shall automatically be extended until the next business day. 
(2)  Insurance company annual license renewals shall be renewed in accordance with Code of Ala. § 11-51-122 which states that each year, each insurance company shall furnish the municipality a statement in writing duly certified showing the full and true amount of gross premiums received during the preceding year and shall accompany such statement with the amount of license tax due according to the licensing schedule. Failure to furnish such statement or to pay such sum shall subject the company and its agents to those penalties as prescribed for doing business without a license as provided for in the municipal code. 
(3)  On or before December 31 of each year, a renewal reminder shall be mailed to each licensee that purchased a business license during the current year. Said renewal notice shall be mailed via regular U.S. mail to the licensee's last known address of record with the municipality. Licensees are required to furnish the municipality any address changes for their business prior to December 1 in order for them to receive their notice. 
(4)  Business license renewal payments received by the municipality shall be applied to the current renewal only when any and other debts the licensee owes to the municipality are first paid in full. No business license shall be issued if the current renewal payment does not meet said prior obligations and the current renewal. Failure to pay such sums shall subject the licensee and its agents to those penalties as prescribed for doing business without a license provided for in the municipal code. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-4. - License shall be location specific. 
(a)  For each place at which any business is carried on, a separate license shall be paid, and any person desiring to engage in any business for which a license is required shall designate the place at which business is carried on, and the license to be issued shall designate such place, and such license shall authorize the carrying on of such business only at the place designated. 
(b)  Every person dealing in two or more of the articles, or engaging in two or more of the businesses, vocations, occupations or professions scheduled herein shall take out and pay for a license for each line of business. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-5. - Restriction on transfer of license. 
    No license shall be transferred except with the consent of the council or other governing body of the municipality or of the director of finance or other chief revenue officer or his or her designee, and no license shall be transferred to reflect a physical change of address of the taxpayer within the municipality more than once during a license year and never from one taxpayer to another. Provided that a mere change in the name or ownership of a taxpayer that is a corporation, partnership, limited liability company or other form of legal entity now or hereafter recognized by the laws of Alabama shall not constitute a transfer for purposes of this chapter, unless (1) the change requires the taxpayer to obtain a new federal employer identification number or department of revenue taxpayer identification number or (2), in the discretion of the municipality, the subject license is one for the sale of alcoholic beverages. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a municipality from requiring a new business license application and approval for an alcoholic beverage license. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-6. - Unlawful to do business without a license. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, taxpayer, or agent of a person or taxpayer to engage in businesses or vocations in the municipality for which a license is required without first having procured a license. A violation of this article passed hereunder fixing a license shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed the sum of $500.00 for each offense, and a willful violation, by imprisonment, not to exceed six months, or both, at the discretion of the court trying the same. Each day shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-7. - License must be posted. 
    Every license shall be posted in a conspicuous place, where said business, trade or occupation is carried on, and the holder of the license shall immediately show same to the designee of the municipality upon being requested so to do. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-8. - Duty to file report. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every person subject to such license tax to render to the municipality on such forms as may be required, a sworn statement showing number of helpers or employees, amount of space occupied, or other factor described in the schedule, one or several, as the case may require, for the ascertainment of the classification of such person for license taxation purposes and the correct amount of license tax to which he is subject. 
(b)  If the municipality determines that the amount of business license tax reported on or remitted with any business license remittance form is incorrect, if no business license remittance form is filed within the time prescribed, or if the information provided on the form is insufficient to allow the taxing jurisdiction to determine the proper amount of business license tax due, the municipality shall calculate the correct amount of tax based on the most accurate and complete information reasonably obtainable and enter a preliminary assessment for the correct amount of business license tax, including any applicable penalty and interest. 
(c)  If the amount of business license tax remitted by the taxpayer is undisputed by the municipality, or if the taxpayer consents to the amount of any deficiency or preliminary assessment in writing, the municipality shall enter a final assessment for the amount of the tax due, plus any applicable penalty and interest. 
(d)  The municipality shall promptly mail a copy of any preliminary assessment to the taxpayer's last known address by either first class U.S. mail or certified U.S. mail with return receipt requested, or, in the sole discretion of the municipality, deliver the preliminary assessment to the taxpayer by personal delivery. 
(e)(1)  If a taxpayer disagrees with a preliminary assessment as entered by the taxing jurisdiction, the taxpayer shall file a petition for review with the municipal license officer within 30 days from the date of entry of the preliminary assessment setting out the specific objections to the preliminary assessment. If a petition for review is timely filed, the license officer of the municipality shall schedule a conference with the taxpayer for the purpose of allowing the taxpayer or its representatives and the representatives of the municipality to present their respective positions, discuss any omissions or errors, and to attempt to agree upon any changes or modifications to the assessment. The license officer shall issue findings of fact and law within 60 days following the conference, which shall promptly upon issuance be mailed or delivered to the taxpayer, consistent with the procedures set forth in subsection (d) above. 
(2)  If the taxpayer disagrees with the license officer's findings of fact and law, the taxpayer may appeal to the municipal governing body, by filing a notice of appeal with the municipal clerk within 30 days after the findings have been issued. The appeal shall be in writing and shall set forth in reasonable detail the grounds on which the taxpayer disagrees with the license officer's findings of fact and law. 
(3)  If a petition for review: a. is not timely filed, or b. is timely filed, and upon further review the license officer, or the administrative hearings officer or governing body of the municipality, as the case may be, determines that the preliminary assessment is due to be upheld in whole or in part, the taxing jurisdiction shall make the assessment final in the amount of business license tax due as computed by the taxing jurisdiction, with applicable penalty and interest. 
(4)  A copy of the final assessment shall promptly be mailed to the taxpayer's last known address (i) by either first class U.S. mail or certified U.S. mail with return receipt requested in the case of assessments of business license tax of $500.00 or less, or (ii) by certified U.S. mail with return receipt requested in the case of assessments of business license tax of more than $500.00. In either case, at the option of the taxing jurisdiction, a copy of the final assessment may be delivered to the taxpayer by personal delivery. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-9. - Duty to permit inspection and produce records. 
    Upon demand by the designee of the municipality, it shall be the duty of all licensees to: 
(a)  Permit the designee of the municipality to enter the business and to inspect all portions of his place or places of business for the purposes of enabling said municipal designee to gain such information as may be necessary or convenient for determining the proper license classification, and determining the correct amount of license tax; 
(b)  To furnish information during reasonable business hours, at the licensee's place of business, in the municipality or the police jurisdiction, all books of account, invoices, papers, reports and memoranda containing entries showing amount of purchases, sales receipts, inventory and other information from which the correct license tax classification of such person may be ascertained and the correct amount of license tax to which he is subject may be determined, including exhibition of bank deposit books, bank statements, copies of sales tax returns to the State of Alabama, copies of Alabama income tax returns and federal income tax returns. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-10. - Unlawful to obstruct. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, or for any agent, servant or employee of such person, to fail or refuse to perform any duty imposed by this ordinance; nor shall any person, agent, servant or employee of such person obstruct or interfere with the designee of the municipality in carrying out the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-11. - Privacy. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person connected with the administration of this article to divulge any information obtained by him/her in the course of inspection and examination of the books, papers, reports and memoranda of the taxpayer made pursuant to the provisions of this article, except to the mayor, the municipal attorney or others authorized by law to receive such information described herein. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to print, publish, or divulge, without the written permission or approval of the taxpayer, the license form of any taxpayer or any part of the license form, or any information secured in arriving at the amount of tax or value reported, for any purpose other than the proper administration of any matter administered by the taxing jurisdiction, or upon order of any court, or as otherwise allowed in this article. 
(c)  Nothing herein shall prohibit the disclosure of the fact that a taxpayer has or has not purchased a business license. Statistical information pertaining to taxes may be disclosed to the municipality council upon their written request through the mayor's office. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of the section. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-12. - Failure to file assessment. 
(a)  In any case where a person subject to paying a license tax as provided herein fails to do so, the municipal designee shall be authorized to assess and determine the amount of license taxes due using the best information available either by return filed or by other means. 
(b)  The taxpayer shall be notified by registered or certified mail, or by personal service, of the amount of any such assessment, and of his right to appear before the municipal governing body on a day named not less than 20 days from the date of notice and to show cause why such assessment shall not be made final. Such appearance may be made by agent or attorney. 
(c)  If no showing is made on or before the date fixed in such notice, or if such showing is not sufficient in the judgment of the municipality, such assessment shall be made final in the amount originally fixed, or in such other amount as is determined by the municipality to be correct. If upon such hearing the municipal designee finds a different amount due than that originally assessed, he/she shall make the assessment final in the correct amount, and in all cases shall notify the taxpayer of the assessment as finally fixed. 
(d)  A notice by the United States mail, addressed to the taxpayer's last known place of business, shall be sufficient. Any assessment made by the designee of the municipality shall be prima facie correct upon any appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-13. - Lien for non-payment of license tax. 
    On all property, both real and personal, used in the business, the municipality shall have a lien for such license, which lien shall attach as of the date when the license is due, as allowed by Alabama Code, § 11-51-44 (1975). 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-14. - Criminal penalties. 
    Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be fined in an amount not less than $50.00 and not more than $500.00, and may also be sentenced to imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months, in the discretion of the court trying the case, and violations on separate days shall each constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-15. - Civil penalties. 
    In addition to the remedies provided by Alabama Code, § 11-51-150 (1975) et seq., the continued or recurrent performance of any act or acts within the corporate limits or within its police jurisdiction for which a license may be revoked or suspended under this article is hereby declared to be detrimental to the health, safety, comfort and convenience of the public and is a nuisance. The municipality, as an additional or alternative remedy, may institute injunctive proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction to abate the same. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-16. - Penalties and interest. 
(a)  All licenses not paid within 30 days from the date they fall due shall be increased by 15 percent for the first 30 days they shall be delinquent, or fraction thereof, and shall be measured by an additional 15 percent for a delinquency of 60 or more days, but this provision shall not be deemed to authorize the delay of 30 days in the payment of the license due, which may be enforced at once. 
(b)  In the case of persons who began business on or after the first day of the calendar year, the license for such "new business" shall be increased by 15 percent for the first 15 days they shall be delinquent, and shall be measured by an additional 15 percent for a delinquency of 45 days or more. 
(c)  All delinquent accounts (both license taxes and penalties) shall also be charged simple interest at the rate of one percent per month. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-17. - Prosecutions unaffected. 
    The adoption of this article shall not in any manner affect any prosecution of any act illegally done contrary to the provisions of any ordinance now or heretofore in existence, and every such prosecution, whether begun before or after the enactment of this article shall be governed by the law under which the offense was committed; nor shall a prosecution, or the right to prosecute, for the recovery of any penalty or the enforcement of any forfeiture be in any manner affected by the adoption of this ordinance; nor shall any civil action or cause of action existing prior to or at the time of the adoption of this ordinance be affected in any manner by its adoption. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-18. - Procedure for denial of new application. 
(a)  The municipal designee shall have the authority to investigate all applications and may refer any application to the municipal governing body for a determination of whether such license should or should not be issued. 
(b)  If the municipal governing body denies the issuance of any license referred to it, the municipal clerk shall promptly notify the applicant of the municipal governing body's decision. 
(c)  If said applicant desires to appear before the municipal governing body to show cause why said license should be issued, he shall file a written notice with the municipal clerk, said notice to be filed within two weeks from the date of mailing by the municipal clerk of the notice of the denial of such license by the municipal governing body. 
(d)  Upon receipt of said notice the municipal clerk shall promptly schedule a hearing to be held within 15 days from the date of receipt of such notice, before the municipal governing body and shall give the notice of the date, time and place of said hearing to the applicant. 
(e)  The applicant shall be given the opportunity to appear personally, or through his counsel, or both, and the municipal governing body shall proceed to hear any evidence which may be presented both for and against the issuance of said license. 
(f)  If the municipal governing body determines from the evidence presented that in order to either provide for the safety, preserve the health, promote the prosperity, or improve the morals, order, comfort and convenience of the inhabitants of the municipality said license should not be granted, it shall enter an order to that effect; otherwise, said license shall be ordered issued upon payment of any required license fees. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-19. - Procedure for revocation or suspension of license. 
(a)  Any lawful license issued to any person to conduct any business shall be subject to revocation by the municipal governing body for the violation by the licensee, his agent, servant, or employee of any provision of this article or of any ordinance of the municipality, or any statute of the State of Alabama relating to the business for which such license is issued; and shall also be subject to revocation by the municipal governing body if the licensee, his agent, servant, or employee under color of such license violates or aids or abets in violating or knowingly permits or suffers to be violated any penal ordinance of the municipality or any criminal law of the State of Alabama; and shall also be subject to revocation by the municipal governing body if, in connection with the issuance or renewal of any license, the licensee or his agent filed or caused to be filed any application, affidavit, statement, certificate, book, or any other data containing any false, deceptive or other misleading information or omission of material fact. 
(b)  The conditions hereinabove set forth as grounds for the revocation of a license shall also constitute grounds for refusing to renew a license. 
(c)  The municipal governing body shall set a time for hearing on the matter of revoking or refusing to renew a license; and a notice of such hearing shall be given to the licensee, or the applicant for renewal, as the case may be, at least ten days before the day set for said hearing. At the hearing the municipal governing body shall hear all evidence offered by any party and all evidence that may be presented bearing upon the question of revocation or the refusal of renewal, as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-20. - Refunds on overpayments. 
(a)  Any taxpayer may file a petition for refund with the municipality for any overpayment of business license tax erroneously paid to the municipality. If a final assessment for the tax has been entered by the municipality, a petition for refund of all or a portion of the tax may be filed only if the final assessment has been paid in full prior to or simultaneously with the filing of the petition for refund. 
(b)  A petition for refund shall be filed with the municipality within two years from the date of payment of the business license tax, which is the subject of the petition. 
(c)  The municipality shall either grant or deny a petition for refund within six months from the date the petition is filed, unless the period is extended by written agreement of the taxpayer and the municipality. The taxpayer shall be notified of the municipality's decision concerning the petition for refund by first class U.S. mail or by certified U.S. mail, return receipt requested, sent to the taxpayer's last known address. If the municipality fails to grant a full refund within the time provided herein, the refund petition shall be deemed to be denied. 
(d)  If the petition is granted or the municipality or a court otherwise determines that a refund is due, the overpayment shall be promptly refunded to the taxpayer by the municipality, together with interest to the extent provided for in Code of Ala. § 11-51-192. If the municipality determines that a refund is due, the amount of overpayment plus any interest due thereon may first be credited by the municipality against any outstanding tax liabilities due and owing by the taxpayer to the municipality, and the balance of any overpayment shall be promptly refunded to the taxpayer. If any refund or part thereof is credited to any other tax by the municipality, the taxpayer shall be provided with a written detailed statement showing the amount of overpayment, the amount credited for payment to other taxes, and the resulting amount of the refund. 
(e)  A taxpayer may appeal from the denial in whole or in part of a petition for refund by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk of the circuit court of the county in which the municipality denying the petition for refund is located. Said notice of appeal must be filed within two years from the date the petition was denied. The circuit court shall hear the appeal according to its own rules and procedures and shall determine the correct amount of refund due, if any. If any appeal is not filed with the appropriate circuit court within two years of the date the petition was denied, then the appeal shall be dismissed for lack of jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-21. - Delivery license. 
(a)  In lieu of any other type of license, a taxpayer may at its option purchase for $100.00 plus the issuance fee, a delivery license for the privilege of delivering its merchandise in the municipality if the taxpayer meets all of the following criteria: 
(1)  Other than deliveries, the taxpayer has no other physical presence within the municipality or its police jurisdiction. 
(2)  The taxpayer conducts no other business in the municipality other than delivering merchandise and performing the requisite set-up and installation of said merchandise. 
(3)  Such delivery and set-up and installation is performed by the taxpayer's employees or agents, concerns the taxpayer's own merchandise in that municipality, and is done by means of delivery vehicles owned, leased, or contracted by the taxpayer. 
(4)  The gross receipts derived from the sale and any requisite set-up or installation of all merchandise so delivered shall not exceed $75,000.00 during the license year. 
(5)  Any set-up or installation shall relate only to (i) that required by the contract between the taxpayer and the customer or as may be required by state or local law, and (ii) the merchandise so delivered. 
(6)  If at any time during the current license year the taxpayer fails to meet any of the above stated criteria, then within ten days after any of said criteria have been violated or exceeded, the taxpayer shall purchase all appropriate business licenses from the municipality for the entire license year and without regard to this section. 
(b)  Mere delivery of the taxpayer's merchandise by common carrier shall not allow the municipality to assess a business license tax against the taxpayer, but the gross receipts derived from any sale and delivery accomplished by means of a common carrier shall be counted against the $75,000.00 limitation described in the preceding section if the taxpayer also during the same license year sells and delivers into the taxing jurisdiction using a delivery vehicle other than a common carrier. 
(c)  A common carrier, contract carrier, or similar delivery service making deliveries on behalf of others shall not be entitled to purchase a delivery license. 
(d)  The delivery license shall be calculated in arrears, based on the related gross receipts during the preceding license year. 
(e)  The purchase of a delivery license shall not, in and of itself, establish nexus between the taxpayer and the municipality for purposes of the taxes levied by or under the authority of Title 40 of the Code of Alabama or other provisions of law, nor does the purchase of a delivery license conclusively determine that nexus does not exist between the taxpayer and the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-22. - Schedule of license classifications and fees. 
CODE NAICS TITLES/BUSINESS LICENSE CODES FEE 7211 Accommodations-Hotels, Motels and Similar Facilities First 10 rooms $ 100.00 Over 10 rooms-each $ 5.00 Maximum amount $ 500.00 7212 Accommodations-Trailer Park, RV Park and Similar 1 to 25 spaces $ 37.50 26 to 50 spaces $ 50.00 51 to 100 spaces $ 75.00 101 to 150 spaces $100.00 Over 150 spaces $125.00 5412 Accountants/CPAs-Individual Professional License $ 100.00 112 Animal Production $ 200.00 1159 Agriculture & Forestry - All Other $ 100.00 561 Administrative Services $ 100.00 481 Airline Transportation $ 200.00 31212 Alcoholic Beverage Manufacturing See City of Dothan Code of Ordinances Section 6-65. 62191 Ambulance Company and/or Services First ambulance $ 35.00 Each additional ambulance $ 10.00 9103 Amusement Devices First 5 machines, each $ 7.50 All over 5 machines, each $ 5.00 713 Amusement $ 100.00 1152 Animal Production Services $ 100.00 315 Apparel Manufacturing $ 200.00 335 Appliance Manufacturing $ 200.00 7131 Arcades First 5 machines, each $ 7.50 All over 5 machines, each $ 5.00 5413 Architect - Individual Professional License $ 250.00 711 Arts and Sports $ 100.00 5411 Attorney/Lawyers - Individual Professional License Individual License $ 225.00 Inactive $ 112.50 4231 Automobile Wholesaler Gross Sales less than $100,000.00 $ 200.00 Gross Sales $100,000.00 and less than $200,000.00 $ 400.00 Gross Sales $200,000.00 and over $ 600.00 B 812997 Bail Bonding Service $ 300.00 See City of Dothan Code of Ordinances Section 18-51 et seq. for regulations. 81211 Barber and Beauty Shops First chair set up, whether used or not $ 35.00 Each additional chair set up, whether used or not $ 15.00 312 Beverage Manufacturing Where gross receipts are less than $200,000.00 $ 400.00 Where gross receipts are $200,000.00 or over $ 600.00 9102 Billiard Tables First Table $ 75.00 Each additional Table $ 25.00 See City of Dothan Code of Ordinances Section 18-186 et seq. for regulations. 621991 Blood and Organ Banks $ 50.00 71395 Bowling Center $ 300.00 515 Broadcasting - Except Internet $ 150.00 51511 Broadcasting Company - Radio $ 150.00 51512 Broadcasting Company - Television $ 300.00 487990 Buggy Rides $ 50.00 Police Department Permit Required. 444 Building Materials and Gardening Equipment Dealers (1) First $100.00 stock carried $ 10.00 (2) From $101.00 stock to not over $150.00 $ 20.00 (3) From $151.00 stock to not over $250.00 $ 30.00 (4) From $251.00 stock to not over $500.00 $ 50.00 (5) From $501.00 stock to not over $1,000.00 $ 75.00 (6) Each additional $1,000.00 $ 15.00 C 711190 Carnivals, Circuses and Similar Entertainment 7 Days or More - For Profit or Non Profit $1,000.00 Less Than 7 Days - For Profit $ 250.00 Less Than 7 Days - Non Profit $ 100.00 7223 Caterers and/or Mobile Food Services $ 50.00 Letter of Authorization from Property Owner for Mobile Food Service Health Department Permit Required 812220 Crematory/Cemetery - Except Combined With Funeral Home $ 100.00 State Board of Funeral Service Certification required. 325 Chemical Manufacturing (1) Total sales less than 5,000 tons per year $ 150.00 (2) Total sales 5,000 to 10,000 tons per year $ 200.00 (3) Total sales 10,000 to 15,000 tons per year $ 300.00 (4) Total sales 15,000 tons per year and over $ 400.00 Provided, chemical manufacturers shall not be required to take out and pay dealer's license and providing, further, that new manufacturers or dealers shall pay the minimum required in this subsection; the maximum to be determined upon the tonnage on December 31 following. State Department of Agriculture License required. 62131 Chiropractor - Individual Professional License $ 200.00 448 Clothing Store and Accessories (1) First $100.00 stock carried $ 10.00 (2) From $101.00 stock to not over $150.00 $ 20.00 (3) From $151.00 stock to not over $250.00 $ 30.00 (4) From $251.00 stock to not over $500.00 $ 50.00 (5) From $501.00 stock to not over $1,000.00 $ 75.00 (6) Each additional $1,000.00 $ 15.00 722411 Club Retail Liquor See City of Dothan Code of Ordinances Section 6-65. 334 Computer Manufacturing $ 200.00 5415 Computer Programmer - Individual Professional License $ 100.00 23899 Contractor - All Other Specialty Trade $ 150.00 Surety Bond Required - $2,000 23835 Contractor - Finish Carpentry $ 150.00 Surety Bond Required - $2,000 23811 Contractor - Poured Concrete Foundation and Structure $ 150.00 Surety Bond Required - $2,000 23831 Contractor - Drywall and Insulation $ 150.00 Surety Bond Required - $2,000 23821 Contractor - Electrical $ 150.00 State Certification Required Surety Bond Required - $5,000 23833 Contractor - Flooring $ 150.00 Surety Bond Required - $2,000 23813 Contractor - Framing $ 150.00 Surety Bond Required - $2,000 2361 Contractor - General - Residential Bldg./Housing Construction $ 150.00 (Greater than $10,000) State Certification Required Surety Bond Required - $10,000 2362 Contractor - General - Non-Residential/Comm. Bldg. Construction $ 150.00 (Greater than $50,000) State Certification Required Surety Bond Required - $10,000 23815 Contractor - Glass and Glazing $ 150.00 Surety Bond Required - $2,000 237 Contractor - Heavy Construction $ 150.00 State Certification Required Surety Bond Required - $10,000 23820 Contractor - Home Security Systems - Installation Only $ 150.00 Must have Police Department Approval 23814 Contractor - Masonry $ 150.00 Surety Bond Required - $2,000 23819 Contractor - Other Foundation, Structure, and Building Exterior $ 150.00 Surety Bond Required - $2,000 23829 Contractor - Other Building Equipment Contractors $ 150.00 Surety Bond Required - $2,000 23839 Contractor - Other Building Finishing $ 150.00 Surety Bond Required - $2,000 23832 Contractor - Painting and Wall Covering $ 150.00 23822 Contractor - Plumbing, Heating, and Air-Conditioning $ 150.00 State Certification Required Surety Bond Required - $5,000 State Fire Marshall Certification Required for Fire Sprinkler Installation 23816 Contractor - Roofing $ 150.00 Surety Bond Required - $2,000 23817 Contractor - Siding $ 150.00 Surety Bond Required - $2,000 23891 Contractor - Site Preparation $ 150.00 Surety Bond Required - $2,000 23812 Contractor - Structural Steel and Precast Concrete $ 150.00 Surety Bond Required - $2,000 23834 Contractor - Tile and Terrazzo $ 150.00 Surety Bond Required - $2,000 1151 Cotton Gin - Each $ 50.00 492 Courier Service $ 50.00 5222 Credit Services $ 100.00 D 624411 Day Care Facility - Child (1) More than 2 but less than 6 children $ 25.00 (2) More than 6 children $ 75.00 Proof of State Certification when required by state law. Health Department Permit or Inspection required. 62442 Day Care Facility - Adult $ 50.00 Proof of State Certification when required by state law. Health Department Permit or Inspection required. 9991 Delivery License $ 100.00 6212 Dentist - Individual Professional License $ 250.00 5221 Depository Institutions - Main and Branch Office $ 125.00 561611 Detective or Investigator - Individual License $ 100.00 See City of Dothan Code of Ordinances Section 18-75 et seq. for regulations. 4543 Direct Sales $ 100.00 See City of Dothan Code of Ordinances Section 18-176 et seq. for regulations. 81232 Dry Cleaning and Laundry Service - Except Coin Operated Drop off and pick up only $ 35.00 First pressing machine $ 25.00 Each additional machine $ 12.00 81231 Dry Cleaning and Laundry Service - Coin Operated 1 to 10 machines $ 40.00 11 to 20 machines $ 75.00 Over 20 machines $ 100.00 E 611 Educational Services $ 100.00 4541 Electronic Shopping $ 50.00 443 Electronic and Appliance Store (1) First $100.00 stock carried $ 10.00 (2) From $101.00 stock to not over $150.00 $ 20.00 (3) From $151.00 stock to not over $250.00 $ 30.00 (4) From $251.00 stock to not over $500.00 $ 50.00 (5) From $501.00 stock to not over $1,000.00 $ 75.00 (6) Each additional $1,000.00 $ 15.00 54133 Engineer - Individual Professional License $ 250.00 State Certification Required 561710 Exterminating Company $ 100.00 Bond Required by State Law. F 111 Farming and Crop Production $ 100.00 114 Fishing & Hunting $ 50.00 445 Food and Beverage Stores (1) First $100.00 stock carried $ 10.00 (2) From $101.00 stock to not over $150.00 $ 20.00 (3) From $151.00 stock to not over $250.00 $ 30.00 (4) From $251.00 stock to not over $500.00 $ 50.00 (5) From $501.00 stock to not over $1,000.00 $ 75.00 (6) Each additional $1,000.00 $ 15.00 311 Food Manufacturing $ 200.00 1153 Forestry Services $ 100.00 812998 Fortune Teller or Clairvoyant - Individual Reader License $ 100.00 525 Funds, Trusts, and Other Financial Agencies $ 100.00 81221 Funeral Services $ 250.00 In addition to the above, caskets, coffins and burial supplies carried in stock shall be as follows: (1) First $100.00 stock carried $ 10.00 (2) From $101.00 stock to not over $150.00 $ 20.00 (3) From $151.00 stock to not over $250.00 $ 30.00 (4) From $251.00 stock to not over $500.00 $ 50.00 (5) From $501.00 stock to not over $1,000.00 $ 75.00 (6) Each additional $1,000.00 $ 15.00 337 Furniture Manufacturing $ 200.00 G 447 Gasoline Retail - With or Without Convenience Store First Pump $ 30.00 Each Additional Pump $ 10.00 452 General Merchandise Store (1) First $100.00 stock carried $ 10.00 (2) From $101.00 stock to not over $150.00 $ 20.00 (3) From $151.00 stock to not over $250.00 $ 30.00 (4) From $251.00 stock to not over $500.00 $ 50.00 (5) From $501.00 stock to not over $1,000.00 $ 75.00 (6) Each additional $1,000.00 $ 15.00 9992 Going Out Of Business License (1) Not more than 30 consecutive calendar days following issuance $ 150.00 (2) Not more than 60 consecutive calendar days following issuance $ 300.00 See City of Dothan Code of Ordinances Section 18-121 et seq. for regulations. 561612 Guard Services Where 2 and less than 4 workers $ 50.00 Where 4 and less than 7 workers $ 75.00 Where 7 and less than 11 workers $ 100.00 Where 11 or more workers $ 125.00 For each additional worker in excess of 11 $ 5.00 H 621399 Health Practitioner - All Other - Individual Professional License $ 100.00 446 Health and Personal Care Store (1) First $100.00 stock carried $ 10.00 (2) From $101.00 stock to not over $150.00 $ 20.00 (3) From $151.00 stock to not over $250.00 $ 30.00 (4) From $251.00 stock to not over $500.00 $ 50.00 (5) From $501.00 stock to not over $1,000.00 $ 75.00 (6) Each additional $1,000.00 $ 15.00 621 Healthcare Services $ 100.00 442 Home Furnishings (1) First $100.00 stock carried $ 10.00 (2) From $101.00 stock to not over $150.00 $ 20.00 (3) From $151.00 stock to not over $250.00 $ 30.00 (4) From $251.00 stock to not over $500.00 $ 50.00 (5) From $501.00 stock to not over $1,000.00 $ 75.00 (6) Each additional $1,000.00 $ 15.00 622 Hospital 20 beds or less $ 100.00 21 to 50 beds $ 150.00 51 to 75 beds $ 300.00 Over 75 beds $ 500.00 I 9995 Importer's License - Alcoholic Beverages See City of Dothan Code of Ordinances Section 6-65. 519 Information Services and Data Processing $ 100.00 524 Insurance Carriers and Related Activities Maximum Allowed by State Code 5241 Insurance Company and/or Agent Maximum Allowed by State Code 524128 Insurance All Other Coverage (1) Each person doing any kind of insurance business other than Fire and Marine shall pay a flat fee of $50.00 plus $1.00 on each $100.00 and major fraction thereof of the gross premiums, less the premiums returned by cancellation or policies issued in the preceding calendar year within the city. Gross premiums shall be those premiums received from policies issued during the preceding calendar year and all premiums received for policies in the years prior to the preceding year when, during the preceding calendar year, such policies have been endorsed making changes in the coverage of property or persons insured. Provided that this shall not apply to Knights of Pythias, Odd Fellows and other such incorporated fraternal orders. If no business has been done in the city during the preceding calendar year, a flat sum of $50.00 shall be paid and adjusted at the expiration of the year according to the amount due for other insurance required in this subsection. Any overpayment shall be refunded by the city. (2) Persons writing their own insurance shall pay the same license as other agents or agencies, provided new companies shall pay $35.00, to be adjusted at the end of the year. (3) Each person or company doing an insurance business shall, on or before March 15, furnish the city clerk in writing a duly certified statement showing the full and true amount of gross premiums received during the preceding calendar year. (4) Nonprofit, hospital plans are exempt pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 10-4-107. 524126 Insurance Fire Coverage (1) Any fire or marine insurance company or mutual aid associations doing business in the city shall pay $4.00 on each $100.00 and major fraction thereof of the gross premiums on policies issued during the preceding calendar year on property located within the city, less returned premiums. Gross premiums shall be those premiums received from policies issued during the preceding calendar year and all premiums received for policies issued in the years prior to the preceding calendar year when, during the preceding calendar year, such policies have been endorsed making changes in the coverage of property or persons insured. If no business has been done in the city during the preceding calendar year, a flat sum of $100.00 shall be paid; and at the end of the first calendar year in which such new business is commenced, the license for such calendar year shall be calculated as set forth in this subsection, and the $100.00 applied as a credit against such first-year license. Any overpayment shall be refunded by the city. (2) Persons writing their own insurance shall pay the same license as other agents or agencies, provided new companies shall pay $35.00, to be adjusted at the end of the year. (3) Each person or company doing an insurance business shall, on or before March 15, furnish the city clerk in writing a duly certified statement showing the full and true amount of gross premiums received during the preceding calendar year. (4) Nonprofit, hospital plans are exempt pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 10-4-107. 516 Internet Publishing and Broadcasting $ 100.00 L 561730 Landscape Service $ 100.00 Subject to State Dept. of Agriculture Requirements 316 Leather and Allied Products Manufacturing $ 200.00 561622 Locksmith Services - Except Sales $ 25.00 1133 Logging $ 300.00 722410 Lounge Retail Liquor See City of Dothan Code of Ordinances Section 6-65. M 333 Machinery Manufacturing $ 200.00 551 Management Company $ 100.00 62133 Mental Health Practitioner - Individual Professional License $ 100.00 332 Metal Fabrication $ 200.00 331 Metal Manufacturing $ 200.00 212 Mining (except for oil and gas) - all related mining activities $ 500.00 213 Mining Support Services $ 500.00 339 Miscellaneous Manufacturing $ 200.00 453 Miscellaneous Store Retailers (1) First $100.00 stock carried $ 10.00 (2) From $101.00 stock to not over $150.00 $ 20.00 (3) From $151.00 stock to not over $250.00 $ 30.00 (4) From $251.00 stock to not over $500.00 $ 50.00 (5) From $501.00 stock to not over $1,000.00 $ 75.00 (6) Each additional $1,000.00 $ 15.00 453930 Mobile Home Dealers $ 225.00 512 Motion Picture and Recording Industry $ 100.00 51213 Motion Picture Exhibition - Theatres and Drive-Ins $ 500.00 4411 Motor Vehicle - New and/or Used Gross Sales less than $100,000.00 $ 200.00 Gross Sales $100,000.00 and less than $200,000.00 $ 400.00 Gross Sales $200,000.00 and over $ 600.00 441990 Motor Vehicle - Off Site Sale - New and/or Used $ 200.00 See State Code Section 40-12-395 for regulations. 4413 Motor Vehicle - Parts and Accessories (1) Minimum up to $1,000.00 stock $ 75.00 (2) Each additional $1,000.00 $ 15.00 712 Museums $ 100.00 N 451212 News Stand $ 25.00 5111 Newspaper Publishing (1) Daily, where gross receipts are not over $200,000.00 $ 500.00 (2) Daily, where gross receipts are over $200,000.00 $ 750.00 (3) Semiweekly $ 100.00 (4) Weekly $ 50.00 (5) Monthly $ 25.00 (6) Job printing in connection with subsections (1) through (5) $ 100.00 327 Nonmetallic Manufacturing $ 200.00 623 Nursing Care Not over 75 beds $ 100.00 Over 75 beds $ 150.00 O 9105 Office Location Only License $ 50.00 2111 Oil & Gas Extraction $ 500.00 Per Well 62132 Optometrist - Individual Professional License Individual License $ 150.00 For manufacturing and grinding lenses in addition to above $ 50.00 314 Other Manufacturing $ 200.00 P 322 Paper Manufacturing $ 200.00 812930 Parking Lot Up to 50,000 sq. ft. $ 50.00 Over 50,000 sq. ft. $ 75.00 485113 Passenger Transportation - Bus Terminals Maximum Allowed by State Code 485 Passenger Transportation - Charter/Other Vehicle Transit Services $ 200.00 48532 Passenger Transportation - Limousine Service 5 passengers or less - each vehicle $ 50.00 Over 5 passengers - each vehicle $ 100.00 Must comply with ALDOT Requirements For Regulatory Provisions see City of Dothan Code of Ordinances - Chapter 110 48531 Passenger Transportation - Taxi Cab $ 50.00 Per Cab 52229 Pawn Shop $ 400.00 See City of Dothan Code of Ordinances Section 18-241 et seq. for regulations. 454391 Peddlers License - Local $ 100.00 See City of Dothan Code of Ordinances Section 18-176 et seq. for regulations. 454392 Peddlers License - Itinerant - Transient Merchant See City of Dothan Code of Ordinances Article XIII for fees and regulations. 812 Personal Service - All Other $ 50.00 324 Petroleum & Coal Manufacturing $ 200.00 62134 Physical, Occupational, Speech Therapist, Audiologist - Individual Professional License $ 50.00 6211 Physician - Individual Professional License $ 350.00 326 Plastic and Rubber Manufacturing $ 200.00 62139 Podiatrist - Individual Professional License $ 350.00 323 Printing $ 100.00 454394 Produce & Fruit Dealers $ 50.00 541 Professional Services - Other Prof., Scientific and Technical $ 100.00 511 Publishing Industries, Except Internet $ 100.00 R 482 Rail Transportation Maximum Allowed by State Code Code of Alabama Section 11-51-124. 531 Real Estate - Management, Appraisers, etc. $ 100.00 5312 Real Estate Office - Agents and Brokers $ 100.00 5311 Real Estate Rental or Leasing - Residential - per unit $ 2.00 Each person engaged in the business of renting, leasing or subletting real estate for residential purposes, in excess of three units, shall pay to the city a license tax 621498 Recovery or Rehabilitation Center 20 beds or less $ 100.00 21 to 50 beds $ 150.00 51 to 75 beds $ 300.00 Over 75 beds $ 500.00 5321 Rental or Leasing - Vehicle $ 150.00 532 Rental or Leasing - Tangible Property $ 100.00 8111 Repair and Maintenance - Garages, Auto, Paint/Body Where no help is employed $ 30.00 Where 3 men or less are employed $ 50.00 Where 4 to 6 men are employed $ 100.00 Where more than 6 men are employed $ 150.00 8112 Repair and Maintenance - All Electronic Equipment $ 50.00 8114 Repair and Maintenance - All Appliances, Home & Garden Equipment, Upholstery, Footwear, Leather, etc. $ 50.00 811 Repair and Maintenance Not Elsewhere Classified $ 50.00 7221 Restaurant - Full Service $ 200.00 Health Department Permit Required. 7222 Restaurant - Limited Facility or Service $ 100.00 722111 Restaurant Retail Liquor See City of Dothan Code of Ordinances Section 6-65. 445310 Retail Beer - (Off Premises Only) See City of Dothan Code of Ordinances Section 6-65. 445311 Retail Table Wine - (Off Premises Only) See City of Dothan Code of Ordinances Section 6-65. 722112 Retail Wine (On or Off Premises) See City of Dothan Code of Ordinances Section 6-65. 722113 Retail Beer (On or Off Premises) See City of Dothan Code of Ordinances Section 6-65. S 523 Securities, Commodities and Other Financial Services $ 100.00 561621 Security Alarm Systems Installation $ 100.00 Combined with Sales, Repair, or Monitoring 487 Sightseeing Transportation $ 200.00 624 Social Assistance Centers - All Types $ 100.00 454393 Solicitors Permit $ 3.00 See City of Dothan Code of Ordinances Section 18-176 et seq. for regulations. 722414 Special Events Retail License See City of Dothan Code of Ordinances Section 6-65. 722412 Special Retail License - Thirty days or less See City of Dothan Code of Ordinances Section 6-65. 722413 Special Retail License - More than 30 days See City of Dothan Code of Ordinances Section 6-65. 451 Sporting Goods and Hobbies (1) First $100.00 stock carried $ 10.00 (2) From $101.00 stock to not over $150.00 $ 20.00 (3) From $151.00 stock to not over $250.00 $ 30.00 (4) From $251.00 stock to not over $500.00 $ 50.00 (5) From $501.00 stock to not over $1,000.00 $ 75.00 (6) Each additional $1,000.00 $ 15.00 54137 Surveyor - Individual Professional License $ 100.00 State Certification Required T 81149 Tailor Shop - Alterations Only $ 10.00 812199 Tattoo Parlor $ 100.00 Health Department Permit required. 517 Telecommunications - Cellular and Other Wireless, Paging $ 100.00 51711 Telecommunications - Telephone Local Maximum Allowed by State Code 51712 Telecommunications - Telephone Long Distance Maximum Allowed by State Code 51713 Telecommunications - Resellers of Service $ 200.00 5175 Telecommunications - Cable/Other Program Distribution Maximum Allowed by State Code 313 Textile Manufacturing $ 200.00 1131 Timber Track Operations $ 100.00 336 Transportation Manufacturing $ 200.00 9993 Tree Cutting $ 50.00 See City of Dothan Code of Ordinances Section 18-226 et seq. for regulations. 484 Truck Transportation - Local, long-distance, freight, moving, and storage $ 100.00 See State Code for Additional Regulations. 4841 Truck Transportation - Terminal/Common/Contract Carrier Maximum Allowed by State Code U 9997 Unclassified Miscellaneous Business Services $ 50.00 Not Elsewhere Classified 9998 Unclassified Miscellaneous Personal Services $ 50.00 Not Elsewhere Classified 9994 Use of Streets License $ 50.00 Police Department Approval Required. 2211 Utilities - electric power or light company Maximum Allowed by State Code 2212 Utilities - natural gas company Maximum Allowed by State Code 2213 Utilities - water, sewage treatment, steam, and other Maximum Allowed by State Code 2219 Utilities - All Other Maximum Allowed by State Code V 9101 Vending Machines - Number of Machines First 5 machines, each $ 7.50 All over 5 machines, each $ 5.00 4542 Vending Machine Sales $ 100.00 54194 Veterinarian - Individual Professional License $ 250.00 W 493190 Warehouse - Alcoholic Beverages See City of Dothan Code of Ordinances Section 6-65. 493 Warehousing and Storage Not over 20,000 sq. ft. $ 75.00 Each additional 10,000 sq. ft. or major fraction thereof $ 37.50 562 Waste Management Services $ 100.00 Surety Bond Required - $2,000 483 Water Transportation Company $ 100.00 424810 Wholesale Beer See City of Dothan Code of Ordinances Section 6-65. 424821 Wholesale Beer and Wine See City of Dothan Code of Ordinances Section 6-65. 424822 Wholesale Liquor See City of Dothan Code of Ordinances Section 6-65. 423 Wholesale Trade - Durable - Other $ 200.00 4247 Wholesale Trade - Gasoline Distributor Inside city: First storage tank $ 150.00 Each additional storage tank $ 75.00 Outside city, delivering gasoline or any kind of fuel in wholesale quantity, within the City of Dothan $ 300.00 424 Wholesale Trade - Non-Durable - Other $ 200.00 424820 Wholesale Wine See City of Dothan Code of Ordinances Section 6-65. 321 Wood Manufacturing $ 200.00 9996 Wrecker Company $ 50.00  
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-23. - Exchange of information. 
(a)  The license officer may exchange tax returns, information, records, and other documents secured by the municipality, with other municipalities adopting similar ordinances for the exchange of taxpayer information, or with county or state authorities. The license officer may charge a reasonable fee for providing such information or documents. Any tax returns, information, records, or other documents so exchanged shall remain subject to the confidentiality provisions, restrictions, and criminal penalties for unauthorized disclosure as provided under state or municipal law. 
(b)  Any such exchange shall be for one or more of the following purposes: 
(1)  Collecting taxes due. 
(2)  Ascertaining the amount of taxes due from any person. 
(3)  Determining whether a person is liable for, or whether there is probable cause for believing a person might be liable for, the payment of any tax to a state, county, or municipal agency. 
(c)  Nothing herein shall prohibit the use of tax returns or tax information by the municipality in the proper administration of any matter administered by the license officer. The license officer may also divulge to a purchaser, prospective purchaser as defined pursuant to the regulations of the Alabama Department of Revenue, or successor of a business or stock of goods the outstanding sales, use, or rental tax liability of the seller for which the purchaser, prospective purchaser as defined pursuant to the regulations of the Alabama Department of Revenue, or successor may be liable pursuant to the Code of Alabama, § 40-23-25, 40-23-82, or 40-12-224. 
Secs. 18-24-18-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BAIL BOND BUSINESS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Bondmen generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 15-13-22(c)-(e) 

Sec. 18-51. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bondsman or bail bondsman means any person who shall, in any court having criminal jurisdiction or in any criminal action or proceeding within the city, including the municipal court, for another deposit cash, bonds or securities or execute as surety any bond or recognizance and who shall receive any compensation therefore. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-52. - License required. 
    No person shall write or furnish bail bonds for compensation or engage in the bail bond business within the city without first securing a license from the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-53. - Issuance of license; financial statement; surety. 
    Under this article, the city clerk shall issue a license to an applicant, in accordance with the amount specified in section 18-22, upon the presentation of a financial statement of such applicant, the correctness of which the applicant has subscribed and sworn to before a notary public. The statement shall bear the written approval of at least four members of the board of commissioners signifying their approval of the applicant to engage in the bail bond business, together with a cash deposit by the applicant in the sum of $3,000.00 or the filing of a good and sufficient surety bond in the sum of $3,000.00 with the city clerk, to be used as provided in this article, which surety bond shall be approved by the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-54. - Revocation of license for noncompliance. 
    If any person or the agent or representative of such person engaged in the bail bond business shall be found guilty of violating this article, the board of commissioners shall have authority to forthwith revoke the privilege license of such person to engage in the bail bond business. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-55. - Solicitation. 
    No person after having been issued a privilege license to engage in the bail bond business shall at any time within the city, by himself, his agents, representatives or employees, solicit business as such bondsman. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-56. - Maximum charges. 
    No person, after having procured a privilege license to engage in the bail bond business, shall charge for his services an amount in excess of 15 percent of the amount of the bail bond. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-57. - Advocating cause, securing settlement for client. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, after having procured a privilege license to engage in the bail bond business, to appear before any judge of any court within the city and advocate the cause of any person for whom such person shall have made a bail bond or approach a solicitor or other prosecuting officer as such advocate of such person or attempt, directly or indirectly, in any manner to secure a settlement of a case pending against a person for whom such person shall have made a bail bond. 
Sec. 18-58. - Forfeiture of bond; depletion of deposit; suspension of license until deposit increased. 
(a)  Upon the final forfeiture of any bond by the municipal court, the city clerk shall issue to the court clerk a check for the amount of the forfeiture, charging the forfeiture against the deposit held for the credit of the person engaging in the bail bond business and, if a surety bond has been filed with the city clerk, shall notify the surety of such final forfeiture and shall demand payment thereon. 
(b)  The person engaging in the bail bond business is required to maintain a deposit of $3,000.00, either in cash or by and through a surety bond, at all times. Upon failure to do so, the privilege license issued for the engaging in the bail bond business shall be suspended until the person complies with this section. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Secs. 18-59-18-74. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DETECTIVES; PRIVATE INVESTIGATORS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- License tax for detective agencies, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-12-93. 

Sec. 18-75. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Private investigator, detective means anyone engaged by individuals for private protection; a person unofficially engaged in obtaining secret information for the use of and benefit of those who choose to employ him and to pay him compensation; one making an investigation for another when such investigation involves the conduct, life or affairs of the person investigated; one who guards property or keeps it under surveillance; one who collects or attempts to collect debts; one who investigates claims; or one who shadows, keeps under surveillance, investigates or follows one to obtain evidence for or against him. Such terms shall not include public detectives, peace officers or deputy sheriffs; lawyers in the course of the practice of their profession; accountants engaged in the practice of their profession; insurance investigators acting solely in the employ of an insurance company, the insured thereof or agency of such insurance company; one conducting strictly the business of a collection agency, the owner of an account or employees of the owner of the account who collect for the owner thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-76. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on or be engaged in or to advertise as engaging in the vocation, profession or business of a private investigator or detective until a license has been issued or after the license to so engage has been revoked. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-77. - License application; qualifications, bond, photograph. 
(a)  An applicant for a license as a private investigator or detective shall file with the chief of police a written application under oath, outlining in such application the following: 
(1)  Personal data as to the date and place of birth, education, law enforcement experience and business experience; 
(2)  A complete and detailed record and report of all civic suits and criminal cases in which the applicant has been either a party or a witness within the preceding 12 months, specifying the name and location of the court, the nature of the proceeding and the result thereof; 
(3)  The applicant's present address, place of employment and the name and address of at least three city residents as references to the applicant's moral and professional reputation; and 
(4)  The name and address of each employee of the applicant during the past year if applicable. 
(b)  Upon approval of the application, the applicant must submit to the city clerk a surety bond in the amount of $2,000.00 with a guaranty bonding company authorized to do business in the state as surety to indemnify anyone who may be wrongfully injured by the words or acts of the applicant in following the vocation, profession, business or calling of a private investigator or detective. 
(c)  No person shall engage in the business of private investigator or detective unless and until such person shall have attained the age of 21 years. 
(d)  No application for a license as a private investigator or detective shall be received unless and until the application is accompanied by a photograph of the applicant. 
(e)  No person shall be licensed as a private investigator or detective who is not of good personal and professional reputation. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-78. - Investigation and fingerprinting of applicant. 
    The chief of police is directed to make a thorough investigation of each applicant for a license as a private investigator or detective and, after full and complete investigation thereof, including the fingerprinting of the applicant, to report his findings to the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-79. - Certificate of compliance. 
    The privilege license required under this article may be issued only on the certification by the chief of police of compliance with all the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-80. - License issuance; filing of bond. 
    A license to a private investigator or detective shall be issued only on the approval of the board of commissioners, after recommendation by the police chief. On issuance of a license the surety bond filed by the applicant shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-81. - License revocation. 
    The license as a private investigator or detective is granted at the pleasure of the board of commissioners and may be revoked at any time on a majority vote of the board of commissioners for cause. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-82. - Employee license. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the vocation or profession of private investigator or detective in the city or in its police jurisdiction who does not have the license required by this article. The violation of this section shall be sufficient cause for revocation of the license of the person violating this section. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-83. - Police supervision; carrying weapons. 
    Each private investigator or detective licensed under this article shall be subject to police supervision. Qualifying and being licensed under this article shall not of itself entitle the applicant to carry weapons, concealed or otherwise, in violation of the law. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-84. - Cancellation of bond. 
    Under this article, if the bond of any applicant, investigator or detective shall be cancelled or the surety company guaranteeing the bond shall be declared to be insolvent or in the hands of a receiver, the license of every such applicant, investigator or detective bonded by such company shall be refused or revoked upon notification by the city clerk, until a new bond approved by the city clerk shall have been posted in lieu thereof. If a new bond is not approved and substituted within 12 months after such revocation, a new application must be submitted as set forth in section 18-77 and a new investigation must be conducted by the chief of police as set forth in section 18-78 prior to issuance of a license. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-85. - Badge. 
(a)  The chief of police may prescribe and furnish a numbered badge bearing the inscription "private detective licensed by the City of Dothan," and it shall be unlawful for any person engaging in the business of a private investigator or detective to wear or display any badge other than the badge prescribed and approved by the chief of police or to wear or display that badge after his license shall have expired or been revoked. 
(b)  The chief of police may charge a deposit of $10.00 on each badge furnished to a licensee under this article, which shall be refunded upon the return of the badge to the chief of police. The receipt for the deposit of this money shall be issued by the city clerk. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person licensed under this article to transfer, give, loan or permit another to use any badge assigned by the chief of police to such licensee or to refuse to surrender the badge to the chief of police or a police officer on the termination, expiration or revocation of the license of such private investigator or detective. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Secs. 18-86-18-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AUCTIONS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Auctions generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 34-1-1 et seq.; limitation on municipalities, Code of Ala. 1975 § 11-51-97. 

DIVISION 1. - PRECIOUS METALS, JEWELRY, CHINA AND GLASS 

Sec. 18-100. - Restrictions; exemptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or dispose of or offer for sale in the city at public auction or to cause or permit to be sold, disposed of or offered for sale in the city at public auction any gold, silver, plated ware, precious stones, watches, clocks, jewelry, bric-a-brac, china or glassware, whether such shall be his own property or whether he shall sell such at auction as agent or employee of others. 
(b)  This division shall not apply to judicial sales or sales by executors or administrators or to sales by or on behalf of licensed pawnbrokers of unredeemed pledges in the manner provided by law or to sales at public auctions, sale of stock on hand of any person who shall, for the period of one year next preceding such sale, have been continuously in business in the city as a retail or wholesale merchant of gold, silver, plated ware, precious stones, watches, clocks, jewelry, bric-a-brac, china or glassware. Such sale at public auction of the stock on hand of such merchants shall not be replenished in anticipation of such auction or pending or during such sale, and the auction shall be held on successive days, Sundays and legal holidays excepted, and shall not continue for more than 30 days within the period of one year. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-101. - Hours of sale. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or dispose of or offer for sale at public auction, between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., any gold, silver, plated ware, precious stones, watches, clocks, jewelry, bric-a-brac, china or glassware. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-102. - Booster or by-bidder. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a by-bidder or what is commonly known as a "capper" or "booster" at any auction regulated by this division or to offer or make any false bid to buy or pretend to buy any such article sold or offered for sale at any such auction. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-103. - Description of goods sold considered warranties. 
    Any person selling, disposing of or offering for sale at any public auction any such gold, silver, plated ware, precious stones, watches, clocks, jewelry, bric-a-brac, china or glassware shall, in describing the property, be truthful with respect to the character, quality, kind and description of the property and which, for the purpose thereof, shall be considered as warranties. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Secs. 18-104-18-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FARM PRODUCTS 

Sec. 18-111. - Certificate and sworn statement required prior to sale. 
    Before any farmer or other person engaged in the production of farm products shall sell or offer for sale such products of any nature or character in the city, such person shall exhibit to the city clerk or license inspector a certificate of the probate judge of his county that such person is a farmer or is engaged in the production of such farm products. In addition to such certificate, the applicant shall file a sworn statement, when required by the city clerk, giving his name, age and residence; the location of his farm; the number of acres cultivated; and the character and kind of farm products raised thereon and which he desires to sell. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-112. - Penalty for false statements. 
    Any person making a statement as required in section 18-111 which is false shall upon conviction be punished as provided in section 1-4. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Secs. 18-113-18-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - GOING-OUT-OF-BUSINESS SALES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-121. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Fire and other altered goods sale means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the sale will offer goods damaged or altered by fire, smoke, water or other means. 
    Going-out-of-business sale means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that upon the disposal of the stock of goods on hand, the business will cease and be discontinued including, but not limited to, the following sales: adjuster's, adjustment, alteration, assignee's, bankrupt, benefit of administrator's, benefit of creditor's, benefit of trustee's, building coming down, closing, creditor's committee, creditor's end, executor's final days, forced out of business; insolvents, last days, lease expires, liquidation, loss of lease, mortgage sale, receiver's, trustee's; quitting business, forced out. 
    Goods means any goods, wares, merchandise or other property capable of being the object of a sale regulated under this article. 
    Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
    Removal of business sale means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the person conducting the sale will cease and discontinue business at the place of sale upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand and will then move to and resume business at a new location in the city, or will then continue business from other existing locations in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-122. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person, firm, corporation or association found guilty of violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in accordance with this Code and the laws of the state. Each day that an offense under this article continues shall be considered a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-123. - Application of article. 
    The provisions of this article are intended to augment and be in addition to the provisions of the general licensing provisions of chapter 18. Where this article imposes a greater restriction upon persons, premises, businesses or practices than is imposed by the provisions of article I of this chapter, this article shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-124. - Exceptions and exemptions. 
(a)  Exception for survivors of businessmen. Upon the death of a person doing business in the city, his heirs, devisees or legatees shall have the right to apply at any time for a license under this article. 
(b)  Persons exempted. The provisions of this article shall not apply to nor affect the following persons: 
(1)  Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction; or 
(2)  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-125. - Restrictions. 
(a)  Interval between sales. Any person who has held a sale, as regulated under this article, at the location stated in the application, within one year last past from the date of such application shall not be granted a license. 
(b)  Restricted location. Where a person applying for a license under this article operates more than one place of business, the license issued shall apply only to the one store, or branch specified in the application, and no other store or branch shall advertise or represent that it is cooperating with it, or in any way participating in the license sale, nor shall the store or branch conducting the licensed sale advertise or represent that any other store or branch is cooperating with it, or participating in any way in the licensed sale unless a separate license is obtained for each location. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Secs. 18-126-18-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 18-131. - Required. 
    A license issued by the city clerk shall be obtained by any person before selling or offering for sale any goods at a sale to be advertised or held out by any means to be one of the following kind: 
(1)  Going-out-of-business sale. 
(2)  Removal of business sale. 
(3)  Fire and other altered stock sale. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-132. - Application. 
    Written information required. A person desiring to conduct a sale regulated by this article shall make a written application to the city clerk, setting forth and containing the following information: 
(1)  The true name and address of the owner of the goods to be the object of the sale. 
(2)  A sworn statement by the legal owner of the business, stating that no additional inventory will be added to the existing inventory during the sale. 
(3)  A description of the place where such sale is to be held. 
(4)  The nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or sublease, and the effective date of termination of such occupancy. 
(5)  The dates of the period of time in which the sale is to be conducted. 
(6)  A full and complete statement of the facts in regard to the sale, including the reason for the urgent and expeditious disposal of goods thereby and the manner in which the sale will be conducted. 
(7)  The means to be employed in advertising such sale, together with the proposed content of any advertisement. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-133. - Conditions; fee. 
    A license shall be issued under this article on the following terms: 
(1)  Licensing period and fee. The license shall authorize the sale described in the application for a period of time and for a license fee as described in this subsection: 
a.  Not more than 30 consecutive calendar days following issuance ..... $150.00 
b.  Not more than 60 consecutive calendar days following issuance ..... $300.00 
    The board of commissioners may authorize the sale to continue for an additional 30 consecutive calendar-day period beyond the 60-day period above, upon receipt of a written request stating the reasons for the request. 
(2)  Nature of sale. The license shall authorize only the one type of sale described in the application at the location named therein. 
(3)  Saleable goods. The license shall authorize only the sale of goods in inventory at the beginning of the sale. 
(4)  Surrender of general license. Upon being issued a license under this article for a going-out-of business sale, the licensee shall surrender to the city clerk all other business licenses they may hold at that time applicable to the location and goods covered by the application for a license under this article. 
(5)  Nontransferability. Any license provided for in this article shall not be assignable or transferable. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-134. - Duties of licensee. 
    It shall be the duty of the licensee to: 
(1)  Adhere to inventory. Make no additions whatsoever during the period of the licensed sale to the stock of goods. 
(2)  Advertise properly. Refrain from employing any untrue, deceptive or misleading advertising. 
(3)  Adhere to advertising. Conduct the licensed sale in strict conformity with any advertising or holding out incident thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Secs. 18-135-18-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SECONDHAND GOLD AND SILVER DEALERS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Law enforcement, ch. 54. 

Sec. 18-146. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means the plural, where applicable, and/or agents, officers, servants or employees of the applicant in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-147. - Applicability of article. 
    The provisions of this article shall be binding upon every employee or agent of the buyer, and it shall be unlawful and an offense against the city for any such permit holder or his agents, servants, officers or employees to fail or refuse to carry out the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-148. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine in an amount not to exceed $500.00 or imprisonment, not to exceed six months, or to both fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court trying the case. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-149. - Permit and business license required. 
    It shall be unlawful for anyone to conduct or carry on the business of purchasing secondhand gold or silver, whether in the form of coins, jewelry, household articles or furnishings, personal effects, bric-a-brac, settings for gems, watches, flatware, service sets or other articles of like kind in the city without first obtaining a permit in accordance with the provisions of this article and a city business license in accordance with chapter 18. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-150. - Application for permit-contents. 
    Applicants for a permit under this article shall file with the city clerk a sworn application in writing, in duplicate, on a form to be furnished by the city clerk, which shall give the following information: 
(1)  Name and description of the applicant. 
(2)  Date of birth and driver's license number of the applicant. 
(3)  Full address of the applicant and the length of time the applicant has resided at the address. 
(4)  If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the relationship. 
(5)  A brief description of the nature of the gold and silver buying to be done. 
(6)  The length of time for which the right to do gold and silver buying is desired and the location where such buying is to be done. 
(7)  A photograph of the applicant, taken within 60 days immediately prior to the date of filing the application, which picture shall be two inches by two inches, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. 
(8)  The fingerprints of the applicant, and the names of at least two reliable property owners of the county, who will certify as to the applicant's good character and business respectability or, in lieu of the names of such references, such other available evidence as to the good character and business responsibility of the applicant, as will enable an investigator to properly evaluate such character and business responsibility. 
(9)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal criminal ordinance in any state, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefore. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-151. - Same-Investigation fee. 
    At the time of filing the application for the permit, a fee of $10.00 shall be paid to the city clerk to cover the cost of an investigation of the facts state therein. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-152. - Same-Investigation of applicant; issuance or denial or permit; appeal. 
    Upon receipt of an application the original shall be referred to the chief of police, who shall cause such investigation of the applicant's business and moral character to be made as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good. If, as a result of such an investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory or if he does not otherwise qualify under the provisions of this article, the chief of police shall endorse on such application his disapproval and the reason for the same and return the application to the city clerk who shall notify the applicant that the application is disapproved and that no permit will be issued. If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, and the applicant otherwise qualifies under this article, the chief of police shall endorse on the application his approval and return the application to the city clerk who shall deliver to the applicant a permit, in the same manner as to other licenses of the city. If the permit is disapproved, the applicant may appeal to the board of city commissioners within 14 days. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-153. - Contents of permit; display of license. 
    The permit shall contain the signature of the city clerk and shall show the name, address and photograph of the licensee, the date of issuance and length of time the same shall be operative, as well as the license number. Such license must be displayed at all times whenever the applicant conducts business. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-154. - Registration of permit holders. 
    Each permit holder under this article shall promptly, after the beginning of business, register with the chief of police, in a book kept for that purpose, the permit holder's name, address and every place where business is carried on or property stored. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-155. - Record of permits issued. 
    The city clerk shall keep a permanent record of all permits issued under this article. 
Sec. 18-156. - Records to be kept by buyers; transcripts to be furnished to chief of police. 
    Each applicant who secures a license under this article for purchasing gold or silver in any form set out in section 18-150 shall: 
(1)  Keep a book in which shall be entered promptly at the time of purchase a brief description of the articles or property purchased or a descriptive photo thereof, the date and hour of the purchase and a brief description of the person from who the purchase is made, together with the address, driver's license number, sex, race and date of birth of such person. Each entry of such transaction shall be serially numbered on the book at the time of making the entry. 
(2)  On every day, before the hour of 10:00 a.m., deliver to the chief of police, upon a form provided by him, a legible transcript of the business done during the business day immediately preceding the filing of the transcript. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-157. - Inspection of records of permit holders. 
    The books and records kept by each permit holder of the articles described in section 18-156 shall be open for inspection by the chief of police or by any officer of the police department of the city at all times, and the permit holder and his agents and employees shall at all times exhibit the book to such officers on request. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Cross reference- Law enforcement, ch. 54. 
Sec. 18-158. - Identification of articles purchased. 
    Each permit holder shall attach to or place on each such article purchased a tag or other identifying mark or label numbered to correspond with the serial number of the book entry required by section 18-156; except, where small articles are bought in bulk and/or are too numerous to conveniently tag or mark, an identifying number shall be placed on the container or wrapper in which all the articles are kept or placed. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-159. - Articles to be held by permit holder after purchase. 
    The property of the kind described in section 18-149 shall be held in the same form, shape or condition in which they were purchased, without mutilation, melting, reduction to block or lump form, or destruction of the form thereof, for a period of 72 hours after the hour when the permit holder reports the purchase to the chief of police during which time such articles shall be open to inspection or examination by the chief of police, or such officers of the police department as may be delegated to make such examination or inspection, unless permission for a change in the form or sale of such article is obtained in writing from the chief of police after the filing of the report required by section 18-156. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Secs. 18-160-18-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Peddlers and itinerant vendors license, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-12-139. 

Sec. 18-176. - Use of streets and sidewalks for residential door-to-door canvassing. 
(a)  Generally. The following practices very often become nuisances and therefore are of such public concern for the preservation of the privacy and safety of the citizens of the city that they must be regulated: 
(1)  Going in and upon private residences by peddlers, canvassers, solicitors and transient vendors of merchandise, not having been requested or invited so to do by the owner or occupant, for the purpose of disposing of the same; 
(2)  Peddling, selling of goods, wares or merchandise upon public or private streets or sidewalks; and 
(3)  Soliciting money, services or orders for the sale of goods, wares or merchandise upon public or private streets or sidewalks. 
(b)  Compliance with city ordinances. Before any person or organization shall engage in any of the practices named in subsection (a) of this section, they must comply with all ordinances of the city and must also obtain from the license division an identification card in accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of this section. Such card shall extend not longer than 30 days. 
(c)  Application requirements. Any applicant engaged in any activity described in subsections (a)(1), (a)(2) and/or (a)(3) of this section must file with the license division an application in writing which shall give the following information: 
(1)  Name and physical description; 
(2)  Permanent and local address and, in the case of itinerant merchants and transient vendors, the local address from which proposed sales will be made; 
(3)  A brief description of the nature of the practice; 
(4)  Name and address of the firm for or on whose behalf the orders are solicited or the supplier of the goods involved; 
(5)  Length of time for which the permit is desired; 
(6)  Statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any criminal offense involving moral turpitude and, if so, the nature of the offense and penalty imposed; 
(7)  Motor vehicle make, model, year, color and registration number if the vehicle shall be used in the proposed solicitation; and 
(8)  Social Security number. 
(d)  Identification card; issuance; fee; display; revocation. Upon the furnishing of the information required under subsection (a) of this section, such applicant shall be issued an identification card for each agent or solicitor used for such solicitation, for which a $3.00 fee shall be required, by the license division within five working days after applying therefore, unless the information furnished in compliance therewith shows that the applicant has been convicted of a felony or if the investigation thereof reveals that the applicant has falsified any information required in the section. All identification cards shall upon demand be exhibited to any police officer or any other city official and shall be displayed to any person who is being solicited. Any identification card granted under this chapter may be revoked by the municipal court after the filing of the information by the prosecuting attorney and a hearing thereon for any of the following cases: 
(1)  Any violation of this section; 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statement made in the course of carrying on the activity; 
(3)  Conviction of a felony; or 
(4)  Conducting the activity in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(e)  Penalty for violation of section. A person who violates any provision of this section, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not less than $1.00 nor more than $250.00 or shall be imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both. 
(f)  Exemption. Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to include a bona fide nonprofit charitable organization which offers proof that such organization is exempt from federal income taxation or equivalent proof of its nonprofit charitable status. Any bona fide nonprofit charitable organization shall submit such proof to the license division of the city prior to engaging in any solicitation activities described in this section. It shall be the responsibility of the license division to contact the police department and inform the police department as to solicitation activities by such exempt organization. 
(g)  Restricted hours. Peddling, soliciting or selling upon streets and sidewalks or residential door-to-door canvassing, as provided by this section shall be prohibited between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday, and on Sunday and legal holidays. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86. 
Sec. 18-177. - Entering premises without invitation declared nuisance. 
    The practice of going in and upon private residences in the city by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants or transient vendors of merchandise and printed matter, not having been requested or invited to do so by the owner or occupant of the private residence, for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise, and printed matter or for the purpose of disposing of or peddling or hawking the same or for the purpose of seeking an invitation for such purposes, or for any such purpose herein cited when a sign is placed near the doorknob or doorbell requesting no disturbance by solicitors, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and punishable as such as a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-178. - Telephone solicitations. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Charitable telephone solicitations campaign means any course of conduct, including social functions, dances, barbecues, etc., whereby any person, organization, society, association, corporation or church, religious society or other religious sect, group, or any member thereof solicits, by telephone, financial assistance, property or donations of any kind, or sells or offers to sell any article, tag, service, emblem, publication, ticket, advertisement, subscription or anything of value on a plea or representation that such sale or solicitation or the proceeds there from are for a charitable, educational, patriotic, philanthropic, religious or political purpose. 
    Commercial telephone solicitations campaign means any course of conduct whereby any person, organization or society, or any agent, member or representative thereof, including professional fundraisers, solicits, by telephone, orders for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise, service or printed matter, or for the purpose of disposing of, peddling or hawking the same. 
(b)  Registration and application for appropriate license. It shall be unlawful to conduct any telephone solicitations campaign utilizing telephones at locations within the city limits of the city to deliver or obtain anything of value in the city unless: 
(1)  For charitable telephone solicitations, the persons or groups enumerated in subsection (a) of this section shall have first registered in compliance with the terms of this section. 
(2)  For commercial telephone solicitations, the persons or groups enumerated in subsection (a) of this section shall have first obtained a business license from the city license division. 
(3)  The terms of this provision shall not apply to: 
a.  Any organization which solicits funds solely from its own members or from its own assemblies; or 
b.  The solicitation of advertising by daily or weekly newspapers, radio, television, yellow pages and outdoor advertising. 
(c)  City business license required for commercial telephone solicitations. A commercial solicitation campaign may commence not less than ten days following completion of the application with the city. Such application shall be sworn to by the applicant and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full name of the organization registering to solicit by telephone, and the address of the headquarters in the city; if the organization is a subsidiary or other affiliate of an organization having its principal office outside the city, the name and address of the parent organization or corporation. 
(2)  The names and addresses of all officers and directors or trustees of the organization and the name and city of residence of all officers, directors or trustees of the parent organization, if any. 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the persons who will be in charge of conducting the telephone commercial solicitations campaign. 
(4)  The period, within which such telephone commercial solicitations campaign shall be conducted, including the proposed dates for the beginning and ending of such campaign. 
(5)  The name and address of any person, who will either be in charge of the telephone solicitation or in charge of the groups who solicit or who will do any soliciting, who has been convicted of a criminal offense involving moral turpitude. The following information shall be furnished with respect to each conviction: 
a.  Date of conviction. 
b.  Location of conviction. 
c.  Nature of offense. 
d.  Sentence upon conviction. 
(d)  Waiting period; additional information. A charitable solicitation campaign may commence not less than ten days following the completion of registration with the city. Such application shall be sworn to by the applicant in addition to the information contained in subsection (c) of this section. Such registration shall contain the following information as well: 
(1)  The purpose for which the gross receipts derived from such solicitations or other activities are to be used. 
(2)  If the registrant is a charitable corporation or other organization, proof of its current status as an organization to which contributions are tax-deductible for federal income tax purposes. 
(e)  License fee. Every application shall be accompanied by a license fee of $50.00. 
(f)  Form of license. The city license division shall prescribe the form of the license. However, each such license shall be printed in black and shall contain the following: "The issuance of this license is not an endorsement by the City of Dothan or any of its officers or employees." Each license shall bear a registration number which is the same as the file in which the application is contained. 
(g)  Reports to be filed by commercial telephone solicitations. All persons or organizations registering under this chapter as professional fundraisers shall furnish to the city, within 30 days after the telephone solicitations campaign has been completed, a detailed report and financial statement showing the amount of funds raised by the telephone solicitations campaign; and the amount expended in collecting such funds, including a detailed report of the wages, fees, commissions and expenses paid to any person in connection with such solicitation and the disposition of the balance of the funds collected by the campaign; provided, however, that the city may extend the time for the report required by this section for an additional period of 30 days upon proof that the filing of the report within the time specified will work unnecessary hardship on the solicitor. The solicitor shall make available to the city all books, records and papers whereby the accuracy of the report required by this section may be investigated. All financial statements and reports and all applications submitted by any applicant or registrant under this section shall be made, prepared and interpreted in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. 
(h)  Times of soliciting. Charitable and commercial telephone solicitation on any telephone located in the city is prohibited between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday, and on Sunday and legal holidays. 
(i)  Disclosure of telephone solicitor's employer's name and address. All professional fundraisers engaged in charitable telephone solicitations in the city shall disclose to potential donors his employer's name and address, and the charity for which he is soliciting. 
(j)  Penalty for violation of section. Any person found guilty of violation of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-4. Each offense and each day's continuance of the offense shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Secs. 18-179-185. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - POOL AND BILLIARDS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Billiard rooms generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 34-6-1 et seq. 

Sec. 18-186. - Compliance with state law; approval of location. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, open or operate any public pool hall, pool room, billiard hall or billiard parlor and no license shall be issued for the privilege of operating such a business until all laws of the state pertaining thereto have been complied with and the proposed location is first approved by the board of commissioners, such approval being made at a regular meeting of the board and evidence thereof being shown in the minutes of the meeting. 
(b)  This section does not apply to coin-operated devices in restaurants or other places which are not pool or billiard parlors. 
Secs. 18-187-18-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - RACES 

Sec. 18-191. - License and insurance required. 
(a)  As used in this section, the terms "conduct" and "conducted" shall include any preparation for drag races or races in which motor vehicles are used. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or permit to be conducted upon lands under his control drag races or races in which motor vehicles are used without first securing a city license. To secure such license, the applicant shall file a certificate or satisfactory evidence with the city clerk that such person has in effect liability insurance to cover personal injury and property damage to participants, spectators and owners of property both on or off the grounds where such races will be conducted. The amount of the liability insurance shall be as follows: 
(1)  Spectators' and participants' liability, $100,000.00 combined single limit. 
(2)  Spectators' and participants' liability, $900,000.00 combined single limit excess of $100,000.00. 
(c)  The insurance required shall provide that the city clerk shall be notified in writing 30 days before cancellation or change in the coverage of such insurance. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Secs. 18-192-18-195. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - RESTAURANTS AND OTHER EATING ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 18-196. - Certificate from county health officer prerequisite to issuance of license. 
    No license shall be issued by the city clerk for the operation of a cafe, lunch stand or eating establishment of any kind until the application for the license is accompanied by a certificate from the county health officer that such establishment has been inspected by him and the establishment meets the requirements of public health laws. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Secs. 18-197-18-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - TRANSIENT MERCHANTS[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Transient merchants generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 34-35-1 et seq.; transient vendors license, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-12-174; bond required, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-23-24. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-201. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Transient merchants means and includes all persons, both principals and agents, who engage in or conduct in this city, either in one locality or in traveling from place to place, a temporary or transient business of selling or soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares or merchandise, with the intention of continuing in such business in the city for a period of not more than 180 days, and who rent, lease, use or occupy, either in whole or in part, for the purpose of carrying on such business, any room, building, area within the Dothan Civic Center or any other public or privately-owned building, any lot or parcel of land, any motor vehicle, including trucks and semi-trailers for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise. The provisions of this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Sales of agricultural produce licensed under this Code. 
(2)  Wholesale sales to licensed businesses, trades or professions. 
(3)  Sales to licensed businesses, trades or professions where such items are not for resale. 
(4)  Where no license may be collected under the provisions of the constitution or laws of the United States. 
(5)  Sales occurring at art shows, antique shows, craft shows, coin shows, trade shows or other shows of a similar kind or description where such art shows, antique shows, craft shows, coin shows, trade shows or other shows of a similar kind or description are organized by and under the authority, control and supervision of a bona fide and commonly recognized charitable or religious organization or a shopping mall association or corporation located with the city. 
(6)  Sales occurring at art shows, antique shows, craft shows of a similar kind or description, held within the Dothan Civic Center or other facility in the city where such shows and sales take place under the authority, control and supervision of the city, the county or the state. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-202. - Reports of sales. 
    All transient merchants shall make a verified report of sales to the city clerk within seven days of the close of business. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-203. - Purpose of sale; statement of persons from whom and where goods were purchased. 
    A transient merchant shall not advertise, represent or hold forth a sale of goods, wares or merchandise as an insurance, bankrupt, insolvent, assignee, trustee, estate, executor, administrator, receiver, manufacturer's wholesale, canceled order or misfit sale or closing-out, or a sale of any goods damaged by smoke, fire, water or otherwise, unless before doing he shall: 
(1)  State in writing under oath to the revenue officer at the time he makes application for a license, all the facts relating to the reason and character of such special sales, so advertised, held forth or represented, including: 
a.  A statement of the names of the persons from whom such goods, wares or merchandise were purchased, and the date of delivery of such goods, wares or merchandise to the person applying for license; 
b.  The place where such goods, wares or merchandise were taken last; and 
c.  Such details necessary to exactly locate and fully identify all goods, wares or merchandise to be sold; 
(2)  Make such further disclosure to and give such information as may be required by the city clerk; and 
(3)  Include in such statement names and residences of the owners in whose interest the business is conducted and whether conducted as an individual, firm, association or corporation. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-204. - Violations of article. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any: 
(1)  Transient merchant to sell or exhibit for sale, either at public or private sale, any goods, wares or merchandise without first complying with the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Transient merchant to make any false statements in reference to the matter required. 
(3)  Transient merchant to fail or refuse to comply with the requirements of any of the provisions of this article. 
(4)  Person, whether principal or agent, who by circular, handbill, newspaper, poster or in any manner, to advertise such sales as contemplated in this article before proper license is issued to such transient merchant and before he has complied with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be construed as abridging or denying the right and power of the city commission to refuse or withhold the granting of any license or to revoke the license, if granted, to a transient merchant upon any hearing thereof when in the discretion of the commission on the basis of the disclosures as aforesaid, or from other information deemed by them sufficient, such action as may be deemed necessary or proper to protect and safeguard the public from imposition, mischief or fraud. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-205. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any violation of this article shall be considered a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as set forth in section 1-4. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Secs. 18-206-18-215. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 18-216. - Application. 
    At least 14 days prior to the holding of such sale or solicitation, every such transient merchant shall furnish to the city clerk a verified license application setting out the following: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant and also the name of the true owner if the applicant is not such true owner of the goods, wares or merchandise to be sold. 
(2)  Name, location and time of the proposed sale or solicitation. 
(3)  Inventory of the goods, wares or merchandise on hand and on order, which the applicant intends to offer for sale at such sale. The inventory shall show the quantity, kind or grade of each item, the wholesale cost thereof, the price at which each item is proposed to be sold and the total wholesale and retail value of the inventory based on the foregoing, and if sales are to be made other than from inventory, a copy of the catalogue or other sales materials and/or a listing of the samples to be displayed. 
(4)  A statement of the amount of gross receipts realized from each sale conducted in the city by the applicant, and the dates thereof, if such sale was within the preceding five years. 
(5)  Such other information as the city clerk may prescribe. 
(6)  Address of any permanent place of business in the state, or if there is no permanent place of business in the state, a copy of the certificate of the secretary of the state evidencing the fact that the dealer, if a corporation, has qualified to do business in the state and the name and address of its agent for the service of process in the state. If the applicant is not a qualified corporation and has no permanent business address, the application shall contain the applicant's social security number. 
(7)  Provide the city with a state sales tax account number that must be reported to the state for sales made in this city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-217. - Fee. 
    All transient dealers as defined in section 18-201 shall pay a license fee based on the following schedule: 
If anticipated sales are: $5,000.00 or less $ 100.00 More than $5,000.00 but less than $10,000.00   200.00 More than $10,000.00 but less than $25,000.00   400.00 More than $25,000.00 but less than $50,000.00   600.00 More than $50,000.00 but less than $100,000.00   800.00 Over $100,000.00  1,000.00 Plus one-tenth of one percent of the gross receipts.  
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-218. - Deposits and bond. 
(a)  Every applicant for a transient merchant's license shall execute and file for review by the city attorney a good and sufficient bond for each event as follows: 
If anticipated sales are: $5,000.00 or less $ 2,500.00 More than $5,000.00 but less than $10,000.00   5,000.00 More than $10,000.00 but less than $25,000.00   7,500.00 More than $25,000.00 but less than $50,000.00   10,000.00 More than $50,000.00 but less than $100,000.00   12,500.00 Over $100,000.00   25,000.00  
Or ten percent of anticipated sales, whichever is greater. 
(b)  The surety thereon shall be a surety company authorized to do business in the state and approved by the city attorney and shall: 
(1)  Be payable to the city, to the extent that any taxes or fines as determined by the city clerk to be due are not paid, and, upon judicial determination, to those authorized to file suit there under; 
(2)  Be conditioned upon faithful observance of all the conditions of this article and the payment of city license, and all state and local taxes due or to be withheld and paid by the licensee under this article; and 
(3)  Also indemnify any purchaser at such sale who suffers any loss by reason of defective merchandise or any misrepresentation in such sale. 
(c)  The bond shall also provide that: 
(1)  The city or its authorized representative, county and the state may file suit in their own name against the licensee and/or the surety on the bond for any taxes, fees or fines due from the licensee which are not paid within 30 days of the termination; 
(2)  Any purchaser at such sale may maintain an action against the licensee and/or the surety for claims arising from such sale; and 
(3)  It shall continue in effect for one year after the termination of the sale for which it is made and until all actions are concluded and the judgments, if any, have been paid and fully satisfied, or the amount of the bond exhausted by such payments. 
(d)  This bond shall be in addition to all deposits required under the ordinances of the city, including but not limited to the sales and use tax ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Secs. 18-219-18-225. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - TREE CUTTERS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Vegetation, ch. 106. 

Sec. 18-226. - Cleanup bond. 
    Under this article, a bond of $250.00 cash or a surety bond of $1,000.00 shall be required to ensure removal of debris to a satisfactory place of disposal. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-227. - Insurance. 
    No license shall be issued for the cutting of trees until the applicant deposits with the city clerk a general liability insurance policy in an amount of at least $50,000.00. The insurance policy shall cover liability to the person as well as to property. The policy must provide for a 30-day notice to the city clerk prior to cancellation. The requirement for insurance shall not apply to persons engaged in the business of tree stump grinding only. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-228. - Permit required; term. 
    Under this article, a permit must be obtained by the licensee or any person engaged in the cutting of trees for profit or other consideration prior to the commencement of the removal of any tree. Each permit shall be good for 30 days and shall only be valid for one location. A permit shall not be required for the grinding of tree stumps. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-229. - Permit fee; penalty for failure to obtain. 
    A fee of $5.00 shall be charged for each permit issued under this article. Failure to obtain a permit prior to beginning work shall result in a penalty of $50.00 in addition to the permit fee. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-230. - Other charges. 
    Under this article, any services required of the city in support of the licensee's business shall be billed to such licensee at the customary rates charged by the city. Such services would include removal or protection of city facilities or services that may be endangered by services rendered by the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Secs. 18-231-18-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - PAWN SHOPS 

Sec. 18-241. - Defined. 
    Any person who lends money or takes personal property, including pistols, as a pledge, or who buys personal property, including pistols, with the agreement or understanding that the same may be redeemed. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-242. - Reporting in general. 
    Every pawnbroker within the city shall report to the chief of police, a description of every article or thing received in pawn, pledge, trade, purchase, or consignment on the business day immediately preceding the filing of the report, in a manner and time as set out herein. Reports shall be made every business day except Saturday and Sunday. Business and transactions done on Saturday or Sunday will be reported on the following Monday. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-243. - Computerized reporting. 
(a)  Every pawnbroker will report all transactions from the previous business day, no later than 4:00 p.m. the next business day. Transactions from Saturday and Sunday shall be reported no later than 4:00 p.m. on the following Monday. The reporting shall be via computer desk or modern transmission as specified by the chief of police. The reporting shall be in a format as specified by the chief of police. The reporting shall be in a format as specified by the chief of police to facilitate loading electronically into the Dothan Police Department's system for locating, lost, stolen, and sought-after property. 
(b)  The chief of police may restrict the scope of items reported at his or her discretion. Items reported electronically shall not also be reported on paper unless requested by the chief of police. Reports filed which contain errors that require correction by the police department staff shall result in a fee of $1.00 per item charged and billed to the appropriate pawnbroker. 
(c)  After establishing an electronic format, the chief of police must have good cause to make any changes and facilitate a minimum of 30 days for pawnbrokers to comply. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-244. - Violations. 
    Failure to comply with any section of this section shall result in the revocation of the pawnbroker and/or business license issued by the city and such failure to comply also constitutes a misdemeanor. Each day the violation continues, a separate misdemeanor offense occurs. Failure to pay error fees shall also result in the revocation of the pawnbroker and/or business license issued by the city and shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Secs. 18-245-18-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - YARD SALES 

Sec. 18-271. - Defined. 
    For the purposes of this article, the term "yard sale" shall mean and include all sales entitled "yard sale," "garage sale," "lawn sale," "attic sale," "rummage sale," "flea market sale," or any other similar casual sale of tangible personal property whereby there is a display and offer for sale of any goods, wares or merchandise, on the premises of any residential lot within the city limits, which goods, wares or merchandise offered for sale are the household furnishings or personal possessions of the persons conducting the sale and residing at the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-272. - Property acquired for resale not to be offered for sale at garage sales. 
    The offer for sale by means of a yard sale of property which has been specifically acquired for resale, or the consignment of which has been accepted for display and offer for sale at a yard sale is specifically prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-273. - Temporary uses. 
    A resident of the city may conduct sales commonly known as yard sales at the resident's dwelling, or at the dwelling of another resident of the city, under conditions specified herein below: 
(1)  Not more than three yard sales shall be held at any one dwelling during the calendar year. A fourth yard sale or "estate sale" may be permitted after the individual wishing to conduct the sale provides the name of the estate as filed in the office of the judge of probate in Houston County. 
(2)  No person shall participate in, including having property sold at more than three yard sales in the city during the calendar year, regardless of whether such additional sale is held at the individual's dwelling or at the dwelling of another person. 
(3)  Yard sales shall be limited to two days in duration, which days must be consecutive, for a period of not more than ten hours each day. Inclement weather may extend the period of time equal to the days lost provided notice is given to the business license office within two working days. 
(4)  No foods may be sold. 
(5)  The provisions of the City of Dothan Code of Ordinances subsection 14-516(13) Standards for signs shall apply. Signs may be posted for a period not to exceed four consecutive days, including the day or days of the sale itself. All signs must be removed within 24 hours after the conclusion of the sale. Any signage placed on other than authorized property shall be subject to seizure without notice. 
(6)  Yard sales conducted on the common area of apartment buildings and mobile home parks require a permission letter from the property manager. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-274. - Permit required; term. 
    Under this article, a permit must be obtained from the business license office at least three business days prior to holding a yard sale. This permit may be obtained in the business license office or via telephone, fax or mail. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-275. - Penalty for failure to obtain a permit. 
    Failure to obtain a permit prior to holding a yard sale shall result in the issuance of a notice of noncompliance. Issuance of a notice of noncompliance shall carry a penalty of $10.00. Any person failing to obtain a permit and pay the penalty within five business days after a notice of noncompliance is issued shall be in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-276. - Posting of permit. 
    The permit issued by the business license office shall be available for inspection by the city officials at the yard sale location. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-277. - Monitoring and enforcement procedures. 
    Any police officer, revenue officer, or zoning officer is hereby authorized to make inspections of any yard or structure in which a yard sale is being conducted to determine whether such yard sale is being conducted in compliance with this section. Such inspections may be made during the days and hours of the sale. The zoning officer, police officer or revenue officer may, but shall not be required to give notice of the inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 18-278. - Violations. 
    Violations of the chapter are punishable as provided under the terms of section 1-4 of the City of Dothan Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2007-393, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Chapter 22 - CEMETERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, ch. 46; planning, ch. 70; zoning, ch. 114. 
State Law reference- Cemeteries generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-40 et seq. 

Sec. 22-1. - Interment or removal records. 
    Each funeral director, mortician, undertaker or vault company, if no funeral director, mortician or undertaker is in charge in case of removals, shall file a record of interment or removal of the remains of any decedent in the city engineer's office within 48 hours of interment or removal, keep a copy in his files as a permanent record and furnish a copy to the relative of the decedent signing the record. The record shall show: 
(1)  The grave space, lot, block numbers and section of the city cemetery in or from which interment or removal, the date and approximate hour, shall be made. 
(2)  The funeral director, mortician or undertaker in charge, and by whom the grave will be opened and closed. 
(3)  The age, sex, color, residence and date of death. 
(4)  An interment or removal authorization record shall be signed by a relative of the decedent having authority to make such authorization, agreeing to hold the city harmless from any liability on account of such interment or removal, and witnessed by representatives of the funeral director, mortician or undertaker, or of the vault company in case of removals where there is no funeral director. 
(Code 1977, § 6-1) 
Sec. 22-2. - Erection, construction, establishment of tombstones, monuments, coping, or other structure-Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct or establish any monument, tombstone, coping or other structure, in the city cemetery of the city, without first obtaining a permit. Such permit shall be first approved by the city engineer. 
(Code 1977, § 6-2) 
Sec. 22-3. - Same-Removal by city authorized on failure to obtain permit. 
    Any monument, tombstone or other structure, constructed or placed in the city cemetery without first obtaining a permit, may be torn down and removed by the city at the expense of the person placing or erecting the same. 
(Code 1977, § 6-3) 
Chapter 26 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; mayor, § 2-71 et seq.; emergency services, ch. 34; floods, ch. 42. 

Sec. 26-1. - Findings. 
    From time to time conditions of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property will arise within the city caused by fire, flood, storm, epidemic, earthquake, drought, energy shortage, war or other matters of public calamity warranting and necessitating the proclamation of the existence of a local emergency. 
Sec. 26-2. - Proclamation of emergency. 
    The mayor, when the existence of appropriate circumstances demand, may declare a local emergency when any of the events referred to in section 26-1 occur and conditions of extreme peril warrant and necessitate the proclamation of the existence of a local emergency. 
Sec. 26-3. - Duties, powers of emergency management personnel. 
    During the existence of a local emergency, the city manager or his designee as head of the emergency organization of the city shall have those powers and duties as are prescribed by state law and by ordinance of the city. 
Chapter 30 - COURTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Settlement procedures for minor animal control violations, § 10-81 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1-30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 30-31. - Establishment. 
    A municipal court was established effective December 27, 1977, and is hereby continued in force for the city, pursuant to the provisions of Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-1 et seq., and referred to in this article as "the court." 
(Code 1977, § 8-1) 
Sec. 30-32. - Jurisdiction. 
    The court shall have jurisdiction of all prosecutions for the breach of city ordinances within its corporate limits and police jurisdiction. This jurisdiction shall also extend to all prosecutions for violations of state offenses committed within the corporate limits and police jurisdiction of the city where such offenses have been made offenses against the city. 
(Code 1977, § 8-2) 
Sec. 30-33. - Prosecutorial services. 
    The city shall furnish prosecutorial services in the municipal court and in appeals from such judgments and orders. The municipal judge should not act as judge and prosecutor unless the defendant knowingly and voluntarily waives the right to an independent prosecutor. 
(Code 1977, § 8-11) 
Sec. 30-34. - Time and place of holding court. 
    The court shall convene at such time and place as the board of commissioners may determine with the advice of the municipal court judge. 
(Code 1977, § 8-3) 
Sec. 30-35. - Municipal court judge. 
(a)  Appointment; number. The court shall consist of one municipal judge to be appointed by a vote of a majority of the members of the commission. The judge shall be appointed for a term of four years. The judge shall be eligible for reappointment upon the expiration of his/her term, and shall hold office until his/her successor is appointed and qualified. 
(b)  Qualifications. The municipal judge must be licensed to practice law in the state and must be a qualified elector of the state. No judge shall be otherwise employed in any capacity by the city during his term of office except as provided in subsection (f) of this section. 
(c)  Vacancies; filling; acting judges. The office of the municipal judge shall be vacant if he dies, resigns or is removed, and vacancies shall be filled by the commission in the same manner as original appointments are made. Any person so appointed shall be eligible to serve two years from the date of appointment. Until such person is appointed, or in the absence from the city of a judge, the mayor shall have the authority to designate a person, licensed to practice law in the state and a qualified elector with all power and authority of a duly appointed municipal judge. No such acting judge may serve for more than 30 successive days or a total of 60 days in any calendar year; provided, however, that when the duly appointed municipal judge is disqualified pursuant to the state constitution, the time of service limitations for acting judges shall not apply during such disqualification. 
(d)  Oath of office. The municipal judge shall, before assuming office, take and sign the oath provided by the state constitution, and a copy shall be filed in the office of the secretary of state, the administrative director of courts and the city clerk. 
(e)  Grounds for disqualification. The municipal judge shall be subject to all grounds of disqualification from hearing specific cases as are applicable to circuit court judges. 
(Code 1977, § 8-4; Ord. No. 2000-339, § 1, 11-7-00) 
Sec. 30-36. - Compensation of judge. 
    The annual salary of the municipal judge shall be fixed by resolution of the commission and shall be payable in biweekly installments. This salary shall not be diminished during the judge's term of office. 
(Code 1977, § 8-5) 
Sec. 30-37. - Powers of the court. 
(a)  The municipal judge shall have the power to admit to bail any person charged with the violation of any municipal ordinance by requiring an appearance bond, with good security, to be approved by the municipal judge or his designee, in an amount not to exceed $500.00 with a maximum bond of $5,000.00 for the charge of driving under the influence of alcohol or controlled substances, or the maximum bond for an offense as authorized by the legislature of the state. The court may require the person to enter into a new undertaking if it appears that the original undertaking was insufficient when entered into or has since become insufficient. The judge or a magistrate operating under the court's direction may, in his discretion, admit to bail minor misdemeanants on a personal recognizance bond, conditioned on the appearance of such persons before him on a day named therein to answer the charges preferred against them. Rule 7 of the ARCP, as amended, is adopted by reference in this section as if fully set forth. The forms of bail shall comply with Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 15-13-20 and 15-13-21, or as recommended by the administrative office of courts. Only pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-1-4 and Rule 19 of the ARJA, as amended, may a police officer release on recognizance a person charged with a minor traffic infraction. Police officers may not accept a cash deposit in lieu of bail. 
(b)  The municipal judge shall have the authority to punish any person convicted of violating any municipal ordinance as provided in section 1-4; provided, however, that for driving under the influence of alcohol or controlled substances, a fine of not more than $5,000.00 and/or a sentence of imprisonment or hard labor for not more than one year may be imposed. The penalty imposed on a corporation shall consist of the fine only, plus costs of court. No prisoner shall be required to perform hard labor if he is declared by a duly qualified physician to be physically unfit at such time. 
(c)  The municipal judge in his judgment may provide that if a fine and costs are not paid within the time prescribed, the defendant, unless indigent, shall work out the amount of the judgment under the direction of the municipal authority allowing not less than $15.00 for each day's service. The provisions of Code of Ala. 1975, § 14-6-22, on housing, maintenance and medical costs apply in municipal court. 
(d)  Upon each conviction in municipal court, there shall be taxed against the defendant as a court cost for the benefit of the city the sum of $50.00. There shall also be taxed as costs the additional costs and fees imposed by the statutes of the state, and the latter such costs and fees shall be remitted pursuant to the state statutes. All costs taxed for the city, as provided in this subsection, shall be paid into the city treasury. Pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-7.1, as amended, $40.00 of each court cost taxed against a defendant shall be deposited into a special account designated as the corrections fund, and is to be used solely for the operation and maintenance of the municipal jail or court complex. 
    Also, a fee of $8.00 shall be charged for issuance of a subpoena upon conviction of defendant. In the event the defendant is declared indigent, this fee may be waived. 
(e)  Upon conviction, the court may, upon a showing of inability to make immediate payment of fines and costs, accept the defendant's bond with or without surety and with waiver of exemptions as to personalty, payable within 90 days, upon nonpayment of which execution may issue as upon judgments in state courts. 
(f)  The municipal judge shall have the authority to continue the case from time to time to permit the fine and costs to be paid; remit fines, costs and fees; impose intermittent sentences; establish work release programs; require attendance of educational, corrective or rehabilitative programs; suspend or revoke driving privileges for such times and under such conditions as provided by law; and order hearings to determine the competency of the defendant to stand trial. 
(g)  All cases in municipal court shall be tried by the judge without a jury. The victim of a criminal offense shall be entitled to be present during court proceedings. 
(h)  The judge may suspend execution of sentence and place a defendant on probation for varying periods of time, not to exceed two years, under the procedures and conditions set out in Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-13, as may be amended. 
(i)  The judge may administer oaths, compel the attendance of witnesses and compel the production of books and papers; punish by fine not exceeding $50.00 and/or imprisonment not exceeding five days any person found and adjudged to be in contempt of court; and shall have power coextensive with the jurisdiction of the district court to issue writs and other process, to approve and declare bail and bonds forfeited, and to enforce forfeitures according to Code of Ala. 1975, § 15-13-80 et seq., as may be amended. The judge shall designate any other court officials who shall be authorized to approve appearance and appeal bonds. 
(j)  The court shall take judicial notice of the ordinances of the city. 
(k)  The sheriff of the county and all city law enforcement officers shall obey the municipal judge having legal authority in faithfully executing the warrants and processes committed to them for service according to their mandates. 
(Code 1977, § 8-6; Ord. No. 97-126, § 1, 4-15-97; Ord. No. 2001-254, § 1, 8-21-01) 
Sec. 30-38. - Warrants. 
    The municipal judge is authorized to issue arrest and search warrants upon affidavit for municipal ordinance violations returnable to the municipal court and for violations of state law returnable to any state court. 
(Code 1977, § 8-9) 
Sec. 30-39. - Magistrates; appointment; powers. 
    The municipal judge shall ensure that a magistrate is appointed for the city pursuant to Rule 18 of the ARJA, as amended. The powers of the magistrate shall be limited to: 
(1)  Issuance of arrest warrants; 
(2)  Setting of bail in minor misdemeanor prosecutions in accordance with a designated bail schedule; 
(3)  Receiving of pleas of guilty in minor misdemeanors where a schedule of fines has been prescribed by law or rule; 
(4)  Accounting to the municipal court for all uniform traffic tickets and complaints, monies received and records of offenses; and 
(5)  Such other authority as may be granted by law. 
(Code 1977, § 8-10) 
Sec. 30-40. - Failure to comply with stopping, standing or parking citation. 
    If a violator of the restrictions in chapter 98 on stopping, standing or parking does not appear in response to a citation affixed to such motor vehicle within a period of 14 days, the magistrate of the municipal court shall send the owner of the motor vehicle, to which the citation was affixed, a letter informing him of the violation and warning him that if such letter is disregarded for a period of 14 days, a warrant of arrest will be issued. 
(Code 1977, § 19-13) 
Sec. 30-41. - Warrants of arrest. 
    If any person fails to comply with the citation given to such person or attached to a vehicle or fails to make an appearance pursuant to a summons directing an appearance in the municipal court, the magistrate of the municipal court shall secure and issue a warrant for his arrest. 
(Code 1977, § 19-14) 
Sec. 30-42. - Court record of traffic cases; report of convictions to the state department of motor vehicles. 
(a)  The municipal judge shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of every state uniform traffic ticket and complaint, or other legal form of traffic charge deposited with or presented to the court, and a record of every official action by the court, including, but not limited to, a record of every conviction, forfeiture of bail, judgment of acquittal and the amount of forfeiture resulting from every state uniform traffic citation. 
(b)  The failure, refusal or neglect of any such judicial officer to comply with any of the requirements of this section shall constitute misconduct in office and shall be grounds for removal therefrom. 
(Code 1977, § 19-15) 
Sec. 30-43. - Reports. 
    The city shall report on the proceedings of the municipal court as required by law or rule. The municipal judge shall make a report to the board of commissioners on the operation of the municipal court every month. 
(Code 1977, § 8-12) 
Sec. 30-44. - Willfully giving false information in financial affidavit to determine indigency. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully give false information in regard to any material matter or thing requested in a financial affidavit in support of a request for an attorney for the purpose of determining indigency knowing that such information is false at the time such affidavit is made. 
(Code 1977, § 9-46) 
Secs. 30-45-30-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PRETRIAL DIVERSION PROGRAM 

Sec. 30-60. - In general. 
(a)  The City of Dothan of Alabama may establish a pretrial diversion program. 
(b)  All discretionary powers endowed by a common law and provided by statutes and acts of this state or powers or discretion otherwise provided by law for the city shall be retained. 
(c)  The pretrial diversion program shall be under the direct supervision and control of the city and the city may contract with any agency, person, or corporation for services related to this act. The city may employ necessary persons to accomplish this act and those persons shall serve at the pleasure of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-212, § 1, 9-6-11) 
Sec. 30-61. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this act, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Application fee. A one-time administrative fee imposed by the city as a condition precedent to participation in a pretrial diversion program. 
    City attorney. The city attorney of the city or any legal staff employed by the city attorney. 
    Law enforcement. As defined in Code of Ala. 1975, § 41-8A-1(1). 
    Law enforcement officer. As defined in Code of Ala. 1975, § 36-25-1(15) whether employed in the State of Alabama or elsewhere. 
    Offender. Any person charged with a criminal offense, including, but not limited to, any misdemeanor, violation, or traffic offense, as defined by the Code of Alabama 1975, which was allegedly committed in the corporate limits or police jurisdiction of the city. 
    Pretrial diversion program or program. A program that allows the imposition of the city or by a designated agency of certain conditions of behavior and conduct for a specified period of time upon an offender which allow the offender to have his or her charges reduced, dismissed without prejudice, or otherwise mitigated should all of the conditions be met during the time frame set by the city attorney. 
    Serious physical injury. As defined in Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-1-2(14). 
    Supervision fee. Any fee other than the application fee imposed by any agency providing supervision of treatment of the offender. 
(Ord. No. 2011-212, § 1, 9-6-11) 
Sec. 30-62. - Participation. 
(a)  An offender may apply to the city for admittance into the pretrial diversion program. Admittance into the pretrial diversion program is in the sole discretion of the city attorney. An offender deemed by the city attorney to be a threat to the safety or well-being of the community shall not be eligible for the program. 
(b)  An offender charged with any of the following types of offenses shall be ineligible for admittance: 
(1)  Any offense involving violence or aggression resulting in injury to a law enforcement officer. 
(2)  Any offense involving eluding or attempting to elude a law enforcement officer. 
(3)  Any offense involving violence where weapons are used or where children are victims. 
(4)  Any driving under the influence charge where serious physical injuries are involved. 
(5)  Any offense wherein the offender is a public official and the charge is related to the capacity of the offender as a public official. 
(6)  The person may not hold a commercial driver license (CDL) issued in any U.S. state, and U.S. possession, any U.S. territory, or any U.S. insular area, or has no conviction for which a commercial driver license was required. 
(c)  The city attorney may consider an offender for the pretrial diversion program based on any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  There is a probability justice will be served if the offender is placed in the program. 
(2)  It is determined that the needs of the state, city, and of the offender can be met through the program. 
(3)  The offender appears to pose no substantial threat to the safety and well-being of the community. 
(4)  It appears the offender is not likely to be involved in further criminal activity if the offender complies with all conditions imposed pursuant to the program. 
(5)  The offender will likely respond to rehabilitative treatment or counseling. 
(6)  The need for restitution for the victim from the offender outweighs the interest of the state and city for incarceration of the offender. 
(7)  The city attorney may waive any of the standards specified in this subsection (c) if just or special circumstances dictate. 
(Ord. No. 2011-212, § 1, 9-6-11) 
Sec. 30-63. - Requirements. 
(a)  Upon application by an offender for admission into the pretrial diversion program, and prior to admission thereto and as a part of the evaluation process of the city attorney, the city attorney may require the offender to furnish information concerning past criminal history, education history, work record, family history, medical or psychiatric treatment or care prescribed or received, psychological test taken, and any other information concerning the offender which the city attorney believes has a bearing on the decision whether or not the offender should be admitted to the program. 
(b)  The city attorney may require the offender to submit to any type of test or evaluation process or interview the city attorney deems appropriate in evaluating the offender for admittance into the program. The costs of any test or evaluation shall be paid by the offender or as otherwise agreed to or provided for by this act. The offender shall provide the city attorney written consent to allow the city attorney to receive any educational, work, medical, psychiatric, psychological, or other records deemed necessary by the city attorney for the evaluation process. 
(c)  Following the decision of the city attorney to admit the offender into the pretrial diversion program, but prior to entry, the city attorney and the offender shall enter into a written agreement stating the conditions of the participation of the offender in the program. The agreement shall include, but not be limited to, all of the following: 
(1)  A voluntary waiver of the right of the offender to a speedy trial. 
(2)  An agreement to the tolling, while in the program of periods of limitations established by statutes or rules of court. 
(3)  An agreement to the conditions of the program established by the city attorney. 
(4)  If there is a victim of the charged crime, an agreement to the restitution repayment within a specified period of time and in an amount to be determined by the city attorney taking into account circumstances of the offender and the victim. 
(5)  A waiver in writing of the right of the offender to a jury trial. 
(6)  A truthful and complete statement by the offender as to the involvement of the offender in the offense charged, which statement shall be admissible in any criminal trial. 
(7)  Submission of a written plea of guilty to the offense or offenses charged or agreed upon included offenses, together with an agreement as to whether the case is to be dismissed upon successful completion of the program, and an agreement, if there be any, as to the recommended sentence should a sentence be imposed. 
(d)  In addition to those requirements set forth in subsection (c) of this section, or as a condition of continued participation in the program, the city attorney may require the offender to agree to any of the following terms or conditions: 
(1)  To participate in substance abuse treatment. 
(2)  To participate in an education setting to include, but not limited to, K-12, college, job training, trade school, GED classes, or basic education courses. 
(3)  If appropriate, to attempt to learn to read and write the English language. 
(4)  To financially support his or her children or pay any court ordered child support. 
(5)  To refrain from the use of drugs or alcohol or frequenting places where drugs or alcohol are sold or used. 
(6)  To not commit any criminal offense. 
(7)  To refrain from contact with certain named persons or premises. 
(8)  To maintain or seek employment. 
(9)  To not leave the state without prior written consent of the city attorney or supervision agency or personnel. 
(10)  To maintain a residence approved by the city attorney or supervising agency or personnel. 
(11)  To attend individual, group, financial, chemical addiction, family, mental health, sex offender, or anger management counseling. 
(12)  To pay all court costs, fees, fines, and worthless checks, and obey any other lawful court order associated with the offense or offenses for which the offender has entered the program, or any other case. 
(13)  To refrain from the possession or use of any deadly weapon or dangerous instrument as defined in Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-1-2. 
(14)  To pay supervision fees and application fees pursuant to this act. 
(15)  To observe curfews or home detention or travel constraints as set out in agreement signed by the offender. 
(16)  To have restitution, court costs, fees, child support, and any other moneys withheld or garnished from the wages or salary of the offender or withheld from any Alabama income tax due the offender, or from any available insurance policy, or forfeited from any other real or personal property of the offender, and applied to the above. 
(17)  To be admitted to a drug or alcohol treatment program on an inpatient or outpatient basis or receive other treatment alternatives for substance abuse. 
(18)  To submit to periodic or random drug testing as part of the program and other terms and conditions related to substance abuse as the city attorney may direct. 
(19)  To waive in writing the right of the offender to a probation hearing in the event of termination or withdrawal from the program. 
(20)  To any other terms or conditions as the city attorney or his or her designee and the offender may agree to in the above-stated agreement, it being the purpose of this act to allow the city attorney broad discretion in designing a program specifically for each offender and his or her particular circumstances. 
(21)  When applicable, to be required to pay supervision fees to the agency or entity responsible for monitoring and verifying the compliance of the offender with the terms of the program set forth by the city attorney. The fees shall be paid by the offender to the supervising entity in a timely manner. 
(22)  Community service with an approved community service, charitable or nonprofit organization. The prosecutor shall compile a list of approved organizations for each participant. Participants who wish to complete this requirement with an organization not on the prosecutor's list must have any such organization preapproved by the prosecutor. 
(e)  If the city attorney denies an applicant admission into said program, the denied applicant shall have the right to appeal such denial to the municipal court judge. The municipal court judge shall be vested with the authority to approve an applicant in such cases wherein the municipal court judge determines that denial was not appropriate and that approval would be in the best interest of justice. 
(Ord. No. 2011-212, § 1, 9-6-11) 
Sec. 30-64. - Fees. 
(a)  An offender may be assessed a nonrefundable application fee when the offender is approved for the pretrial diversion program. The amount of the assessment for participation in the program shall be in addition to any court costs, fees, and assessments for the crime victim's compensation fund, department of forensic sciences assessments, drug, alcohol, or anger management treatment required by law, and any costs of supervision, treatment, and restitution for which the offender may be responsible. A schedule of payments for any of these fees may be established by the city attorney. 
(b)  The following maximum applications fees shall be applied to offenders accepted in the program: 
(1)  Driving under the influence (DUI): $5,000.00; 
(2)  Domestic violence offenses: $1,500.00; 
(3)  Other misdemeanor offenses: $750.00; 
(4)  Traffic offenses not including DUI: $500.00; 
(5)  Violations: $250.00. 
(c)  The amount of the application fee for each offender shall be established by the city attorney and approved by the municipal court judge. 
(d)  The application fee shall be allocated to the general fund of the city. 
(e)  An applicant offender may not be denied access into the pretrial diversion program based solely on the inability of the offender to pay the application fee. Application fees may be reduced, but not waived, for just cause, including indigency of the offender, at the discretion of the city. Any determination of the indigency of the offender for purposes of program fee mitigation shall be made by the city but such mitigation shall be done only upon the determination by the city that there is no reasonable likelihood within the reasonably foreseeable future that the offender will have the ability to pay the application fee. 
(f)  Application fees required by this act shall be collected by the court clerk of the city municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 2011-212, § 1, 9-6-11) 
Sec. 30-65. - Approval of the court. 
(a)  Upon acceptance of an offender into the pretrial diversion program by the city attorney, the city attorney and the offender shall submit the written application of the offender together with the statement of facts of the offender, the acceptance of the offender by the city attorney, and the agreement between the city attorney and the offender to the court presiding over the affected case of the offender for the approval of the court. The offender shall also enter a plea of guilty to the charge or charges involved. If the court rejects the agreement and guilty plea, any money paid by the offender in satisfaction of the application fee shall be refunded to the offender. The offender shall still be liable for any actual expenses already incurred by the city attorney or any agency or service provider in furtherance of the application and evaluation process and the same will be deducted from any money so refunded to the offender. 
(b)  Upon approval of the agreement and acceptance of the guilty plea, the court shall expressly retain jurisdiction of the case, any other provision of law notwithstanding, any may withdraw and file the case or otherwise place it on an administrative docket until such time as the court has been notified that the offender has fulfilled the terms of the agreement, has been terminated from the program, or otherwise withdrawn from the program. Imposition of punishment by the court shall be deferred until the offender has successfully completed the program or is terminated from the program. 
(c)  In the event the offender is terminated from the program, the court shall impose appropriate punishment in the same manner as with any plea of guilty or finding of guilty and shall not be bound by the terms of agreement as to what punishment to impose. 
(d)  Upon successful completion of the program by the offender, the city attorney shall notify the court in writing of that fact together with a request that the court enter an order of disposition of the case pursuant to the agreement between the offender and the city attorney. 
(e)  Regardless of whether the offender successfully completes the program or withdraws from or is terminated from the program, the offender will still be liable for and required to pay any and all court costs and fees, restitution, victim's compensation fund assessment, and any and all other fees and assessments, in the same manner as if the offender had not applied for entry into the program and had been found guilty of the offense or offense involved. No costs, fees, restitution, or assessments shall be waived or remitted, absent an express agreement to that effect between the city attorney and the offender, without a finding by the court that the offender does not have the reasonable ability to pay the same within the reasonably foreseeable future. 
(Ord. No. 2011-212, § 1, 9-6-11) 
Sec. 30-66. - Violations. 
(a)  After any violation of any program terms or conditions or upon any breach of any program agreement by the offender, the city attorney may do any of the following: 
(1)  Continue the agreement with or without modification. 
(2)  Terminate the offender from the pretrial diversion program. 
(3)  Require the offender to adopt a new agreement as a condition of continued participation. 
(b)  The city attorney may waive a violation for good cause shown why the offender should stay in the program. 
(Ord. No. 2011-212, § 1, 9-6-11) 
Sec. 30-67. - Liability. 
    In no event shall the city attorney or any other agency or service provider have any liability, criminal or civil, for the conduct of any offender while participating in the pretrial diversion program or for acceptance of an offender into the program. 
(Ord. No. 2011-212, § 2, 9-6-11) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2011-212, § 2, did not specify manner of inclusion. Hence, inclusion as § 30-67 is at the discretion of the editor. 
Chapter 34 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Civil emergencies, ch. 26; alarm systems, § 54-61 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1-34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AMBULANCES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Ambulances generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-18-1 et seq.; city authority, Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-18-7. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ambulance means any vehicle equipped or used for the purpose of transporting the wounded, injured or sick, and shall include, but is not restricted to, emergency vehicles used for such purposes. 
    Ambulance driver means any person who has completed successfully a defensive driving training course and is so licensed under the laws of the state. 
    Attendant means a trained or qualified individual responsible for the operation of an ambulance and the care of patients who currently holds a valid state license as emergency medical technician II or its equivalent, as may be determined by the emergency medical services advisory committee, whether or not the attendant also serves as driver, and is licensed as such under the laws of the state. 
    Clerk means the city clerk of the City of Dothan. 
    Commission means the board of commissioners of the City of Dothan. 
    Fire chief means the fire chief of the city, his agent or such member of the fire department as he may from time to time designate to act under this article. 
    Health officer means the county health officer, or his designated representative. 
    Invalid coach means a nonemergency vehicle used to transport individuals or patients to clinics, hospitals and other treatment centers who are not acutely or seriously ill, and who do not require the services of an emergency ambulance. 
    Patient means an individual who is sick, injured, wounded or otherwise incapacitated or helpless. 
(Code 1977, § 21-62) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-32. - Applicability of article. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to the operation of any ambulance or invalid coach which is not subject to the permit and licensing under the provisions of section 34-56 while traveling without a patient into, traversing through and from the city, or while being used to transport a patient by traversing through the city, or from without the city to a location within the city, including volunteer nonprofit rescue squads and other governmental agencies. 
(Code 1977, § 21-61) 
Sec. 34-33. - Operator clearance from police dispatcher required to use flashing lights and siren. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive any ambulance or invalid coach on any of the public streets or highways of the city or its police jurisdiction, or to use any of such public streets or highways within the city or its police jurisdiction for ambulance or invalid coach purposes with the siren or other audible emergency equipment in operation, or while using any flashing emergency lights, without first obtaining clearance to use such public streets or highways from the police dispatcher of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 21-51(b)) 
Cross reference- Law enforcement, ch. 54. 
Sec. 34-34. - Operator subject to all traffic laws. 
    Any person who shall drive or operate any ambulance or invalid coach upon the streets of the city or its police jurisdiction with or without a siren or other audible emergency equipment in operation and with or without the flashing emergency lights in operation on such vehicle shall observe and be subject to all the traffic laws and rules of the road of the city and the state. 
(Code 1977, § 21-51(c)) 
Sec. 34-35. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article, or fail to comply therewith or with any requirement thereof, or who shall do any act prohibited therein or fail to do any act required therein shall, upon conviction, be punished within the limits of and as provided in section 1-4. Each offense and each day's continuance of the offense shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1977, § 21-84) 
Sec. 34-36. - Promulgation of additional standards and regulations. 
(a)  The fire chief is hereby authorized to establish additional standards and regulations for the operation of ambulance permit holders not in conflict with any provisions of this article. Such standards and regulations shall include and set forth the procedures to be followed in processing and handling complaints against permit holders made to the city and may clarify any provision of this article which is deemed ineffective so as to make the provision effective, and may establish any procedure necessary to the accomplishment of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Such standards and regulations as shall be established in accordance with subsection (a) of this section shall be mailed to all permit holders under this article and such regulations shall become effective 30 days thereafter, or earlier if an emergency exists, as determined by the fire chief. 
(c)  The standards and regulations, or any part of this article, as provided in this section, may be revoked at any time by appropriate action of the commission. 
(Code 1977, § 21-83) 
Secs. 34-37-34-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - VEHICLE PERMIT 

Sec. 34-56. - Required; exceptions. 
(a)  No person, whether as owner, agent or otherwise shall furnish, operate, conduct, maintain, advertise or otherwise be engaged in or profess to be engaged in the business or service of the transportation of patients upon the streets, public ways or other places in the city, unless he shall hold a currently valid permit for an ambulance or invalid coach issued under the terms of this division; provided, however, that no person holding a valid ambulance permit shall be issued an invalid coach permit for the same vehicle. 
(b)  No vehicle shall be operated for ambulance or invalid coach purposes, and no individual shall drive, attend or permit the vehicle to be operated for such purposes on the streets, public ways or other places in the city unless such ambulance or invalid coach shall be under the immediate supervision and direction of a person who is holding a currently valid permit as an attendant; provided, however, that no such permit shall be required for an ambulance or invalid coach or for the attendant or ambulance driver of an ambulance or invalid coach which: 
(1)  Is rendering assistance to licensed ambulances in the case of a major catastrophe or emergency with which the licensed ambulances of the city are insufficient or unable to cope. 
(2)  Is operated from a location or headquarters outside the city in order to transport patients who are picked up beyond the limits of the city to locations within the city or through the city. No such outside ambulance or invalid coach shall be used to pick up patients within the city for transportation to locations within the city unless the attendant or ambulance driver and any other person subject to the provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall hold currently valid permits issued pursuant to this division. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of operating an ambulance or invalid coach upon, over or along any street in the city unless such person holds a valid permit from the commission granted by appropriate resolution. The requirements for a permit under this division shall be in addition to the requirements of a city business license. 
(Code 1977, § 21-63) 
Sec. 34-57. - Application. 
    Application to the commission for an ambulance or invalid coach permit under this division shall be made and sworn to upon such forms as may be prepared or approved by the clerk and shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant and owner of the ambulance or invalid coach, including place of residence and business. 
(2)  The trade and corporate name under which the applicant does business and proposes to do business. 
(3)  The training and experience of the applicant and any employees of the applicant in the transportation and care of patients. 
(4)  A description of each ambulance or invalid coach to include its equipment, the make, model, year of manufacture, vehicle identification number, current state license number, the length of time the vehicle has been in use, and the color scheme, insignia, name, monogram or other distinguishing characteristics to be used to designate the applicant's vehicle. 
(5)  The location and description of the place or places from which it is intended to operate. 
(6)  State license number for ambulance companies and for each of its attendants and ambulance drivers. 
(Code 1977, § 21-64) 
Sec. 34-58. - Investigation of application. 
(a)  Each and every application for an ambulance or invalid coach permit filed with the clerk shall be immediately referred to the fire chief for investigation and report. The fire chief shall investigate the facts set out in the application and report in writing to the commission within 30 days the results of his investigation as follows: 
(1)  His findings as to the truth or falsity of the facts set out in the application. 
(2)  Whether or not each such ambulance or invalid coach, its required equipment and the premises designated in the applications meet the requirements of this division and other applicable laws, ordinances and regulations. 
(3)  Whether or not only duly permitted attendants are employed in such capacities. 
(4)  Any facts which he has which may bear upon the question whether or not the applicant is a responsible and proper person to conduct, carry on, or engage in the proposed business. 
(5)  Whether or not only duly permitted attendants and all other applicable laws and ordinances relating to the application have been met. 
(b)  A copy of the application shall be referred by the clerk to the emergency medical services advisory committee. The committee shall consider such application and report thereon to the commission within 30 days whether or not the public necessity and convenience requires or will be served by the proposed ambulance and invalid coach service. The committee shall also advise the commission of any facts of which it has knowledge that are relevant to the consideration of the permit application. 
(Code 1977, § 21-65) 
Sec. 34-59. - Hearing on application. 
    Upon receipt of all reports as required by section 34-58, the commission shall set a date for a hearing on such application to be held within 21 days after receipt of such reports. The clerk shall notify the applicant of the time and place of such hearing. At such hearing, or upon any date to which the hearing is continued, the commission shall hear all evidence offered by any party that may be present which bears upon such application. If the commission finds that the applicant is ready, willing and able to comply with all the provisions of this article and that the territory proposed to be served by the operation under the permit is, in the opinion of the commission, not adequately served by other ambulance or invalid coach facilities and that the public necessity and convenience require the issuance of such a permit, then such application shall be granted and a permit issued to the applicant to operate such number of ambulances or invalid coaches upon the streets of the city as the commission deems in the public interest, which permit shall be issued by the clerk upon payment to the city by the applicant of a fee of $50.00 for each vehicle covered by the permit. If the commission finds otherwise, the application shall be refused. 
(Code 1977, § 21-66) 
Sec. 34-60. - Transferability. 
(a)  With the exception of subsection (d) of this section, any change or transfer of ownership of an ambulance or invalid coach for which a permit has been granted, or shall be granted under this division, shall terminate such permit, and shall require a new application and a new permit in conformance with all the requirements of this division as upon an original application. 
(b)  With the exception of subsection (d) of this section, application for transfer of any ambulance or invalid coach permit to another or substitute vehicle shall require conformance with all requirements of this article as upon an original application. No ambulance or invalid coach permit may be sold, assigned or otherwise transferred without the approval of the commission. 
(c)  No ambulance or invalid coach shall be operated under any name other than that set forth in the permit granted under this division, unless such permit shall have been transferred with permission of the commission in which event it shall operate in the name of the transferee of such permit. 
(d)  A transfer of a permit from an ambulance being taken permanently out of service to a new ambulance coming into service will be permitted only after inspection and approval of the new ambulance by the fire chief or his designee and the filing of a certificate of insurance from an insurance company authorized to do business in the state, evidencing insurance coverage of the new ambulance as required by section 34-111. 
(Code 1977, § 21-67) 
Sec. 34-61. - Suspension; revocation. 
(a)  Any ambulance or invalid coach permit issued under this division shall be subject to revocation by the commission for failure of a permittee to comply or to maintain compliance with this division or for any violation of any applicable provision, standard or requirement of this division or of any regulation promulgated hereunder or for failure to operate or cause to be operated for a continuous period of 20 days any ambulance or invalid coach for which a permit has been issued or when, in the opinion of the commission, the public necessity, convenience or good renders such revocation advisable, upon not less than ten days' written notice to the permittee and after a public hearing thereof. 
(b)  An ambulance or invalid coach, equipment or premises inspection report of the fire chief provided for in this article shall be prima facie evidence of compliance or noncompliance, as the case may be, with the provisions, standards or requirements contained in this article and of the regulations promulgated under this article. 
(c)  Upon suspension, revocation or termination of an ambulance or invalid coach permit, such ambulance or invalid coach shall cease operations. 
(Code 1977, § 21-68) 
Sec. 34-62. - Permit holder's report. 
    All ambulance permit holders shall send a detailed report of the previous month's response times to the fire chief. 
Sec. 34-63. - Attendance at inner-city emergency planning committee meetings. 
    Ambulance permit holders shall submit two representatives to the inner-city emergency planning committee to meet at least quarterly or more often as directed by the fire chief. 
Secs. 34-64-34-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT 

Sec. 34-86. - Marking, design and equipment requirements. 
(a)  Each ambulance or invalid coach shall have on each side, in letters not less than four inches in height, the name of the owner or operator; the designation "ambulance" or "invalid coach," as appropriate; the vehicle number assigned by the fire chief, which number shall also appear on the back doors of the vehicle in numerals not less than six inches in height; and on each side of the vehicle there shall appear the symbol of the "Star of Life." All other markings or emblems shall be approved by the fire chief. 
(b)  Each ambulance shall at all times while in use: 
(1)  Be suitable for the transportation of patients from the standpoint of health, sanitation and safety and be maintained in sanitary premises. 
(2)  Contain equipment conforming with the standards, requirements and regulations provided for in subsections (b)(3) and (f) of this section, and which equipment shall be in proper working order. 
(3)  Be so designed and constructed as to comply with all requirements of the state department of health and all state laws as well as any additional standards as may be promulgated by the fire chief, as provided in section 34-36. 
(4)  Be equipped with such lights, sirens and special markings to designate it as an ambulance as may be prescribed by law or in reasonable regulations promulgated by the fire chief. 
(5)  Be equipped with adequate safety belts for the driver and a passenger in the front seat and the attendant in a rear seat, if such a seat is provided. 
(6)  Be equipped with a two-way radio communications unit capable of communicating with its base of operations and the city police department communication center. 
(7)  Be equipped with the types and plys of tires as approved by the fire chief. 
(8)  Be designed with sufficient space and proper equipment to permit an attendant to administer first aid to an injured patient or a variety of services to an ill patient. The unit must provide adequate facilities so that the attendant can administer the required service to the patient while the vehicle is in motion, with safety to both the patient and attendant. 
(9)  Be designed to have the smoothest possible riding quality with the lowest possible rate of motion frequency while operating over rough street surfaces so as to minimize the possibility of secondary injury to patients. 
(10)  Be of such design that the tires, wheels, spring suspensions, shock absorbers, chassis frame, weight distribution, body mounting and body shall provide a total low motion frequency ride and that such components be in proper balance with each other. 
(11)  Be so designed as to meet the specifications as to body types and dimensions required by the state. 
(12)  Be licensed and certified in accordance with the state department of public health/emergency medical services division rules and regulations, to include EMT license, vehicle standards and equipment standards. 
(c)  The commission shall have the authority to and may require any additional equipment which in their judgement is necessary for the safe and efficient operation of an ambulance. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to operate any ambulance as such upon the streets of the city without all the equipment in proper working order, as prescribed in this section. 
(e)  Each permit holder may add equipment in addition to that required as he may so desire; provided, however, that the police chief is notified in writing of such additional equipment and such equipment is approved by him. 
(f)  The following shall be considered essential equipment for advanced life support ambulances: 
(1)  Suction. 
(2)  Bag-mask. 
(3)  Airways. 
(4)  Oxygen system. 
(5)  Dressings, bandages and gauze. 
(6)  Splints. 
(7)  Backboards. 
(8)  Resuscitation. 
(9)  Blood pressure kit. 
(10)  Cot and accessories. 
(11)  Miscellaneous restraints. 
(12)  First aid kit. 
(13)  Light rescue equipment. 
(14)  Standard fluid kit. 
(15)  Miscellaneous. Equipment which does not fall into one of the above major areas, as may be promulgated by the commission, such as leather restraints, shears, rubber gloves, etc. 
(g)  The following shall be considered essential equipment for invalid coaches: 
(1)  Standard first aid kit. 
(2)  Three flares for roadside trouble. 
(3)  One 21/2 pound chemical fire extinguisher. 
(4)  Cot and accessories. 
(5)  Bedpan. 
(6)  Urinal. 
(7)  Emesis basin. 
(8)  Towels. 
(9)  "S" tube airway. 
(10)  Portable oxygen system approved by the police chief. 
(11)  Suction. 
(h)  Each invalid coach shall, at all times when in operation as such, be so designed and constructed as to comply with all requirements of the state department of health and all state laws as well as any additional standards as may be promulgated by the fire chief, as is provided in section 34-36, and comply with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations relating to health, sanitation and safety. 
(Code 1977, § 21-69) 
Sec. 34-87. - Inspection of vehicles. 
(a)  Periodic. Periodic inspection of vehicles shall be conducted as follows: 
(1)  Every ambulance or invalid coach for which a permit is issued under division 2 of this article, its equipment and premises designated in the application, and all records relating to its maintenance and operation as such shall be open to inspection by the county health officer or the fire chief. 
(2)  Subsequent to the issuance of an ambulance or invalid coach permit, the fire chief shall cause to be inspected each such ambulance or invalid coach, its equipment and premises, whenever he deems such inspection to be necessary, but in any event no less frequently than once each six months, and shall promptly report his findings in a written report to the clerk. The periodic inspection required in this section shall be in addition to any other safety or motor vehicle inspection required to be made for ambulances or other motor vehicles, or other inspections required to be made under general law or ordinance, and shall not excuse compliance with any requirement of law or ordinance to display any official certificate of motor vehicle inspection and approval, nor excuse compliance with the requirements of any other applicable general law or ordinance. 
(3)  A copy of each initial, semiannual or other ambulance, equipment and premises inspection report submitted by the fire chief to the clerk under the provisions of this section shall be promptly transmitted to the applicant or permittee to whom it refers. 
(b)  After an accident. It shall be unlawful for any person to transport a patient in an ambulance or invalid coach subsequent to an accident involving such vehicle until the vehicle has been inspected by the fire chief and determined by him to be in proper operative condition and in compliance with all the requirements of this division; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit such an ambulance or invalid coach to continue the transportation of a patient who was being transported at the time of the accident when such can be done safely. 
(Code 1977, § 21-70) 
Secs. 34-88-34-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - INSURANCE AND RECORDS 

Sec. 34-111. - Liability insurance required. 
    No permit required by this article or the business schedule shall be granted to any person to operate any ambulance or invalid coach upon the streets or elsewhere in the city until such person shall have first filed with the clerk a personal injury and property damage liability insurance policy issued to such person by a public liability insurance company authorized to do business in the state, providing insurance coverage for each such ambulance or invalid coach as follows: 
(1)  For each ambulance, such insurance policy shall provide insurance coverage in the amount of $300,000.00 for personal injury or death arising from any one accident and $50,000.00 for property damage liability, and shall provide for the payment of any final judgement, not to exceed $100,000.00 for injury to or death of a person and, subject to the same limits per person, of $300,000.00 for injury to or death of more than one person, and $50,000.00 property damage, in any one accident that may be rendered against such person operating such ambulance for injury to or death of a person, or damage to property, resulting from accident or collision arising out of, or occurring by reason of the careless or negligent operation of such vehicle by such person, his agent, servant or employee or by any person in possession of such vehicle; provided, however, that each insurance policy as required in this subsection may contain the following exclusions: Comprehensive automobile liability insurance, basic automobile liability insurance, automobile medical payments insurance, emergency vehicles, volunteer firefighters and volunteer workers. It is agreed that the insurance does not apply to bodily injury to any person who is a volunteer firefighter or who performs services as a volunteer worker for the insured, which is sustained while such person is engaged in the operation or maintenance of the automobile or which arises out of, or in the course of, his duties or other activities as a volunteer firefighter, or a volunteer worker participating in rescue squads or ambulance corps operations. 
(2)  For each invalid coach such insurance policy shall provide insurance coverage in the amount of $300,000.00 for personal injury or death arising from any one accident and $50,000.00 for property damage liability, and shall provide for the payment of any final judgement, not to exceed $100,000.00 for injury to or death of one person and, subject to the same limits per person, of $300,000.00 for injury to or death of more than one person, and $50,000.00 property damage, in any one accident, that may be rendered against such person operating such invalid coach for injury to or death of a person, or damage to property, resulting from accident or collision arising out of or occurring by reason of the careless or negligent operation of such vehicle by such person, his agent, servant or employee or by any person in possession of such vehicle; provided, however, that each insurance policy as required in this subsection may contain the following exclusions: Comprehensive automobile liability insurance, basic automobile liability insurance, automobile medical payments insurance, emergency vehicles, volunteer firefighters and volunteer workers. It is agreed that the insurance does not apply to bodily injury to any person who is a volunteer firefighter or who performs services as a volunteer worker for the insured, which is sustained while such person is engaged in the operation or maintenance of the automobile or which arises out of or in the course of his duties or other activities as a volunteer firefighter or a volunteer worker participating in rescue squads or ambulance corps operations. 
(3)  The insurance coverage required by this section shall, at all times, be maintained for the full amount. The policy of insurance required by this section to be filed with the city revenue officer shall contain a clause obligating the company issuing same to give not less than ten days' written notice to the city revenue officer before cancellation thereof. Notice of cancellation shall not relieve the company issuing such policy of liability for any injury or claim arising before the cancellation becomes effective. The cancellation of any such policy shall have the effect of suspending the permit of such person to the ambulances or invalid coaches covered thereby until a new policy complying with the provisions of this section is filed with the city revenue officer. 
(4)  Every insurance policy required under this division shall contain a provision for a continuing liability thereunder to the full amount thereof, notwithstanding any recovery thereon, that the liability of the insurer shall not be affected by the insolvency or the bankruptcy of the insured, and that until the policy is cancelled the insurance company will not be relieved from liability on account of nonpayment of premium or any act or omission by the named assured. Such policy of insurance shall be further conditioned for the payment of any and all judgements, up to the limits of such policy, recovered against any person other than the owner, his agent or employee who may operate the same with the consent or acquiescence of the owner. 
(Code 1977, § 21-71) 
_____
Sec. 34-112. - Permit holder to keep records. 
(a)  Each holder of an ambulance permit issued under division 2 of this article shall maintain accurate records concerning the transportation of every patient within the city, or from one place therein to another place within or beyond its limits upon forms in words and figures substantially as follows: 
Trip No._____ 
_____Date Time Vehicle Dispatcher Driver Attendant _____ 
(Company name) 
Called by _____ 
Patient's name _____ 
Address _____ 
City _____  Phone ________ 
Age ___ Male _______ Code _______Attending physician-Dr. _____
Female _______ 
Medicaid No. _____  Medicare No. _____ 
Employed by _____ 
Complaint _____
_____ 
Vital signs: B/P _____   P _____   R _____ 
From _____ 
To _____ 
Ending 
Mileage _____ To: 
From: Emerg. ( ) 
Emerg. ( ) Routine ( ) 
Routine ( ) Picked up 
Mileage _____   
Patient charge _____  $_____ Carried 
Miles _____ First aid supplies _____  $_____ 
Oxygen _____  $_____ From _____ M to _____ M  _____ Waiting time _____  $_____ Special handling _____  $_____ Drugs and fluids _____  $_____ Transfer mileage (one way) _____  $_____ Total Fee _____  $_____  
Such records shall be available for inspection by the fire chief at any reasonable time and copies thereof shall be made available after a request by the fire chief. 
_____
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall apply with equal force in case the patient shall die before being so transported in such ambulance, or dies while being transported therein, or at any time prior to the acceptance of the patient into the responsibility of the hospital or medical or other authority, if the patient is still under the care responsibility of the ambulance permittee. 
(Code 1977, § 21-72) 
Secs. 34-113-34-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - DRIVERS AND ATTENDANTS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 34-136. - Permit holder to furnish list of personnel. 
    It shall be the duty of every permit holder to furnish the fire chief a complete list of all personnel employed by such permit holder at any time requested by the fire chief, on a form to be provided by the fire chief. 
(Code 1977, § 21-73) 
Sec. 34-137. - Appearance and conduct. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a permit holder to permit or allow an attendant or ambulance driver to drive an ambulance or attend a patient while not sanitary or not clean and neat in appearance. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for each permit holder to permit or allow an attendant or ambulance driver of an ambulance to be discourteous; to use vulgar, profane or obscene language; to drink intoxicating beverages while on duty; or to drive an ambulance while under the influence of intoxicating beverages or drugs. 
(c)  No permit holder shall knowingly allow any person suffering from a communicable disease to act as an attendant or ambulance driver, nor shall anyone suffering from a communicable disease act as such. Any permit holder shall notify the police department in writing immediately upon becoming aware that any person in his employ is suffering from such a disease. 
(Code 1977, § 21-82) 
Sec. 34-138. - Operation. 
(a)  The driver of an ambulance, when responding to an emergency call or while transporting a patient, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but is subject to the conditions stated in this section, and only when the licensed attendant in charge and such driver have reasonable grounds to believe that an emergency in fact exists requiring the exercise of such privileges. 
(b)  Subject to the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, the driver of an ambulance may: 
(1)  Park or stand, irrespective of the otherwise applicable provisions of law, ordinance or regulation. 
(2)  Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down to ten miles per hour, or as may be necessary for safe operation. Drivers must adhere to the same DFD standard operating procedure, stopping at all red lights and stop signs. Drivers shall proceed through all traffic signals with green lights, with caution as to stopped vehicles. All ambulance drivers must meet state standards for EVOC. 
(3)  Exceed the maximum speed limits permitted by law, ordinance or regulation so long as he does not endanger life or property. 
(4)  Disregard laws, ordinances or regulations governing movement or turning in specified directions. 
(c)  The exemptions granted in subsection (b) of this section shall apply only when such ambulance is making use of varying pitch, audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of law, ordinance or regulations. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not relieve the driver of an ambulance from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. All ambulance drivers should be trained in ICS and HAZ-MAT A&O. 
(Code 1977, § 21-74) 
Sec. 34-139. - Emergency calls. 
(a)  Any person engaged in operating ambulances, upon receiving an emergency call, shall first report such call to the city police dispatcher and give the name of the person requesting the ambulance, the circumstances under which the call was received and obtain the oral permission of such dispatcher before sending, permitting or driving any ambulance to answer such emergency call. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the city communications dispatcher, upon receiving a request for permission to send or drive an ambulance to answer an emergency call made, as provided in subsection (a) of this section, to immediately give permission therefor, unless an ambulance has already been permitted to go to the scene of the same accident or emergency, in which case such dispatcher shall refuse permission for another ambulance to answer such call unless he is convinced that more than one ambulance is necessary to take care of the emergency properly. 
(c)  No person shall send, drive, permit or allow an ambulance to answer an emergency call without having first obtained permission from the police dispatcher as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  No person operating any private ambulance or place of business wherein an ambulance service business is conducted or any place used in connection therewith shall permit any dispatch of vehicles for business purposes due to information received on any radio used by such business which is so adjusted or tuned as to receive messages or signals or frequencies assigned by the Federal Communications Commission to police, firefighters or rescue units of the city unless such ambulance or ambulance business has been designated as an emergency vehicle transmitting station to be assigned to use frequencies assigned to the city. 
(Code 1977, § 21-75) 
Sec. 34-140. - Personnel required on vehicles answering emergency calls. 
    There shall be not less than an attendant and ambulance driver in each vehicle on all emergency calls, each of whom must be licensed as required by this division. Only licensed emergency medical technician personnel may assist in rendering patient care. 
(Code 1977, § 21-76) 
Secs. 34-141-34-160. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Attendant's and Driver's Permits 

Sec. 34-161. - Application. 
    Applications for attendant's and ambulance driver's permits under this division shall be made upon such forms as approved by the clerk and shall contain: 
(1)  The applicant's full name, current residence, places of residence for five years previous to moving to present address and length of time of residence in the city. 
(2)  The applicant's age, marital status, height and color of eyes and hair. 
(3)  Whether he has ever been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, and if so, when, where and for what cause. 
(4)  The applicant's training and experience in the transportation and care of patients and whether he had previously been licensed as an ambulance driver, chauffeur or attendant, and if so, when, where and whether his license has been revoked or suspended in any jurisdiction and for what cause. 
(5)  The names, addresses, phone numbers and places of employment of four persons who have personally known the applicant during two years preceding the date of his application. 
(6)  Proof that he is the holder of a current valid state driver's license. 
(7)  Such other information as the clerk shall deem reasonably necessary to a fair determination of compliance with this division. 
(8)  An accompanying fee of $5.00. 
(Code 1977, § 21-77) 
Sec. 34-162. - Investigation of applicant; nontransferable; defacing. 
(a)  The fire chief shall, within a reasonable time after receipt of an application as provided in this section, cause such investigation as he deems necessary to be made of the applicant for an attendant's or ambulance driver's permit. 
(b)  The clerk may issue a permit to an attendant or ambulance driver for a period of one year when he finds the applicant: 
(1)  Is not addicted to the use of intoxicating liquors and is morally fit for the position. 
(2)  Is able to speak, read and write the English language. 
(3)  Has been found by a duly licensed physician, upon examination attested to on a form provided by the fire chief, to be of sound physique, possessing eyesight corrected to at least 20/40 in the weakest eye, free of physical defects or diseases which might impair the ability to drive or attend an ambulance or invalid coach, and to be without any communicable disease. 
(4)  For an ambulance driver's permit, to have a currently valid certificate evidencing successful completion of a defensive driving training course under the laws of the state. 
(c)  A permit as attendant or ambulance driver issued under this division shall not be assignable or transferable. 
(d)  No official entry made upon a permit required by this division may be defaced, removed or obliterated. 
(Code 1977, § 21-78) 
Sec. 34-163. - Display. 
    Each attendant and ambulance driver shall have his permit conspicuously displayed on his person at all times while in operation so that it may be easily seen. It shall be unlawful for any person to change, alter, deface, tear or destroy any permit issued under this division. 
(Code 1977, § 22-79) 
Sec. 34-164. - Renewal. 
    Permits for attendant or ambulance driver shall be renewed annually by submitting a copy of his valid state license for emergency medical technician II, two weeks prior to the expiration of such permit. Revocation for any reason, or failure to renew within two weeks prior to expiration, shall require the conformance of all the requirements of this article as upon application for an original permit. 
(Code 1977, § 21-80) 
Sec. 34-165. - Suspension; revocation. 
    The fire chief may and is hereby authorized to suspend or revoke a permit of an attendant or ambulance driver issued under this division for failure of a permittee to comply and to maintain compliance with this division or for his violation of any applicable provision, standard or requirement of this division or of any regulation promulgated under this division, but only after reasonable notice of such violation and reasonable time for correcting such violation. Within seven days after any suspension under this division, the permit holder shall be afforded an oral hearing, upon written request, before the fire chief. The fire chief shall, within 14 days after conclusion of such hearing, issue a written decision which shall include written findings as to the suspension or revocation of such permit. Upon suspension, revocation or termination of an attendant's or ambulance driver's permit, the permittee shall cease to drive or attend an ambulance or invalid coach, and thereafter no person shall employ or permit such individual to drive or attend an ambulance or invalid coach until such permittee has obtained a reinstatement of such permit, or otherwise been issued another such permit. 
(Code 1977, § 21-81) 
Chapter 38 - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, adopted April 18, 2017, amended chapter 38 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 38, §§ 38-1-38-16, 38-26-38-40, 38-51, 38-52, 38-56, 38-61, 38-66-38-74, pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

ARTICLE I. - PURPOSE, ADMINISTRATION, PERMITTING AND INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS, FEES, PENALTIES 
DIVISION 1. - ADOPTION 

Sec. 38-1. - Adoption. 
    That certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk of the City of Dothan, Alabama, being marked and designated as the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition (as published by the International Code Council, Inc., and copyrighted in 2014), including Appendices B through E and Appendix I, (Section D107 of Appendix D is not adopted but is recommended), inclusive, thereof, which is hereby incorporated by reference as a part of this article as though fully set forth herein, is hereby adopted as the "Fire Code of the City of Dothan" (sometimes hereinafter called "Fire Code"), regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as therein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said fire code with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in the following sections of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
DIVISION 2. - PURPOSE; ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 38-2. - Purpose of this chapter. 
    In order to provide for the general welfare of the public's health and safety, the declared purpose of this chapter is to adopt the 2015 Edition of the International Fire Code and National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Standards. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 38-3. - Administering authority. 
    The fire prevention division under general direction of the fire chief shall be responsible for administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
DIVISION 3. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 38-4. - International Codes amended. 
(a)  Section 102.6. Referenced Codes and Standards (International Fire Code). The Codes and Standards referenced in this Code shall be those that are listed in Chapter 80 of the 2015 Edition of the International Fire Code and such Codes and Standards, as the same may be revised or amended from time to time, shall be considered part of the requirements of this Code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between the revisions of this Code and the referenced Standards, the provisions of this Code shall apply. 
(b)  Section 103.1. Fire Department. The person in charge shall be known in this Code as the Fire Official, who shall be called the Fire Chief of the City of Dothan, and who is charged with the implementation, administration and enforcement of the City of Dothan's Fire Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
DIVISION 4. - PERMIT AND INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 38-5. - Inspection notice. 
    When any of the trade work is ready for inspection, it shall be the duty of the subcontractor of that trade or owner doing his own work to notify the inspection office orally, by telephone or in writing, not less than 12 working hours before the work is to be inspected or tested. All work shall be left uncovered, where it applies, until approved as having been done in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 38-6. - Plans review. 
(a)  All commercial construction plans submitted for review shall be stamped and signed by an Alabama registered architect or engineer. 
(b)  All plans submitted must include the following information: 
 Occupancy type(s) and capacities (for each area) 
 Construction type 
 Building dimension(s) 
 Life safety information (Exit information, lighting, protection systems, alarms, etc.) 
 Correct physical address 
 Site plan 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 38-7. - Automatic fire sprinkler systems. 
(a)  No person shall install, modify or repair an automatic fire sprinkler system without first obtaining a permit from the city. 
(b)  Any person who installs fire sprinkler systems must be certified by the state fire marshal's office. 
(c)  Installer must have sprinkler plans approved by the fire official before commencing any part of the installation. 
(d)  No company shall perform maintenance or testing on any fire sprinkler system unless a representative of said company is certified by the state fire marshal's office. 
(e)  Upon final inspection, the NFPA contractor's material and test certificate for aboveground piping shall be properly completed and submitted to the fire official. 
(f)  The fire official shall require certain operational tests upon final inspection. 
(g)  A copy of the records of all maintenance and repairs made to any automatic fire suppression systems shall be sent to the fire prevention division monthly. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 38-8. - Standpipe systems. 
(a)  Any person who installs a standpipe system must be certified by the state fire marshal's office. 
(b)  No person shall install a standpipe system without first obtaining a permit from the city. 
(c)  A copy of the records of all maintenance and repairs made to any standpipe system shall be sent to the fire prevention division monthly. 
(d)  The fire official shall require certain operational tests upon final inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 38-9. - Fire pumps. 
(a)  Any person who installs, repairs or services fire pumps must be a licensed Alabama sprinkler contractor and be certified by the state fire marshal's. 
(b)  A copy of the records of all maintenance and repairs made to any fire pump shall be sent to the fire prevention division monthly. 
(c)  All testing of fire pumps shall comply with NFPA 25. 
(d)  The fire official shall require certain operational tests upon final inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 38-10. - Fire alarm systems, servicing. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the business of servicing fire alarm systems without possessing a current business license issued by the city on an annual basis renewable in January of each year. 
(b)  No person shall be issued a permit to install, modify, repair, test or service fire alarm systems who does not possess a then-current manufacturer's certification of training from the manufacturer of the type equipment to be installed, modified, repaired, tested or serviced, or be certified by the National Institute of Certification in Engineering Technologies (NICET) fire alarm certified - minimum level II. 
(c)  Owners of buildings may perform maintenance on their own systems as long as the individual who performs the system maintenance possess a then-current certificate of training issued by the manufacturer of that system's equipment or be NICET fire alarm certified - minimum level II. 
(d)  A service tag shall be required to be installed by the permitted alarm servicing individual or company at the control panel of each fire alarm system, stating the service company's name, address, phone number, name of the technician performing the service, date, and the type of service performed. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 38-11. - Fire alarm systems, installation. 
(a)  Any person who installs a fire alarm system shall possess a current business license issued by the city on an annual basis renewable in January of each year. 
(b)  No person shall install or modify a fire alarm system without having the plans approved by the fire official before commencing any part of the work. No person shall commence working on a fire alarm system without first notifying the fire prevention division. 
(c)  Any person or entity who designs fire alarm systems must possess written evidence from the manufacturer of the equipment to be installed, certifying that the designer is qualified to design fire alarm systems or be National Institute of Certification in Engineering Technologies (NICET) fire alarm certified-minimum level III. 
(d)  Installer must possess written evidence from the manufacturer of the equipment to be installed, certifying that the installer is qualified to install such equipment or the installer must be NICET fire alarm certified - minimum level II. 
(e)  Licensed electricians may pull wire, mount ancillary equipment, and connect the main power to the control panel after a permit has been issued; but no one other than a qualified fire alarm installer shall be allowed to make any other connections inside the control panel. 
(f)  A certified fire sprinkler installer may install devices integral to the operation of the fire sprinkler system, but shall not make any connection to the fire alarm system. 
(g)  Upon final inspection, the NFPA Fire Alarm System Record of Completion form shall be properly submitted to the fire official and a fire alarm system test shall be performed in the presence of the fire official. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 38-12. - Portable fire extinguishers. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the business of servicing portable fire extinguishers without possessing a current business license issued by the city, renewable in January of each calendar year. 
(b)  No person shall be issued a license to service portable fire extinguishers who does not possess a then-current manufacturer's certification of training for servicing the type extinguisher being installed or serviced. 
(c)  The technician who actually performs the work of servicing portable fire extinguishers shall sign and date the service tag verifying that all work was done in compliance with NFPA standards. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 38-13. - Fixed fire extinguishing systems, servicing. 
(a)  No person shall be issued a license to service fixed fire extinguishing systems who does not possess a then-current certification of training for servicing the type system to be serviced or installed. 
(b)  The technician who actually performs the work of servicing fixed fire extinguishing systems shall sign and date the service tag verifying that all work was done in compliance with NFPA standards. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 38-14. - Fixed fire extinguishing systems, installation. 
(a)  No person shall be issued a permit to install a fixed fire extinguishing system that does not possess a then-current manufacturer's certification of training for installation of the type system to be installed. 
(b)  No person shall install a fixed fire extinguishing system without first having plans approved by the fire prevention division. 
(c)  The fire official shall require certain operational tests upon final inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
DIVISION 5. - PERMIT FEES 

Sec. 38-15. - Permit fees; in general. 
    Permit fees shall be based upon the cost of construction or other valuation defined in chapter 14 of the City of Dothan Code of Ordinances and in accordance with the fee schedule defined therein unless otherwise noted. On all buildings, structures or alterations requiring a building permit, as set forth therein, fee shall be paid as required at the time of filing of an application and before any construction begins. 
    Where the fire official determines that construction permits are required, application for said work must be made to the City of Dothan building official in accordance with provisions of this article. The building official shall establish procedures for making application and issuing required permits and performing inspections of building construction, alteration, repair, moving, and demolition activities in the city. 
    The following activities, in addition to others specified herein, require permits, the cost of which shall be in accordance with section 14-5 (minimum fee of $50.00): 
(1)  Portable fire extinguisher installation and service. 
(2)  Fire alarm systems. 
(3)  Gasoline and bottled gas installation. 
(4)  Fire suppression sprinkler system installation (all fixed fire suppression systems to include, but not limited to: kitchen hoods, paint booths, etc.). 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
DIVISION 6. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 38-16. - Penalties. 
(a)  Construction or other activities requiring permits before obtaining a permit. Any contractor or others working without first obtaining a required permit for the work being done will be charged the lesser of $500.00 or double the permit fee for the first two offenses in a 12-month period and the greater of double the permit fee or $500.00 for the third or any additional offenses during any subsequent 12-month period. 
(b)  Other violations. Persons violating any section of the provisions of this Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Code is committed, and upon conviction for any such violation such person will be punished. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Secs. 38-17-38-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPEN BURNING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL 

Sec. 38-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Contractor means the primary contractor/builder or subcontractor for a particular construction site for which a building permit has been issued. 
    Fire extinguishing equipment means an approved five-pound ABC fire extinguisher and any other equipment approved in writing in advance by the fire marshal. 
    Fire prevention officer means the officer or other designated authority or their duly authorized representative charged with the administration and enforcement of the fire prevention code. 
    Open burning means the burning of any matter in such a manner that the products of combustion resulting from the burning are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing through an adequate stack, duct or chimney. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 38-27. - Purpose. 
    This article is enacted to protect, preserve and promote the safety and welfare of the citizens of the city through the reduction, control and prevention of open burning. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 38-28. - Method of enforcement. 
    The fire marshal and any fire prevention officer acting under his supervision, and any law enforcement officers are authorized to issue citations to appear in municipal court to answer charges of violations of any of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 38-29. - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates or fails or refuses to obey or comply with any provision of this article shall upon conviction be punished, in addition to such other punishment, including a term of community service, as may be provided by the court, by minimum fines and penalties, for a first conviction of $100.00 or by imprisonment for not more than ten days. For conviction of a second offense committed within one year after the date of the first offense, such person shall be punished by a fine of $200.00 or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. For conviction of a third or subsequent offense committed within one year after the date of the first offense, such person shall be punished by a fine of $500.00 or by imprisonment for not more than three months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Multiple violations will result in a permanent ban of permit issuance for violators. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 38-30. - Exemptions. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as applying to the regular military or naval forces of the United States, the duly authorized militia of the state, or the police and fire departments in the proper performance of their duty. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 38-31. - Compliance. 
    No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit open burning except as specifically permitted by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 38-32. - Exceptions to prohibition. 
(a)  Open burning may be conducted, subject to the limitations as spelled out in the open burning permit which is issued upon approval. This grant of exception shall in no way relieve the person responsible for such open burning from the consequences of or the damages or injuries resulting from such burning. No open burning permits shall be issued without the prior approval of the fire official or his designated representative. The fire official's approval shall be based upon his judgment as to the fire safety potential of the proposed open burning activity. 
(b)  Open burning of leaves and small tree limbs, less than three inches in diameter, at a residence where collection for such material is not available. The determination of availability will be made by the fire marshal. Fires must be a minimum of 50 feet from any building on the owner's property and a minimum of 500 feet from any other buildings. 
(c)  Open burning for the disposing of materials grown on that tract of land may be conducted provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Burning is done using an air curtain destructor or other approved device, at suitable sites as approved by the fire official, when such device is operated in a manner satisfactory, and with a valid open burning permit. 
(2)  The burning will take place on days and hours designated by the fire official. Designated days of burning will always be tentative and will be regulated according to weather conditions. 
(d)  Open burning as specified below may be conducted, subject to the limitations as spelled out in the permit which is issued upon approval by the fire official. This grant of exception shall in no way relieve the person responsible for such open burning from the consequences of or the damages or injuries resulting from such burning. 
(1)  Ceremonial fires (such as school bonfires) when the fires are approved, ignited and extinguished by fire department personnel. 
(2)  Fires set between October 1 and April 30 for the purpose of providing warmth to workers at construction sites for which a building permit has been issued, providing the following conditions are met: 
a.  The fire is contained in a noncombustible container not to exceed 55 U.S. gallons, with the opening covered by an ash screen. 
b.  Fire containers shall be located a minimum of 25 feet from any structure, tree or bush. 
c.  Fire containers shall be located a minimum of 25 feet from electrical lines and/or electrical service. 
d.  Only clean fuel not containing garbage, rubber, plastics, metals, shingles, treated lumber, or other hazardous materials is permitted. 
e.  Fire extinguishing equipment shall be located within ten feet of the fire container. 
f.  Fires shall be extinguished when no worker is in attendance. 
g.  The contractor shall apply in advance for a permit issued in his name from the fire marshal and shall be held liable for all permit violations on the burn site. 
(e)  Open burning activities as specified below may be conducted without an open burning permit. Notification of intent to conduct such activity as specified below shall be made 24 hours prior to the time the open burning activity is to begin. The person conducting any of the following open burning activities shall be responsible for the consequences of such activities and all damages or injuries resulting from such open burning: 
(1)  Fires set for the training and instruction of public or private firefighting personnel. 
(2)  Fires set by or at the direction of responsible fire control agencies for the prevention, elimination or reduction of a fire hazard. 
(3)  Smokeless flares or safety flares for the combustion of waste gases. 
(4)  Fires used for agricultural, horticultural and silvicultural purposes, when specifically recommended by the state extension service or the state forestry commission, provided such fires are conducted only in situations where the actual burning is at least 1,000 feet from the closest occupied building. 
(5)  Fires used to destroy pests, germs, dead animals, etc., when the open burning is being conducted in accordance with or under the direct supervision of personnel of the local or state health department. 
(f)  No open burning permit or notification is required for fires used for cooking of food, including barbecues and outdoor fireplaces. Only clean fuel not containing garbage, rubber, plastics or other refuse is permitted. 
(g)  No open burning permit is required for outdoor fireplaces, or outdoor heating containers for residential use. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
DIVISION 2. - OPEN BURNING PERMITS 

Sec. 38-33. - Permits. 
    Open burning permits may be issued subject to specific conditions, consistent with standards provided in this division, in which case the conditions shall be specified in writing. The holder of a permit shall comply with conditions contained in such permit as well as all applicable provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 38-34. - Permit applications. 
    Applications for open burning permits shall be in the form prescribed by the fire official and shall give all the information necessary to enable him to make the determinations required in this division. Applications should be submitted a minimum of three days prior to the requested burn date. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 38-35. - Action on application. 
    The fire official shall act, within a reasonable time, on an application for a permit and shall notify the applicant in writing of its approval, conditional approval or denial. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 38-36. - Permit fees. 
(a)  Open burning permit fees for individual residents shall be waived. 
(b)  Open burning permit fees for commercial developments shall be in the amount of $50.00, with an additional $10.00 per acre. Fees shall be made payable to the city and shall be nonrefundable. 
(c)  Commercial permits shall be issued for a period of seven days and can be extended to ten days, due to weather delays. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 38-37. - Transfer. 
    Open burning permits shall not be transferable whether by operation of law or otherwise, either from one location to another, or from one person to another. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 38-38. - Expiration of permit. 
    Open burning permits shall expire on the date specified on the face of the permit. In no event, however, may an open burning permit be issued which has an expiration date of longer than ten days from the burn start date. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 38-39. - Display of permits. 
    Permits shall be displayed and available for inspection at the open burning site by any and all persons who may request to see the permits. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 38-40. - Revocation of permit. 
    Any open burning permit granted may be revoked for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Failure to comply with any conditions of the open burning permit. 
(3)  Outdoor fire bans by the state due to weather, and drought periods (water usage). 
(4)  For any other cause if, in the judgment of the fire official, continuance of the permit is not consistent with the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Secs. 38-41-38-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FUEL STORAGE TANKS 

Sec. 38-51. - Installation of aboveground or underground fuel storage tanks. 
(a)  No person shall install any stationary aboveground or underground flammable or combustible liquid storage tank without first obtaining a permit from the city. 
(b)  No person shall be issued a permit until plans showing the complete fueling system have been submitted to the fire official for approval. Plans should include the relationship of the storage tank to the property lines, buildings, public ways, other tanks, and to the dispenser. The plans also shall show and list all the safety devices to be installed on the tank. 
(c)  The installation shall follow recognized industry standards for aboveground tanks and the requirements of NFPA 30 and NFPA 30A. 
(d)  Any person who installs underground flammable or combustible liquid storage tanks shall call for an inspection prior to covering the tank or piping. 
(e)  Installer shall call for a final inspection after completing the installation. The fire official shall require certain operational tests upon final inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 38-52. - Non-permanent fuel storage tanks in excess of 100 gallons. 
(a)  An annual permit for all non-permanent stationary aboveground flammable or combustible liquids storage tanks (AST) is required. The installation shall follow recognized industry standards for aboveground tanks and the requirements of NFPA 30 and NFPA 30A. 
(b)  Installation must me the requirements of the International Fire Code 2015 edition. 
(c)  Tanks must be listed for aboveground use. 
(d)  Exception: Tanks used for storage of Class IIIB combustible liquids (crankcase draining) and fuel tanks permanently mounted on licensed vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Secs. 38-53-38-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS OF THE FIRE PREVENTION CODE 

Sec. 38-56. - General requirements. 
(a)  No permit shall be issued to any individual or company who does not possess a then-current city business license related to the area of operation or business to be so permitted. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued to any individual or company who does not possess a then-current certificate of liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000.00 and list the city as the certificate holder. Sprinkler contractors shall also have Errors and Omissions and/or Professional Liability Coverage Endorsement on the insurance certificate. 
(c)  It shall be required that a copy of all annual or semi-annual inspection reports be submitted to the fire prevention division with any and all deficiencies clearly noted (to be submitted monthly). 
(d)  No person or company shall be issued a permit under this Code until such time as they show proof of then-current certification of training. 
(e)  Violation/penalties. Where work for which a permit is required by this Code commences prior to obtaining said permit, the permit fee herein specified shall be doubled. 
(f)  Re-inspection fee(s). A fee of $50.00 shall be paid for each re-inspection requested or required after the first re-inspection. 
(g)  Emergency repairs. Where equipment replacement and/or repairs must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted within the next business day at the fire official's office. 
(h)  Weekend and emergency inspections shall cost $50.00 for the first hour and $25.00 for each additional hour. Inspections needed as a result of a fire or other emergency will not be charged. 
(i)  Dothan Fire Department, Fire Prevention Division mailing address is 600 Columbia Hwy, Dothan, Alabama 36301. 
(j)  Payment. All checks and money orders shall be made payable to the City of Dothan. 
(k)  All installation permits shall automatically expire 90 days from the date of issuance. 
(l)  Permits are not transferable and any change in occupancy, operation, tenancy or ownership shall require that a new permit be issued. 
(m)  All private fire hydrants shall be color-coded in accordance with City of Dothan Guidelines, with these additional requirements: 
(1)  Marking on private hydrants. The barrel shall be painted in accordance with the city's guidelines and the bonnet shall be painted reflective yellow. 
(2)  All private hydrants shall have a control valve located and clearly marked near the hydrant. 
(3)  Four blue reflective markers shall be placed in a diamond pattern in the street for rapid identification at night. 
(n)  Maintenance of all private fire hydrants is the sole responsibility of the property owner. Any private fire hydrant found to be out-of-service shall be repaired immediately. The city will perform annual inspections of all private fire hydrants. 
(o)  Fire department connections (FDC) shall be located on the address side (front, or as otherwise specified) of all buildings. An exterior audible/visible device shall be installed in lieu of a water motor gong/bell. 
(p)  A copy of the permit and approved plans shall be on the job site. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Secs. 38-57-38-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FIREWORKS 

Sec. 38-66. - Possession and sale of fireworks. 
    No person, firm, or corporation shall possess, offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail, or use or explode any fireworks, except as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 38-67. - Definition. 
    Any composition or device for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, and which meets the definition of "consumer (Explosive's 1.4G)", "theatrical and novelty (Explosives 1.4S)" or "display (Explosive's 1.3G)" fireworks as set forth in the U.S. Department of Transportation's (DOT) Hazardous Materials Regulation, Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Parts 171-180. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 38-68. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Toy caps for use in toy pistols, toy canes, or toy guns, and novelties and pick noisemakers manufactured in accordance with DOT regulations, 49 CFR 173.100(p), and packed and shipped according to said regulations. 
(b)  Model rockets and model rocket motors designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling recoverable aero models. 
(c)  Propelling or expelling charges consisting of a mixture of sulfur, charcoal, saltpeter are not considered as designed to produce audible effects. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 38-69. - Permit required. 
    The city fire department shall be permitted to adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the licensing of individuals or granting of permits for supervised displays of fireworks by municipalities, fair associations, amusement parks, and other organizations or groups of individuals. Such permits shall be permitted to be granted upon application to the city fire department's fire prevention division and approval in accordance with the regulations for the display and filing of a bond by the individual filing the permit application. An inspection and/or determination by the fire department will be performed after application and before issuance of permit. (See NFPA 1126, Code for Fireworks Display and NFPA 1126, Standard for the Use of Pyrotechnics before a Proximate Audience.) 
    A competent operator, licensed or certified as to competency by the city fire department, shall handle every such display. Every such display shall be of such composition and character and shall be located, discharged, or fired so as, in the opinion of the board of commissioners, after proper site inspection, not to be hazardous to any person of property. After such privileges have been granted, sales, possession, use, and distribution of fireworks for such displays shall be lawful for that purpose only. No permit granted hereunder shall be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 38-70. - Proof of financial responsibility required. 
    Before any permit for a pyrotechnic display shall be issued, the person, firm, or corporation making application therefore shall furnish proof of financial responsibility to satisfy claims for damages to property or personal injuries arising out of any act or omission on the part of such person, firm, or corporation or any agent or employee thereof, in such amount, character, and form as the fire department determines to be necessary for the protection of the public. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 38-71. - Permitted uses. 
    Nothing in this law shall be construed to prohibit any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, at wholesale, of any fireworks for supervised displays by any approved resident manufacturer, wholesaler, dealer, or jobber, in accordance with regulations of the U.S. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms (see Title 27, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 181) and the U.S. Department of Transportation. 
(2)  The manufacture, transportation, or storage of fireworks at a manufacturing facility. The testing of fireworks under the direction of its manufacturer provided permission for such testing has been obtained from the authority having jurisdiction. 
(3)  The sale, transportation, handling, or use of industrial pyrotechnic devices or fireworks, such as railroad torpedoes, fuses, automotive, aeronautical and marine flares and smoke signals. 
(4)  The sale and use of blank cartridges for use in a show or theater; for signal or ceremonial purposes; in athletics or sports; or legal power tools. 
(5)  The transportation, handling, or use of any pyrotechnic devices by the Armed Forces of the United States. 
(6)  The use of pyrotechnics in training by the fire service, law enforcement, or similar government agencies. 
(7)  The use of fireworks for agricultural purposes under the direct supervision of the U.S. Department of the Interior or an equivalent state or local agency. [See Title 16, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 1500.17(a)(8)]. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 38-72. - Authority. 
    The authority having jurisdiction shall seize, take, remove, or cause to be removed at the expense of the owner all stocks of fireworks offered or exposed for sale or stored or held in violation of the law. The Dothan Police Bomb and Explosive Detail will destroy seized items in accordance with ATF Standards. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 38-73. - Violation. 
    Any person, firm, or corporation violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 38-74. - Severability. 
    Any provisions of this article held to be unconstitutional shall not invalidate the remainder thereof. Any acts, laws, or parts of laws in conflict with any provision of this law are hereby repealed to the extent of the conflict. 
(Ord. No. 2017-115, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Chapter 42 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; civil emergencies, ch. 26. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1-42-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-26. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined as follows, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application: 
    Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common loadbearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter loadbearing walls is new construction. 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the public works director's interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a variance. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
    Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 42-33 of this Code. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Building means any structure built for support, shelter or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations or storage of materials. 
    Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
    Existing construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before January 15, 1988. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed before January 15, 1988. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the: 
(1)  Overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  Unusual and rapid accumulation or run-off of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide and/or floodrelated erosion hazards. 
    Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
    Floodway (regulatory floodway) means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Floor means the top surface of an enclosed area in a building, including basement, i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles. 
    Functionally dependent facility means a facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose, unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair or seafood processing facilities. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales or service facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of the interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior, or 
b.  Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs. 
    Levee means a manmade structure; usually an earthen embankment designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices, to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this code. 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
    Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For the purposes of this article, the term is synonymous with North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88). 
    New construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed on or after January 15, 1988. 
    North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88) is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Remedy a violation means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the article or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
    Repetitive loss means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred. 
    Section 1316 : No new flood insurance shall be provided for any property which the administrator finds has been declared by a duly constituted state or local zoning authority or other authorized public body, to be in violation of state or local laws, regulations or ordinances which are intended to discourage or otherwise restrict land development or occupancy in floodprone areas. 
    Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure.) (Note: Accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means a walled or roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank or other manmade facilities or infrastructures. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. Substantial damage also means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "repetitive loss" or "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The market value of the building should be: 
(1)  The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
(2)  In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of an "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an "historic structure." 
    Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions means the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
    Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's flood-plain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) §44, Sec. 60.3 (b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) and corresponding parts of this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Code 1977, § 14-4; Ord. No. 99-44, § 1, 2-16-99; Ord. No. 2008-306, § 1, 10-21-08) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 42-27. - Authority. 
    Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-52-1 et seq. and 41-9-166 authorizes local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. 
(Code 1977, ch. 14, art. I) 
Sec. 42-28. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in hazards to property, health and safety and may disrupt commerce and governmental services. Also, this inundation can result in extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief and impairment of the tax base which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These potential flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains, causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other properties which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Code 1977, § 14-1) 
Sec. 42-29. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage; and 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2) 
Sec. 42-30. - Objectives. 
    The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, and streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood-blight areas; and 
(7)  Ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3) 
Sec. 42-31. - Lands to which article applies. 
    This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5) 
Sec. 42-32. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Code 1977, § 14-8) 
Sec. 42-33. - Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated December 16, 2005, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this ordinance. For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS and data for Houston, Dale, and Henry Counties are hereby adopted by reference. Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6; Ord. No. 99-44, § 1, 2-16-99; Ord. No. 2002-343, § 1, 11-19-02; Ord. No. 2005-272, § 1, 9-27-05) 
Sec. 42-34. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Code 1977, § 14-9) 
Sec. 42-35. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the board of commissioners; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Code 1977, § 14-10) 
Sec. 42-36. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made under this article. 
(Code 1977, § 14-11) 
Sec. 42-37. - Penalties for violation. 
    Violation of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-4 and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Code 1977, § 14-12) 
Secs. 42-38-42-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 42-66. - Designation of administrator. 
    The public works director is appointed to administer and implement this article. 
(Code 1977, § 14-13; Ord. No. 2008-306, § 2, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 42-67. - Duties and responsibilities of public works director generally. 
    The duties of the public works director under this article shall include but not be limited to: 
(1)  Reviewing all development permits to ensure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied and assure that sites are reasonably safe from flooding. 
(2)  Advising the permittee that additional federal or state permits may be required and, if specific federal or state permit requirements are known, requiring that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the development permit. 
(3)  Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), and the state department of economic and community affairs/office of water resources/national flood insurance program (ADECA-OWR-NFIP). 
(4)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to FEMA and ADECA-OWR-NFIP to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(5)  Verifying and recording the actual elevation, in relation to the mean sea level, of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures, in accordance with subsection 42-69(2). 
(6)  Verifying and recording the actual elevation, in relation to the mean sea level, to which the new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with subsection 42-69(2). 
(7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, the public works director shall obtain certification from a registered professional engineer or architect, in accordance with subsection 42-97(2). 
(8)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and the actual field conditions), the public works director shall make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation, as provided in this article. 
(9)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 42-33, the public works director shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer division 3 of this article. 
(10)  All records pertaining to this article shall be maintained in the office of the public works director and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Code 1977, § 14-14; Ord. No. 99-44, § 1,2-16-99; Ord. No. 2008-306, § 2, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 42-68. - Development permit required. 
    A development permit shall be required in conformance with this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Code 1977, § 14-7; Ord. No. 2008-306, § 2, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 42-69. - Permit procedures. 
    An application for a development permit required in section 42-68 shall be made to the public works director, on forms furnished by him prior to any development activities, and may include but not be limited to the following plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location of such. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  The elevation, in relation to the mean sea level, of the proposed lowest floor, including basement, of all structures; 
b.  The elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria in subsection 42-97(2); and 
d.  A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development. 
(2)  Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level using appropriate FEMA elevation or floodproofing certificate immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any regulatory floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
(Code 1977, § 14-14; Ord. No. 99-44, § 1,2-16-99; Ord. No. 2008-306, § 2, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 42-70 - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The board of zoning adjustment, as established by the city, shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The board of zoning adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the public works director in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person or any taxpayer aggrieved by the decision of the board of zoning adjustment may appeal such decision to the circuit court, as provided in Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-81. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  In passing upon such applications, the board of zoning adjustment shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this article and the: 
(1)  Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(2)  Danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)  Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(4)  Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(5)  Necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, for a functionally dependent facility; 
(6)  Availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
(7)  Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(8)  Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
(9)  Safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(10)  Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(11)  Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
(f)  Upon consideration of the factors listed in subsections (e) and (g) of this section and the purposes of this article, the board of zoning adjustment may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(g)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(h)  Conditions for variances shall be as follows: 
(1)  The provisions of this section are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon a: 
a.  Showing of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice, specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The public works director shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(Code 1977, § 14-16; Ord. No. 99-44, § 1, 2-16-99; Ord. No. 2008-306, § 2, 10-21-08) 
Secs. 42-71-42-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 42-96. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard, the following are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include but are not limited to the use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(3)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(5)  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(6)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate the infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(7)  New and replacement sanitary sewer systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate the infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(8)  Onsite waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(9)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this section, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(10)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or floodresistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic floor forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this section, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(Code 1977, § 14-17; Ord. No. 99-44, § 1, 2-16-99; Ord. No. 2008-306, § 3, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 42-97. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data have been provided, as set forth in section 42-33 or subsection 42-67(9), the following are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 42-96(10). 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction or the substantial improvement of any nonresidential structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in subsection 42-67(7). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved: 
1.  On individual lots or parcels; 
2.  In new or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; 
3.  In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or 
4.  On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement (Refer to section 42-96). 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, fully licensed and ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions; or 
2.  Meet all the requirements for "new construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsections 42-97(3)a. and c., above. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 42-33, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity flood waters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  The community shall select and adopt a regulatory floodway based on the principle that the area chosen for the regulatory floodway must be designed to carry the waters of the base flood, without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one foot at any point. 
b.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
c.  A community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM and floodway revision, fulfills the requirements for such revisions as established under the provisions of [the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 44, § 65.12] and receives the approval of the administrator. 
d.  Require, until a regulatory floodway is designated, that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
e.  Only if subsection 42-97(4)(b), (c), or (d) above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of sections 42-96 and 42-97 of this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 14-19; Ord. No. 99-44, § 1, 2-16-99; Ord. No. 2008-306, § 3, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 42-98. - Standards for streams without established base flood elevations and floodways. 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard, established in section 42-33, when small streams exist but where no base flood data have been provided or where no floodways have been provided, the following apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 42-33, then the public works director shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of section 42-96 and section 42-97. Only if data is not available from these sources, then the following provisions, subsections (2) and (3) below, shall apply. 
(2)  No enroachments, including fill material or structures, shall be located within a distance of the stream bank equal to five times the width of the stream at the top of the bank or 20 feet on each side from the top of bank, whichever is greater, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided, demonstrating that such encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 42-96(10). 
(Code 1977, § 14-19; Ord. No. 99-44, § 1, 2-16-99; Ord. No. 2008-306, § 3, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 42-99. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(b)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(c)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(d)  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres. 
(Code 1977, § 14-20; Ord. No. 2008-306, § 3, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 42-100. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
    Areas of special flood hazard established in section 42-33, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 42-96(10). The public works director shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus two feet, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in subsections 42-69(1)c. and 42-69(2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Code 1977, § 14-21; Ord. No. 99-44, § 1, 2-16-99; Ord. No. 2008-306, § 3, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 42-101. - Severability. 
    If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this article is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way effect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 99-44, § 2, 2-16-99; Ord. No. 2008-306, § 3, 10-21-08) 
Chapter 46 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Cemeteries, ch. 22; vegetation, ch. 106. 
State Law reference- Authority regarding health and cleanliness generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-130 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Rules and regulations of state board of health adopted. 
    The rules and regulations promulgated by the state board of health, in effect as of October 26, 1965, and as may be adopted or amended thereafter by the state board of health, the violation of which constitutes a misdemeanor, are adopted as laws of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 11-1) 
Sec. 46-2. - Inspections by board of health. 
    All water closets, privies, septic tanks, and public and private property within the corporate limits or police jurisdiction of the city shall be subject to inspection and investigation by the county board of health or its duly authorized representative, at all reasonable times. The board of health or its representative shall have the right to enter upon or into all property, premises or buildings at all reasonable times for the purpose of inspecting or investigating any matter or condition concerning or affecting sanitation or public health. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or in any manner attempt to prevent any such inspection or investigation. 
(Code 1977, § 11-2) 
Sec. 46-3. - Abatement of nuisances. 
(a)  All of the unlawful conditions defined in this chapter which are inimical to the public health are declared to be public nuisances per se, and if the owner or person in charge of any of the premises upon which such exist fails to abate the nuisance and make the premises completely sanitary within ten days after written notice by the county health officer or chief of police to do so, the city, at the discretion of the board of commissioners, may have such premises cleaned off or remove such unsanitary condition at the expense of the owner and assess the cost of the work as a lien against the property and proceed with the collection of such lien by due process of law. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section shall be cumulative in effect with respect to the authority and duty of the county health officer provided in Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-3-1 et seq. 
(Code 1977, §§ 11-3, 11-4) 
State Law reference- Nuisance abatement generally, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 6-5-122, 11-47-117. 
Sec. 46-4. - Abandoned refrigerators, trunks or airtight containers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building, dwelling or structure or within any unoccupied or abandoned building, dwelling or structure under his control, in a place accessible to any person, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator, trunk or any other container which has a cover, lid or door that when closed is sufficiently airtight so as to cause or be likely to cause death by suffocation of any person enclosed therein and that has a latch catch, lock or other device for keeping such cover, lid or door closed or which door, lid or cover is by weight or for other reason likely to imprison any person therein, without first rendering such icebox, refrigerator, trunk or other container safe for any person by removing therefrom such cover, lid or door. 
(Code 1977, § 11-23) 
Secs. 46-5-46-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER WELLS 

Sec. 46-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Repair and repairing mean and include, in addition to the acts and things usually embraced in such terms, the replacement of old parts and the cleaning, extending or enlarging of any well. 
(Code 1977, § 11-5) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 46-32. - Permit for construction. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dig, drill, bore, construct or enlarge any well for the withdrawal of water in the city until a permit has been obtained as provided in this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, tenant or one having charge of property upon which a well is located to make or cause to be made or permit to continue to exist any physical connection between a well and its pumping system and the water distribution system of the city. Valving check, manual or automatic, placed between the private supply and the city distribution system shall not constitute satisfactory compliance with this section. 
(Code 1977, § 11-6) 
Sec. 46-33. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Any person desiring to dig, drill, bore, construct or enlarge any well for the withdrawal of water in the city shall, before commencing such work, make application for the permit as required in this article. 
(b)  The application shall be made in writing, subscribed and sworn to by the person owning the premises on which the well is located or proposed to be located or by an officer of the corporation owning the premises on which the well is located or proposed to be located, and also by the person having charge of the actual work of digging, drilling, boring, constructing or enlarging such well. 
(c)  The application shall be made on such form as may be prescribed and furnished by the city engineer and shall contain complete and accurate information with respect to the size, depth, location, approximate capacity, ownership and use of such well and any other pertinent information, including a statement of the purpose for which the supply from such well is to be used and where the surplus or overflow water is to be discharged. It shall be unlawful for any person to make any false or misleading statement in any such application. 
(Code 1977, § 11-7) 
Sec. 46-34. - Permit fee. 
    A fee of $5.00 shall be collected by the city for issuing each permit for water well drilling, boring, constructing or enlarging. 
(Code 1977, § 11-9) 
Sec. 46-35. - Permit to specify work authorized; failure to comply. 
    Each permit issued as required in the section 46-32 shall specify clearly the work which is authorized to be done, and it shall be unlawful for any person to dig, drill, bore, construct or enlarge any well in the city for the withdrawal of water contrary to or not authorized by the terms of the permit issued for the work. 
(Code 1977, § 11-8) 
Sec. 46-36. - Permit conditions. 
(a)  Approval required. No permit shall be issued to dig, drill, bore, construct or enlarge any well for the withdrawal of water except upon the recommendation of the water and electric superintendent and the approval of the city manager. 
(b)  Use as discharging point. It is unlawful and dangerous to the public health for any well within the city to be employed as a discharge point for any waste of any kind: liquid, inorganic or organic. 
(c)  Industrial plants. Industrial plants using wells for industrial water and water from the city distribution system for human use and consumption, shall, in addition to maintaining complete physical separation of the two supplies, properly identify all pipes carrying the industrial supply, as approved by the water superintendent. 
(d)  Removal from city distribution system. If any private well system is not in compliance with this article, the water superintendent is empowered and directed to disconnect and remove in an appropriate manner the property served by the well system from the city distribution system. 
(e)  Covering and screening of wells and cisterns. The owner or proprietor of any lot or parcel of ground within the city, upon which is located a well or cistern, shall be required to keep such well or cistern securely covered for the protection of anyone coming upon the property and to protect from surface water and contamination. Such covering shall be of concrete or other sanitary material, subject to the approval of the water superintendent. However, the covering and protection required in this subsection shall not be construed to prevent the owner or proprietor from maintaining a sufficient opening through which to draw, pump or otherwise remove water from such well or cistern. Such opening is to be screened or covered so as to prevent the entrance of mosquitoes. 
(f)  Filling dangerous wells. When, in the opinion of the water superintendent, a private well system fails to meet any of the conditions set out in this article or if it is so poorly maintained and protected as to allow a danger to animals and children and is further considered to be a menace to public health, the well shall be ordered to be filled in a manner approved by the health officer and the city engineer, in accordance with the state department of environmental management regulations. 
(g)  Abandoned wells. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having control over any parcel of real property within the corporate limits upon which the parcel of real property is located any abandoned well to allow or permit the well to remain open. It shall be the duty of any such person who owns or has control over such property to completely and adequately seal such abandoned well in such a manner that there will be no danger from the abandoned well to any person who may come upon the property, whether their entry upon the property is lawful or otherwise. 
(h)  Bond required of persons engaged in business of well construction. It shall be the duty of every person licensed to engage in the business of digging, drilling, boring, constructing or enlarging any well used or to be used for the withdrawal or securing of water in the city to be bonded by the state in accordance with the Rules, Regulations, and Standards and Rules of Practice and Procedure adopted by the Alabama Water Well Standards Board on October 12, 1972, and amended on March 8, 1974, and July 18, 1978, in accordance with Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-24-1 et seq. 
(i)  Reports. Any person who engages in the digging, drilling, boring, constructing or enlarging of any well in the city shall maintain complete legible and neat logs of each permanent well. A report shall be forwarded to the water department within 30 days of completion of the well or completion of the work on the well in accordance with requirements of state regulations in subsection (h) of this section. 
(Code 1977, § 11-10) 
Secs. 46-37-46-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SALE OF PRODUCE FROM TEMPORARY STRUCTURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18. 

Sec. 46-66. - Certificate from city required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any fruit or vegetable produce in any temporary structure located within the city without having first obtained a certificate from the city engineer or building official that the temporary structure in which such fruit or vegetable produce is displayed or sold complies with the minimum requirements specified in section 46-68. 
(Code 1977, § 11-11) 
Sec. 46-67. - Certificate prerequisite to license. 
    No city privilege license shall be issued to any person for the sale of any fruit or vegetable produce at any temporary structure within the city unless the certificate required in section 46-66 is presented to the city clerk at the time of application for such license. 
(Code 1977, § 11-12) 
Sec. 46-68. - Minimum requirements. 
    Minimum requirements for a temporary structure under this article shall be as follows: 
(1)  There shall be a roof supported by 11/2-inch by 31/2-inch studs with studs no more than 24 inches apart. 
(2)  There shall be a cement or proper wood floor with the floor under restrooms made of concrete. If refrigeration is approved by the health department for use in produce and fruit stands, the floor under the refrigeration units must be of concrete except upon the approval of the health department of home-type refrigerators. 
(3)  The walls may be open or of screen or wire, except for restrooms. 
(4)  A building permit is required and must meet all health department, city, county and state applicable regulations governing the intended operation. 
(Code 1977, § 11-12.1) 
Secs. 46-69-46-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SMOKING POLLUTION CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2003-303, § 1, adopted Oct. 21, 2003, amended art. IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. IV, §§ 46-96-46-109, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1977, §§ 11-40-11-53. 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; law enforcement, ch. 54; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 62. 

Sec. 46-96. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Protect the public health and welfare by prohibiting smoking in public places, except in designated smoking areas, and by regulating smoking in places of employment; and 
(2)  Strike a reasonable balance between the needs of persons who smoke and the needs of nonsmokers to breath smoke-free air and to recognize that, where these needs conflict, the need to breathe smoke-free air shall have priority. 
(Ord. No. 2003-303, § 1, 10-21-03) 
Sec. 46-97. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bar or cocktail lounge means any establishment which is primarily engaged in the business of selling and dispensing alcoholic beverages. 
    Business means any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other business entity formed for profit-making purposes, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold as well as professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural or other professional services are delivered. 
    Dining area means any enclosed area containing a counter or tables upon which meals are served. 
    Employee means any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and any person who volunteers his or her services for a nonprofit entity. 
    Employer means any person, including a municipal corporation, or nonprofit entity who employs the services of one or more individual persons. 
    Minor means a person who is not at least 19 years of age. 
    Nonprofit entity means any corporation, unincorporated association or other entity created for charitable, philanthropic, educational, character building, political, social or other similar purposes, the net proceeds from the operation of which are committed to the promotion of the objects or purposes of the organization and not to private financial gain. A public agency is not a nonprofit entity within the meaning of this article. 
    Place of employment means any enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer in which employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including but not limited to work areas, employee lounges and restrooms, conference and classrooms, employee cafeterias and hallways. 
(1)  A private residence is not a place of employment unless it is used as a childcare or health care facility. 
(2)  The dining area of a restaurant is not a place of employment. 
    Public place means any enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including but not limited to city-owned facilities, banks, educational facilities, health facilities, public transportation facilities, reception areas, restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, theaters and waiting rooms. A private residence is not a public place. 
    Restaurant means any coffee shop, cafeteria, sandwich stand, private and public school cafeteria, and any other eating establishment which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests or employees, as well as kitchens in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere, including catering facilities, except that the term "restaurant" shall not include a cocktail lounge or tavern if the cocktail lounge or tavern is a bar as defined in this section. 
    Retail tobacco store means a retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. 
    Separated bar area means a room or area where alcohol is served that is totally enclosed by a solid floor to ceiling wall, is adequately ventilated and equipped with a self-closing door. 
    Service line means any indoor line at which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not such service involves the exchange of money. 
    Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, weed, plant or other combustible substance in any manner or in any form. 
    Smoking establishment means any restaurant which permits patrons to smoke throughout the entire facility. Smoking establishments shall not provide separate nonsmoking areas. 
    Sport arena means sports pavilion, gymnasium, health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool, roller and ice rink, bowling alley and other similar places where members of the general public assemble either to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition or witness sports events. 
(Ord. No. 2003-303, § 1, 10-21-03) 
Sec. 46-98. - Application of article to city-owned facilities. 
    All enclosed facilities owned by the city shall be designated as no smoking except in designated smoking areas. 
(Ord. No. 2003-303, § 1, 10-21-03) 
Sec. 46-99. - Smoking in public places. 
(a)  Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed places within the city, including but not limited to the following places and with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Elevators. 
(2)  Buses, taxicabs and other means of public transit under the authority of the city; and ticket, boarding and waiting areas of public transit depots. However, this prohibition does not prevent the establishment of separate waiting areas of equal size for smokers and nonsmokers 
(3)  Restrooms. 
(4)  Service lines. 
(5)  Retail stores, except areas in such stores not open to the public and all areas within tobacco stores. 
(6)  All areas available to and customarily used by the general public in all city-owned facilities, nonprofit entities and businesses patronized by the public. See subsection 46-101(a)(7). 
(7)  Restaurants. A restaurant may have a separated bar area in which smoking is permitted. 
(8)  Public areas of aquariums, galleries, libraries and museums when open to the public. 
(9)  Any building not open to the sky which is primarily used for exhibiting any motion picture, stage, drama, lecture, musical recital or other similar performance, except when smoking is part of a stage production. 
(10)  Sports arenas (enclosed) and convention halls, except in designated smoking areas. 
(11)  Every room, chamber, place of meeting or public assembly, including school buildings under the control of any board, council, commission, committee, including joint committees, or agencies of the city or any political subdivision of the state during such time as a public meeting is in progress, to the extent such place is subject to the jurisdiction of the city. 
(12)  Waiting rooms, hallways, wards and semiprivate rooms of health facilities, including but not limited to hospitals, clinics, physical therapy facilities, doctors' offices and dentists' offices. 
(13)  Polling places. 
(14)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any owner, operator, manager or other person who controls any establishment or facility described in this section may declare that entire establishment or facility as a nonsmoking establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2003-303, § 1, 10-21-03) 
Sec. 46-100. - Places of employment. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of employers to provide smoke-free areas for nonsmoking employees within existing facilities to the maximum extent possible, but employers are not required to incur any expense to make structural or other physical modifications in providing these areas. 
(b)  Each employer having an enclosed place of employment located within the city shall adopt, implement, make known and maintain a written smoking policy which shall contain at a minimum the following: 
(1)  Any employee in a place of employment shall have the right to designate his work area as a nonsmoking area and to post the area with an appropriate sign, to be provided by the employer. If, due to the proximity of smokers, size of the work area, poor ventilation or other factors, such designation does not reduce the effects of smoke to the satisfaction of the employee, the employer shall make additional accommodation by expanding the size of the work area subject to the prohibition against smoking or implementing other measures reasonably designed to eliminate the effects of smoke on the employee. 
(2)  Smoking shall be prohibited in all common work areas in a place of employment, unless every person who works in that area agrees in writing that a smoking area will be designated. 
(3)  There shall be provided and maintained separate and contiguous nonsmoking areas of not less than 50 percent of the seating capacity and floor space in cafeterias, lunchrooms and employee lounges or provision and maintenance of separate and equal sized cafeterias, lunchrooms and employee lounges for smokers and nonsmokers. 
(4)  Employers have the right to designate smoking areas within their facilities so long as it does not infringe on the rights of nonsmokers. 
(5)  If any dispute arises under the smoking policy, the health concerns of the nonsmoker shall be given precedence. 
(c)  The smoking policy shall be communicated to all employees within three weeks of its adoption. 
(d)  All employers shall supply a written copy of the smoking policy upon request to any existing or prospective employee. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, every employer shall have the right to designate any place of employment or any portion thereof as a nonsmoking area. 
(Ord. No. 2003-303, § 1, 10-21-03) 
Sec. 46-101. - Exceptions to restrictions. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other section of this article to the contrary, the following areas shall not be subject to the smoking restrictions of this article: 
(1)  Bars, cocktail lounges or taverns which prohibit the admission of minors. 
(2)  Private residences, except when used as a childcare or health care facility. 
(3)  Hotel and motel rooms rented to guests. 
(4)  Retail tobacco stores and tobacco processors. 
(5)  A restaurant which elects to become a "smoking establishment" provided they comply with the requirements of 46-102(b). 
(6)  Hotel and motel conference or meeting rooms and public and private assembly rooms while these places are being used for private functions. 
(7)  A private, enclosed office, if all persons present consent, and further provided that this exception shall not be construed to permit smoking in the reception areas of lobbies or offices. This exception does not apply to city-owned facilities. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any owner, operator, manager or other person who controls any establishment described in this section may declare that entire establishment as a nonsmoking establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2003-303, § 1, 10-21-03) 
Sec. 46-102. - Posting of signs. 
(a)  No smoking signs, with letters of not less than 5/8 inch (approximately 66 points) in height or the international "no smoking" symbol, consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it, shall be clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted in every building or other place where smoking is regulated by this article by the owner, operator, manager or other person having control of such building or other place. 
(b)  If a restaurant elects to be a smoking establishment they must display signs at all entrances identifying the business as a smoking establishment with letters of not less than 5/8 inch (approximately 66 points) in height and the signs shall include the notice that smoking is allowed throughout the establishment and that there is no non-smoking section, in letters not less than 1/4 inch in height (approximately 36 points). 
(c)  Every theater owner, manager or operator shall conspicuously post signs in the lobby stating that smoking is prohibited within the theater or auditorium, and, for motion picture theaters, such information shall be shown upon the screen for at least five seconds prior to the showing of each feature motion picture. 
(d)  Every restaurant shall have posted at every entrance a sign inconformity with section (a) or (b) above clearly stating that smoking is prohibited or that a restaurant is a smoking establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2003-303, § 1, 10-21-03) 
Sec. 46-103. - Enforcement. 
(a)  This article is enforceable by any duly sworn police officer employed by the city, the county health officer or a duly authorized representative thereof, or as otherwise allowed by law for prosecution of offenses. 
(b)  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this article may initiate enforcement with the department of health. 
(c)  The fire department or the health department shall require, while an establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections, a self-certification from the owner, manager, operator or other person having control of such establishment that all requirements of this article have been complied with. 
(d)  Any owner, manager, operator or employee of any establishment regulated by this article may inform any person violating this article of the appropriate provisions of this article. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, a private citizen may bring legal action to enforce this article. 
Sec. 46-104. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the use of any premises subject to regulation under this article to fail to comply with any of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any area where smoking is prohibited by this article. 
(c)  Any person who violates this article is subject to summons by the department of health or a police officer to appear in municipal court to answer the charges punishable by: 
(1)  A fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation. 
(2)  A fine not exceeding $200.00 or 80 hours of community service with a charitable organization, designated by the court, or both the fine and community service for a second violation of this article within one year. 
(Ord. No. 2003-303, § 1, 10-21-03) 
Sec. 46-105. - Nonretaliation. 
    No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner retaliate against any employee or applicant for employment because such employee or applicant exercises any rights afforded by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2003-303, § 1, 10-21-03) 
Sec. 46-106. - Notification requirements. 
    Restaurants shall notify the City of Dothan Business License Division in writing of their status (smoke-free or smoking) within 30 days of the passage of Ordinance No. 2003-303. If within 90 days of their initial status choice (smoke-free or smoking) a restaurant wishes to change their status (smoke-free or smoking) they may do so in writing by notifying the business license division. Thereafter if a restaurant wishes to change their status (smoke-free or smoking) they may do so in writing only at the time they renew/purchase the business license. There is no fee associated with the initial election or change in smoking status. 
(Ord. No. 2003-303, § 1, 10-21-03) 
Sec. 46-107. - Governmental agency cooperation. 
    The board of commissioners shall annually request other governmental and educational agencies having facilities within the city to establish local operating procedures in cooperation and compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2003-303, § 1, 10-21-03) 
Sec. 46-108. - Effect of other applicable laws. 
    This article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 2003-303, § 1, 10-21-03) 
Sec. 46-109. - Education. 
    The department of health shall develop a program to inform citizens of this article and to assist owners, operators and managers to comply. 
(Ord. No. 2003-303, § 1, 10-21-03) 
Chapter 50 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14. 
State Law reference- Historic preservation generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-68-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
    Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure, including but not limited to the kind of texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to such. 
    Exterior environmental features means all those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affect the historical character of the property. 
    Historic district means a geographically definable area designated by the board of commissioners as a historic district. 
    Historic property means an individual building, structure, site, object or work including the adjacent area necessary for the property appreciation thereof designated by the board of commissioners as a historic property. 
    Material change in appearance means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any building, structure, site, object, landscape feature or work of art within a historic district, such as: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
(2)  Demolition or relocation of a historic structure; 
(3)  Commencement or excavation for construction purposes; 
(4)  A change in the location or advertising visible from the public right-of-way; or 
(5)  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal of any building or other structure within a historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements or other appurtenant features. 
(Code 1977, § 11.1-2) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 50-2. - Purpose. 
    The board of commissioners declares it to be the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, landscape features and works of art having a special historical, cultural or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with this chapter: 
(1)  In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of the city is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people; 
(2)  In order to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historical and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business; and 
(3)  In order to provide for the designation, protection, preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts and to participate in federal or state programs to do the same. 
(Code 1977, § 11.1-1) 
Sec. 50-3. - Affirmation of building and zoning codes. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to exempt property owners from complying with existing city building and zoning codes or to prevent any property owner from making use of his property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(Code 1977, § 11.1-71) 
Sec. 50-4. - Penalty. 
    Violation of any section of this chapter shall be punished in the same manner as provided for punishment of violations of other validly enacted ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 11.1-81) 
Secs. 50-5-50-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Commission generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-68-2 et seq.; powers and duties generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-68-5. 

Sec. 50-31. - Created. 
    There is created a commission whose title shall be "City of Dothan Historic Preservation Commission" (hereafter "commission" in this chapter). 
(Code 1977, § 11.1-11) 
Sec. 50-32. - Composition; appointment; compensation; rules and standards. 
(a)  The historic preservation commission shall consist of ten (10) members. The mayor, each associate commissioner, the Downtown Group, the Dothan Landmarks Foundation and the Wiregrass Festival of Murals shall each recommend one (1) member. The mayor shall then nominate the members of the commission who shall be appointed by the legislative body. All members shall have voting privileges. All members shall be bona fide residents of the city or the territorial jurisdiction of the city who have demonstrated experience in history, archaeology, planning, architecture or law or who shall be residents of a historic district. 
(b)  Except for the original members of the commission, members of the commission shall serve three (3) year terms and shall be appointed in such a manner so as to serve overlapping terms. Two (2) of the original members of the commission shall be appointed to serve one (1) year terms, two (2) of the original members of the commission shall be appointed to serve two (2) year terms, and the remainder of the original members of the commission shall be appointed to serve three (3) year terms. Members of the commission may be reappointed. The board of commissioners may remove any member of the historic preservation board by a majority vote. 
(c)  Members shall receive no compensation for service on the commission. Members may, however, be reimbursed for reasonable business related expenses incurred on behalf of the commission. 
(d)  Members of the commission shall elect a chairperson, a vice-chairperson and such other officers as it may deem appropriate. The commission shall adopt rules and by-laws, copies of which shall be provided to the city clerk. 
(e)  The commission may adopt rules and standards without amendment of this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 11.1-12; Ord. No. 2009-314, § 1, 9-22-09; Ord. No. 2014-25, § 2, 2-4-14) 
Sec. 50-33. - Meetings, minutes and public participation. 
(a)  All meetings of the historic preservation commission must be publicly announced and be open to the public. Commission meetings must occur at regular intervals. Public notice must be provided prior to any special meetings. 
(b)  Minutes of all decisions and actions of the commission, including the reasons for making these decisions, must be kept on file and available for public inspection. 
(c)  All decisions of the commission shall be made in a public forum, and applicants must be given written notification of the commission's decision. 
(d)  The rules of procedure adopted by the commission must be available for public inspection. 
(e)  During the process of reviewing properties for nomination to the National Register, the commission must provide opportunity for public comments. 
(Code 1977, § 11.1-13) 
Sec. 50-34. - Responsibilities of members. 
    Each historic preservation commission member and anyone serving the commission in a technical/professional staff capacity is required to attend at least two informational or education meetings per year pertaining to historic preservation. Such meetings may include those sponsored by the Alabama Historical Commission, Board of Advisors, the National Trust for Historic Preservation or a local preservation organization. One of the two should be a regional or statewide meeting. 
(Code 1977, § 11.1-25) 
Sec. 50-35. - Duties. 
    The duties of the historic preservation commission shall be as follows: 
(1)  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the city having the potential for designation as historic property. 
(2)  Recommend to the board of commissioners specific places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects or works of art to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts. 
(3)  Review applications for certificates of appropriateness and grant or deny such in accordance with this chapter. 
(4)  Recommend to the board of commissioners that the designation of any place, district, site, building, structure, objects or work of art as a historic property or as a historic district be revoked or removed. 
(5)  Restore and preserve any historic properties acquired by the city or acquired by the commission. 
(6)  Promote the acquisition by the city of facade easements and conservation easements. 
(7)  Develop and conduct educational programs on historic properties located within the city and on general historic preservation activities. 
(8)  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation including employment of historic preservation experts the board of commissioners or the commission itself may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources. 
(9)  Seek out local, state, federal and private funds for historic preservation and make recommendations to the board of commissioners concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired. 
(10)  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the city historic preservation program. 
(11)  Employ persons, if necessary, to carry out the responsibilities of the commission. 
(12)  Receive donations, grants, funds or gifts of historic property. 
(13)  Purchase, sell, contract to purchase, contract to sell, own, encumber, lease, mortgage and insure real and personal property in carrying out the purposes and responsibilities of the commission. The commission shall not obligate the city without prior consent. 
(14)  Review and make comments to the Alabama Historical Commission concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places. 
(15)  Investigate, survey and assist the Alabama Historical Commission in processing nominations or properties to the National Register of Historic Places. 
(16)  Investigate, survey and assist the Alabama Historical Commission in processing applications for certification of historic properties for tax credits for preservation expenditures. 
(17)  Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and with the consent of the city, enter into agreements with such programs to perform historic preservation related functions. 
(Code 1977, § 11.1-21) 
Sec. 50-36. - Annual reports of activities. 
    The historic preservation commission shall prepare and file with the board of commissioners and with the Alabama Historical Commission an annual report of its activities as required by the board of commissioners and the Alabama Historical Commission. The annual report shall cover the period from October 1 to September 30 and shall be submitted in October of each year. The report shall include such items as the number of cases reviewed, historic district and property designations made, revised resumes of commission members/staff, appointments to the commission, attendance records and all minutes relating to the review of the National Register nominations. The report shall document attendance at the orientation/training session as specified in section 50-38. 
(Code 1977, § 11.1-22) 
Sec. 50-37. - Conflict of interest. 
    At any time the historic preservation commission reviews a project in which a member of the commission has ownership or other vested interest, that member will be forbidden from presenting, voting or discussing the project, other than answering a direct question. 
(Code 1977, § 11.1-23) 
Sec. 50-38. - Records of meetings. 
    A public record shall be kept of the historic preservation commission's resolutions, proceedings and actions. 
(Code 1977, § 11.1-24) 
Sec. 50-39. - Liaison with state historic preservation office. 
    If the board of commissioners elects to become a certified local government, the board of commissioners shall designate a paid member to the city's staff or a person working under contract as a source of technical/administrative/professional assistance to be responsible for the operations of the historic preservation commission in keeping with the requirements of certification for participation in the certified local government program. At least one member of the commission or the person serving as the commission's technical staff or representative appointed by the mayor, who has an ongoing relationship with the commission, will attend the Alabama Certified Local Government orientation/training session sponsored by the Alabama Historical Commission each year. 
(Code 1977, § 11.1-26) 
Secs. 50-40-50-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RECOMMENDATION AND DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC DISTRICTS AND PROPERTIES 

Sec. 50-66. - Preliminary research. 
(a)  Survey of local historical resources. The historic preservation commission shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources with the city. 
(b)  Recommendation of districts and buildings for designation. The historic preservation commission shall present to the board of commissioners recommendations for historic districts and properties. 
(c)  Documentation of proposed designation. Prior to the historic preservation commission's recommendation of a historic district or historic property to the board of commissioners for designation, the commission shall prepare a report consisting of: 
(1)  A physical description; 
(2)  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and aesthetic significance; 
(3)  A map showing district boundaries and classification (i.e., historic, nonhistoric, intrusive) or individual properties therein or showing boundaries of individual historic properties; 
(4)  A statement justifying district or individual property boundaries; and 
(5)  Representative photographs. 
(Code 1977, § 11.1-31) 
Sec. 50-67. - Designation of historic district. 
(a)  Criteria for selection. An historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects, landscape features and works of art or a combination thereof that: 
(1)  Are associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of our history; 
(2)  Are associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; 
(3)  Embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method of construction or represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or 
(4)  Have yielded or may be likely to yield information important in prehistory or history. 
(b)  Boundaries. Boundaries of all historic districts shall be shown on a map to be entitled "Historic Districts and Properties of Dothan, Alabama." This map shall be maintained as a public record by the city engineer. 
(c)  Evaluation of properties. Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as: 
(1)  Historic (contributes to the district). 
(2)  Nonhistoric (does not contribute but does not detract from the district). 
(3)  Intrusive (detracts from the district). 
(Code 1977, § 11.1-32) 
Sec. 50-68. - Designation of historic property. 
(a)  Criteria for selection. An historic property is a building, structure, site, object, work of art, including the adjacent area necessary for the property appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the city because the building, structure, site, object or work of art: 
(1)  Is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of our history; 
(2)  Is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; 
(3)  Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method of construction or that represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or 
(4)  Has yielded or may be likely to yield information important in prehistory or history. 
(b)  Location. Locations of historic properties shall be shown on the historic districts and properties map of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 11.1-33) 
Sec. 50-69. - Requirements for adopting ordinance for designation of historic districts and historic properties. 
(a)  Application. Designations for adopting ordinance for designation of historic districts and historic properties may be proposed by the board of commissioners, the historic preservation commission or: 
(1)  For historic districts, a historical society, neighborhood association or group of property owners may apply to the commission for designation; 
(2)  For historic properties, a historical society, neighborhood association or property owner may apply to the commission for designation. 
(b)  Required components of ordinance. Any ordinance designating any property or district as historic shall: 
(1)  List each property in a proposed historic district or describe the proposed individual historic property; 
(2)  Set forth the name of the owner of the designated property or properties; 
(3)  Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property; and 
(4)  Require that the property or district be shown on the historic districts and properties map of the city. 
(c)  Public hearings. The historic preservation commission shall hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district or property. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three consecutive issues in the principal newspaper of local circulation, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten or more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last known owner of the property shown on the Houston County, Dale County or Henry County tax roll and a notice sent via United States mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this chapter. 
(d)  Recommendations on proposed designations. A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the historic preservation commission within 15 days following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to the board of commissioners. 
(e)  Board of commissioners' action on recommendation. Following receipt of the historic preservation commission's recommendation, the board of commissioners may adopt the ordinance as proposed, may adopt the ordinance with any amendments it deems necessary or reject the ordinance. 
(f)  Notification of adoption of ordinance for designation. Within 30 days following the adoption of the ordinance for designation by the board of commissioners, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property and the owners and occupants of each structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district shall be given written notification of such designation by the board of commissioners, which notice shall apprise the owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last known owner of the property shown on the Houston County, Dale County or Henry County tax roll and a notice sent via United States mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this chapter. 
(g)  Notification of other agencies regarding designation. The historic preservation commission shall notify all municipal agencies within the city of the ordinance for designation. 
(h)  Moratorium on applications for alteration or demolition while ordinance for designation pending. If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the historic preservation commission shall have the power to freeze the status of the involved property. 
(Code 1977, § 11.1-34) 
Secs. 50-70-50-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS 

Sec. 50-96. - Required. 
(a)  Approval of alterations, demolitions or new construction. After the designation by ordinance of a historic property or of a historic district, no historic property may be demolished, no building or structure in a historic district may be erected or demolished and no material change in the exterior appearance of such property or of a structure, site, object or work of art within such historic district shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the historic preservation commission. 
(b)  Approval of new construction. The historic preservation commission shall issue certificates of appropriateness to new structures constructed within designated historic districts if these structures conform in design, scale, building materials, setback and landscaping to the character of the district specified in the design criteria developed by the historic preservation commission. 
(c)  Approval of signs. Signs shall be considered as structures, and no sign on a historic property or in a historic district shall be changed, erected or demolished unless and until a certificate of appropriateness is approved by the historic preservation commission. 
(d)  Approval of alteration or demolition. The requirement of a certificate of appropriateness shall apply to public property which has been designated as a historic property or which is contained in a historic district and shall apply to all actions by public authorities which involve historic properties and properties within historic districts. 
(e)  Color. Changes in exterior color shall require a certificate of appropriateness. 
(f)  Painting originally unpainted surfaces. The painting of originally unpainted surfaces shall require a certificate of appropriateness. 
(g)  Interior alterations. In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the historic preservation commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features. 
(h)  Failure to maintain historic property. Demolition by neglect and the failure to maintain a historic property or a structure in a historic district shall constitute a change for which a certificate of appropriateness is necessary. 
(Code 1977, § 11.1-41) 
Sec. 50-97. - Approval. 
(a)  Guidelines and criteria. The historic preservation commission shall adopt rules and regulations setting forth the procedure for submission and consideration of applications for certificates of appropriateness. The historic preservation commission shall also adopt general design standards which shall apply in considering the granting and denial of certificates of appropriateness. Design standards shall be in compliance with the Secretary of the Interior's "Standards for Historic Preservation Projects" including the Secretary's "Standards for Rehabilitation." 
(b)  Submission of plans. An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by such drawings, photographs, plans or other documentation as may be required by the historic preservation commission. Applications involving demolition or relocation shall be accompanied by post-demolition or relocation plans for the site. 
(c)  Criteria for issuance. 
(1)  The historic preservation commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic or architectural significance and value of the historic property or of the historic district. In making this determination, the historic preservation commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the historical and architectural value and significance, architectural style, general design arrangement, texture and material of the architectural features involved and the relationship thereof to the exterior architectural style and pertinent features of the other structures in the immediate neighborhood. 
(2)  The historic preservation commission shall deny a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change in appearance would have substantial adverse effects on the aesthetic, historic or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. The commission shall not grant certificates of appropriateness for demolition or relocation without reviewing at the same time the post-demolition or post-relocation plans for the site. 
(d)  Public meetings and hearings. Applications for certificates of appropriateness shall be considered by the historic preservation commission at public meetings monthly at a regular time to be established by the commission. At least seven days prior to review of a certificate of appropriateness, the commission shall take such action as may reasonably be required to inform the owners of any property likely to be affected because of the application and shall give the applicant and such owners an opportunity to be heard. When the commission deems it necessary, it may hold a public hearing concerning the application. All meetings shall be open to the public. 
(e)  Deadline for approval or rejection of application. 
(1)  The historic preservation commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of a historic property or of a historic structure, site, object or work of art located within a historic district. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission. Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by United States mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the commission. 
(2)  Failure of the commission to act within the 45 days shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(f)  Rejection of application. 
(1)  If the historic preservation commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. 
(2)  When the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure that would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the commission shall be binding upon the building inspector or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits, and, in such cases, no building permit shall be issued. 
(g)  Appeals. Any person having a request for a certificate of appropriateness denied by the historic preservation commission or architectural review board as hereinafter provided, may appeal such denial to the circuit court of the county in which the commission exists. (Code of Alabama 1975, § 11-68-10 et. seq.) 
(h)  Recording of applications. The historic preservation commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness and of all the commission's proceedings in connection with the application. 
(Code 1977, § 11.1-42; Ord. No. 2007-222, § 1, 6-26-07) 
Sec. 50-98. - Compliance. 
(a)  All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness issued under this article shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. If work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the historic preservation commission shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. 
(b)  The board of commissioners or the historic preservation commission shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with this chapter or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. 
(c)  A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within six months of the date of issuance. Certificates of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of 18 months and are renewable. 
(Code 1977, § 11.1-43) 
Sec. 50-99. - Technical advice. 
    The historic preservation commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any application submitted under this article. 
(Code 1977, § 11.1-44) 
Secs. 50-100-50-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MAINTENANCE OF HISTORIC PROPERTIES 

Sec. 50-126. - Expedited review procedures for approval of routine maintenance. 
    The historic preservation commission may adopt expedited review procedures for approval of routine maintenance to historic properties or to buildings or structures in historic districts. Routine maintenance to historic properties includes ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on a historic property to correct deterioration, decay or damage or to sustain the existing form that does not involve a material change in design, material or outer appearance. Expedited review procedures shall waive the requirements for submission of an application for a certificate of appropriateness and for consideration at a public meeting. 
(Code 1977, § 11.1-51) 
Sec. 50-127. - Failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
    Property owners of historic properties or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The historic preservation commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect: 
(1)  The commission shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Such conditions as broken windows, doors and openings which allow the elements and vermin to enter; the deterioration of exterior architectural features; or the deterioration of a building's structural system shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
(2)  If the commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the commission will notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps which will need to be taken to remedy the situation. The owner of such property will have 90 days in which to initiate this. 
(3)  If the condition is not met in 90 days, the owner shall be punished as provided in section 50-4 and, at the direction of the board of commissioners, the commission may perform such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration by neglect. The owner of the property shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair performed by the commission. 
(Code 1977, § 11.1-52) 
Chapter 54 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-181 et seq.; alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; animals, ch. 10; settlement procedures for minor animal control violations, § 10-81 et seq.; moving buildings, § 14-1; secondhand gold and silver dealers, § 18-296 et seq.; inspection of records and exhibit of records required, § 18-307; clearance from police dispatcher for use of flashing lights/siren by ambulances, § 34-33; smoking pollution control, § 46-96 et seq.; littering, § 82-71 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 54-1-54-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-181 et seq. 

Sec. 54-31. - Authority to make arrests and enforce laws. 
(a)  The chief of police or any police officer of the city has authority and it is his duty to make arrests for offenses against the laws of the state in all cases where such authority is now or shall hereafter be conferred on such officers by the laws of the state. In making such arrests, whether with or without a warrant, they shall have all the authority conferred, and be subject to all the duties imposed upon such officers by the laws in existence now or that may hereafter be enacted. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the police and the police force to enforce the ordinances of the city and all of the penal laws of the state in the city, and police jurisdiction thereof, and to arrest all persons violating either of the same. 
(c)  The arresting officer shall carry such persons so arrested before the municipal judge for examination or trial for the violation of a state law, or for trial for the violation of an ordinance of the city; provided, however, that any person who has been arrested and is under the influence of intoxicating beverages or narcotic drugs shall be confined in the city jail until such person shall not be under the influence of intoxicating beverages or of narcotic drugs, in the opinion of the officer in charge of the city jail. 
(Code 1977, § 15-40) 
Sec. 54-32. - Service of process. 
    The chief of police shall without delay execute all writs, warrants, summonses, executions, rules, attachments, notices, and scire facias, and all other process, original mesne or final, which may be issued by the municipal judge. In the discharge of the duties imposed upon him he shall have all the rights and powers that sheriffs and constables have, and be entitled to all the protection, privileges and immunities to which they are entitled. 
(Code 1977, § 15-41) 
Sec. 54-33. - Attendance at fires; protection of property. 
    On an alarm of fire, it shall be the duty of the chief of police to go at once to the fire, or detail an officer for that purpose, to protect and guard the apparatus of the fire department from any interruption or interference as well as all property. 
(Code 1977, § 15-42) 
Sec. 54-34. - Docket of arrested persons. 
    The chief of police shall cause to be entered in a book to be kept at the police department the name, at full length, of every person detained by him, the time of arrest, the offense charged, the name and residence of the complainant, the name of the officer who arrested the person and the disposition of the case. This book shall be accessible to the officers of the municipal court. 
(Code 1977, § 15-43) 
Sec. 54-35. - Chief of police to be keeper of jail; duties. 
    The chief of police shall be the keeper of the city jail. He shall cause it to be kept clean and in good order, and see that it is maintained as a safe place of confinement. He shall see that the prisoners under his charge are properly fed with wholesome food, and shall not confine a man and a woman in the same cell or room, nor allow any person to give or deliver to any prisoner any spirituous, vinous or malt liquors. He may also require any person convicted of any offense to wear, while in confinement, such uniform as may be prescribed by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1977, § 15-45) 
Secs. 54-36-54-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EMERGENCY ALARMS AND REPORTING OF EMERGENCIES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18; emergency services, ch. 34. 

Sec. 54-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act of God. Any unusual, extraordinary, sudden and/or unexpected manifestation of the forces of nature, sustained extensive power failure, or other incidents that cannot be prevented or mitigated by reasonable human care, skill and foresight. Such manifestations include but are not limited to tornadoes, wind storms, hail storms, hurricane, earthquake, sustained extensive power failure, conflagrations or similar catastrophic events. The police chief, on duty police patrol supervisor, communications center senior dispatcher, or on duty ranking fire rescue supervisor shall determine if such conditions exist. 
    Alarm system. Any mechanical, electrical or electronic device which is designed for the detection of intrusion into any structure, building, or vehicle, for the detection of fire, sprinkler activation, water flow, toxic gases, carbon monoxide or smoke, or is utilized to summon aid from the city or any agency, or entity, that is dispatched through the Dothan Communications Center or dispatched through any city agency; or any device which transmits any alarm signal to any person who may notify the city, or prompts the transmission of a request for aid of any type by an intermediary, is considered an alarm within this section. This includes any systems whether manually, mechanically, electrically or electronically activated. This shall include any device which sounds a visual and/or audible signal that is able to be heard or seen from a distance of more than 50 feet from the structure or location of the alarm including vehicles. No "tape dial systems" or systems that directly dial or contact the Dothan Communications Center via voice telephone or any city department will be allowed to operate after January 1, 2002. Alarm systems installed and maintained by a resident in a structure zoned for residential occupancy, and the alarm is not connected to the City of Dothan, any city department or any central monitoring station, and only sounds an audible and/or visual signal not audible for more than 50 feet are exempt under from the requirements of obtaining a permit as long as such systems are approved as noted below in section 54-62. All other sections of this article are applicable to such residential systems. 
    False alarm. Activation of an alarm system that necessitates the response of the police department, fire rescue department, other public safety personnel, or other city employees, whereas no emergency or emergency situation exists. Determination of whether an alarm is a false alarm resides solely with the city. 
(Code 1977, § 13-1; Ord. No. 2001-224, § 1, 7-24-01) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 54-62. - Approval of alarm systems. 
    No person, business or firm shall install or operate any alarm system within the city unless the Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. approves such system, and/or the American National Standards Institute. Such systems must be installed and maintained to the standards cited in the above or to the manufacturers recommendations which ever is the more stringent. Failure to comply with this section shall result in revocation of the alarm permit. Any business, person or firm installing any alarm system other than at their owned residence must be licensed, certified or other wise meet the requirements set forth by this article but also must be comply with Alabama Electronic Security Board of Licensure requirements. All businesses, firms or persons who install alarms must provide a minimum of one hour or more user training to the person or persons who shall operate the alarm system. The permitee or resident shall assure that all persons who operate the alarm system have had user training and are familiar with preventing false alarms. 
(Code 1977, § 13-7; Ord. No. 2001-224, § 1, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 54-63. - Permit. 
(a)  Required. No person, firm or business shall install any alarm system other than in his/her own residence as cited in section 54-61 unless a permit has been obtained. No person shall install or maintain any alarm system within the city unless the person has a current valid License for the Alabama Electronic Security Board of Licensure and a current valid city business license. 
(b)  Application. No alarm shall be installed without completion and approval of an application as designed and maintained by the police chief. Alarms, whose primary purpose is to detect fire, toxic gases smoke, heat, sprinkler water flow or other methods of fire detection must also have the approval of the fire chief. Alarms that are not permitted, approved, revoked or temporarily suspended may not have police, fire rescue, or other city forces dispatched. 
(c)  Fee. Upon approval of the permit application by the chief of police or his/her designee, and when required the fire chief or his/her designee, the applicant will pay a fee of $25.00. Government entities and non-profit organizations, as determined by the chief of police, are exempt from the initial permit fee. A check for this amount shall be attached to the application and if the application is approved the check shall be sent to the city clerk. Applications that are disapproved shall be returned by first class mail to the applicant along with the check. The communications center shall periodically audit alarms received and notify the police chief, or fire chief in the case of fire detection alarm systems, of alarms that are not permitted. The police chief shall take steps to notify the resident, owner or other responsible party of the need for compliance with this section. Notification may be by telephone, first class mail, certified mail, or in person. Failure to secure a permit within a 14 day period from the time of notification shall constitute a violation of this section and is a misdemeanor. The police chief may order the alarm revoked and disconnected after mailing a notification by first class mail. Such notice shall include the date of discontinuance and may be included in the failure to secure a permit notification. 
(d)  Transferability. Permits issued under this section shall not be transferable. 
(e)  Revocation. Permits are a privilege and not a right to the permitee. Failure to comply with any portion of this section shall be grounds for the revocation of the permit by the chief of police including permanent revocation. The communications center shall not acknowledge nor dispatch police, fire rescue or any city resources to any alarm that has been revoked, permanently revoked, or temporarily deactivated. Revocation notices other than temporary deactivations will be made in writing delivered by first class mail or in person by the city. 
(f)  Existing alarms. Existing alarms with prior permits are not exempt from this section or any other portion of this article. Persons or businesses with prior permits issued within five years of the date this article is enacted may register a new permit at no cost. This article requires all alarms to be re-permitted upon its enactment. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2; Ord. No. 2001-224, § 1, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 54-64. - Notice of person to contact when system is activated and connect to 9-1-1. 
(a)  The permittee shall provide the Dothan Communications Center a 24-hour contact point for the affected premises when the alarm is activated. Failure to provide this information will result in the denial of the permit or revocation of the permit. The inability to contact persons associated with the facility, structure or business may result in the temporary revocation or permanent revocation of the permit by the chief of police. The permittee will be notified in writing of the revocation, which may be delivered by first class mail or in person by the city. The notice shall include the date the alarm shall be revoked and disconnected. 
(b)  Any alarm installed upon a fixed structure, or fixed location, with an audible signal capable of being heard for more than 50 feet, and/or visual signal must discontinue these audible and/or visual signals within ten minutes of activation and shall not reactivate for a minimum of 20 minutes. Failure to comply with this section shall be grounds for revocation of the permit and is a misdemeanor. Police officers may issue a summons or make a custodial arrest for such violations. 
(c)  Vehicles with an audible and/or visual signal must deactivate such signals within five minutes of the activation of the alarm and must not sound again within a 20 minute period following deactivation. Failure to comply with this section shall be grounds for revocation of the permit and is a misdemeanor. Police officers may issue a summons or make a custodial arrest for such violations. 
(d)  The owner of any property, structure, or vehicle, or the person occupying or operating a business or vehicle with such an alarm system is responsible for complying with all portions of this section. 
(e)  No alarm may be connected to telephonically dial 9-1-1 under any circumstances. No telephone, electronic device, or any other device may have an automatic feature or device to dial 9-1-1 when the telephone is taken off hook, or to dial 9-1-1 unless there is direct purposeful intentional human action to dial 9-1-1. The communications center may designate a dedicated telephone number for alarms that are activated by purposeful human intervention and may elect only to receive notification of alarms only at the designated dedicated seven-digit telephone number. 
(Code 1977, § 13-3; Ord. No. 2001-224, § 1, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 54-65. - Deactivation of system. 
(a)  The police patrol supervisor on duty, the communications center senior dispatcher on duty, the chief of police, or the ranking fire rescue official on duty, may order the deactivation of any alarm after two activations in a 12-hour period when such activations reveal no discernible emergency, or the owner, supervisor or other responsible party cannot be contacted following the activation of the alarm, or when such person refuses to respond to the scene at the request of a police officer or fire rescue official. It shall not be the responsibility of the Dothan Communications Center nor the Dothan Police or Fire Rescue Departments to notify the responsible person of the activation of any alarm. The request for the responsible person to be notified or respond is at the discretion of the responding police officer(s), fire rescue official(s), or their supervisor. 
(b)  The Dothan Communications Center will take steps to notify the owner, supervisor or other responsible person the next regular business day by telephone or other method of the deactivation of the alarm or upon deactivation if such contact can be made by telephone. Reactivation of the alarm shall not occur until contact is made with a responsible party and steps are taken to correct any deficiencies in the system. 
(c)  Repeated violations of this nature are grounds for the chief of police to revoke the permit for the alarm for no less than six months, or permanently. Repeated violations are two such occurrences necessitating deactivation as described in aforementioned section, in any 12-month period. 
(Code 1977, § 13-4; Ord. No. 2001-224, § 1, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 54-66. - Test or installation activating system and activating system falsely and tampering with alarms, and failure to train alarm users. 
(a)  Any installation or testing of the alarm system equipment that may possibly activate a response from the city must be approved in advance by the on duty communications center senior dispatcher. Activations made without prior notifications will be treated as a false alarm as described in subsection (b). 
(b)  Any person who intentionally, or through their negligence, activates an alarm of any type or nature when no emergency exists is guilty of rendering a false alarm. Rendering a false alarm is a misdemeanor for which a police officer may issue a summons or make a custodial arrest. 
(c)  Any person who intentionally, negligently or through negligently maintained telephone equipment, telephonically dials, or calls 9-1-1, or makes contact or attempts to make contact in any manner to any telephone line within the Dothan Communications Center or any city telephone, or through their negligence dials 9-1-1, when no emergency exists, is guilty of rendering a false 9-1-1 call. Rendering a false 9-1-1 call is misdemeanor for which police officers may issue a summons or make a custodial arrest. 
(d)  Any person who willfully tampers with, damages, interferes with any wire, switch, telephone, radio or other equipment or apparatus that is connected to or part of any alarm system is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(e)  Any permitee who fails to train or have their alarm installation vendor train personnel, or any alarm vendor who fails to adequately train alarm users as specified within this article, to prevent false activations of the alarm system is guilty of a misdemeanor for which police officers may issue a summons or make a custodial arrest. 
(Code 1977, § 13-5; Ord. No. 2001-224, § 1, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 54-67. - False alarms. 
    Under this section, a permittee will be subject to the following false alarm fee and other penalties related thereto: 
(a)  Each false alarm in excess of one false alarm in a calendar month will be subject to the following fee schedule. False alarms as a result of Acts of God as aforementioned as determined by the city are excluded. 
(b)  First false alarm (calendar month) ..... No charge 
Second false alarm (calendar month) ..... $50.00 
Additional false alarms (calendar month) ..... 50.00 
(Code 1977, § 13-6; Ord. No. 2001-224, § 1, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 54-68. - Priority of alarms and verified alarms. 
(a)  A verified alarm for the purposes of this section is considered to be an alarm that allows the operator to directly surveille via real time audio and/or video the alarm site such that a determination can be made immediately if an emergency exists. In many instances multiple alarms are received for police and fire rescue service. Alarms that are directly connected to the communications center computer aided dispatch system and those alarms that are verified through an audio or video surveillance system shall be categorized with a higher priority than other alarms. Determination as to whether an alarm is a verified alarm rests with on duty senior dispatcher of the communications center. 
(b)  Alarms that are monitored by a central station or off site station that cannot either visually or audibly surveille the alarm site in a real time manner are considered lower priority alarms. Call back to the alarm site via telephone is not considered a verified alarm. 
(c)  The police chief or his/her designee may designate a specific telephone number for the receipt of alarms and may elect to accept alarms reported via telephone only through this designated telephone number. Reasonable efforts will be made to notify permittees of such changes. 
(d)  Violation of any portion of this article is a misdemeanor for which any police officer may issue a summons or make a custodial arrest. 
(Ord. No. 2001-224, § 1, 7-24-01) 
Secs. 54-69-54-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AUTHORITY OF CHIEF OF POLICE DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY/FIREARMS 

Sec. 54-91. - Permanent records kept. 
    The Dothan Police Department shall keep a permanent record of each piece of stolen or abandoned property taken or stored including the date of the taking of each piece of property, the place where it was found and taken and a description of the property shall be kept. 
(Ord. No. 2017-294, § 1, 9-19-17) 
Sec. 54-92. - Property shall be stored in a suitable place. 
    The property shall be stored in a suitable place, provided that if the property be perishable it may be sold at once without notice, in which case the proceeds shall be held for a period of six months for the account of the owner and if not called for within that time shall be converted into the general fund of the City of Dothan. 
(Ord. No. 2017-294, § 1, 9-19-17) 
Sec. 54-93. - Property shall be sold at auction. 
    The Chief of Police for the City of Dothan shall sell at public auction nonperishable personal property that has been accumulated and held by the Dothan Police Department for a period of no less than three months. 
(Ord. No. 2017-294, § 1, 9-19-17) 
Sec. 54-94. - Notice of public sale. 
    Notice of such public sale shall be advertised as to the time and location once a week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation published in Dothan, Alabama. The first day of such publication shall be at least 20 days before the sale. 
(Ord. No. 2017-294, § 1, 9-19-17) 
Sec. 54-95. - Firearms sold only to licensed dealers. 
    Firearms may only be sold to licensed firearms dealers. 
(Ord. No. 2017-294, § 1, 9-19-17) 
Sec. 54-96. - Owner of property may redeem property prior to sale. 
    The owner of any of the property taken up and stored may redeem the same at any time prior to its sale by paying the reasonable expense of storing it and a pro rata of the cost of publication. 
(Ord. No. 2017-294, § 1, 9-19-17) 
Sec. 54-97. - Person making sale shall have right to reject bids. 
    Each article shall be sold separately and records kept of the amount received for each article. The person making the sale shall have the right to reject any and all bids and shall have the right to continue the sale from time to time if there are no bids. 
(Ord. No. 2017-294, § 1, 9-19-17) 
Sec. 54-98. - Balances shall be paid into the general fund. 
    After deducting and paying of all expenses of taking up, storing and selling the property, the balance, if any, shall be paid into the general fund of the City of Dothan. 
(Ord. No. 2017-294, § 1, 9-19-17) 
Chapter 62 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; animals, ch. 10. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - State misdemeanor. 
(a)  Any person or corporation committing an offense within the corporate limits of the city, or within the police jurisdiction thereof, which is declared by a law or laws of the state now existing or hereafter enacted to be a misdemeanor, shall be guilty of an offense against the city. 
(b)  Any person or corporation committing an offense within the corporate limits of the city, or within the police jurisdiction thereof, which is declared by laws of the state now existing or hereafter enacted to be a violation, shall be guilty of an offense against the city. 
(c)  Any person or corporation committing, within the corporate limits of the city or within the police jurisdiction thereof, an offense as defined by Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-1-2 of the Alabama Criminal Code, which offense is not declared by laws of the state, now existing or hereafter enacted, to be a felony, misdemeanor or violation, shall be guilty of an offense against the city. 
(d)  Any person found to be in violation of subsections (a), (b) or (c) of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $1.00 nor more than $500.00, and/or may be imprisoned or sentenced to hard labor for the city for a period not exceeding six months, at the discretion of the court trying the case, unless otherwise provided by subsection (e) of this section. Any corporation found to be in violation of subsections (a), (b) or (c) of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $1.00 nor more than $500.00, at the discretion of the court trying the case. 
(e)  Any person found to be in violation of Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-191, as amended, shall: 
(1)  Upon first conviction be punished by imprisonment in the county or municipal jail for not more than one year, or by a fine of not less than $500.00 nor more than $2,000.00, or by both a fine and imprisonment. 
(2)  On a second conviction within a five-year period, be punished by a fine of not less than $1,000.00 nor more than $5,000.00 and by imprisonment, which may include hard labor in the county or municipal jail for not more than one year. The sentence shall include a mandatory sentence, which is not subject to suspension or probation, of imprisonment in the county or municipal jail for not less than 48 consecutive hours or community service for not less than 20 days. 
(3)  On a third conviction within a five-year period, be punished by a fine of not less than $2,000.00 nor more than $10,000.00 and by imprisonment, which may include hard labor, in the county or municipal jail for not less than 60 days nor more than one year, to include a minimum of 60 days which shall be served in the county or municipal jail and cannot be probated or suspended. 
(Code 1977, § 9-1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-191(e-g). 
Sec. 62-2. - Convict registration. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Felony means any offense punishable by death or imprisonment in a penitentiary, either state or federal. 
    Resident or residing means any person who remains within the city or its police jurisdiction for a period of more than 24 hours and maintains sleeping quarters anywhere within the city or its police jurisdiction. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-11-180. 
(b)  Time for registering; sworn statement; issuance of cards; change of address; duty to carry card. Registration procedures and practices are as follows: 
(1)  It shall be the duty of every person who has been previously convicted of any felony under the laws of any state or the federal government, and who has not been restored to his civil rights by competent authority, and who resides within the city or its police jurisdiction, to register, within 24 hours after his arrival in the city or its police jurisdiction, in a book of registration to be kept by the chief of police at the city hall. 
(2)  Such person shall make a sworn statement upon blanks to be furnished by the police department stating the offense for which he has been convicted, the time and place of conviction and his address while residing in the city. 
(3)  Upon registration and the filing of the affidavit provided for in this subsection, the chief of police shall give to such person a registration card showing the name and address of such person in the city or its police jurisdiction and the date of registration, which registration card must be signed by the chief of police or one of the police officers. 
(4)  It shall be the duty of any person who has registered as provided in this section who changes his address or place of residence in the city to inform the police of such change within 24 hours after the change has been made, which shall be noted on the records of the chief of police and also on the registration card. 
(5)  It shall be the duty of any person receiving a registration card to carry the card with him on his person at all times while he is within the city or its police jurisdiction, and to exhibit the card to any officer of the city upon request. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 13A-11-181-13A-11-183. 
(c)  Records. No persons except the chief of police or his assistants, shall have access to or be permitted to examine the registration book or the sworn statement provided for in subsection (b) of this section. 
(Code 1977, §§ 9-2-9-4) 
Sec. 62-3. - False hotel registration. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to write or cause to be written or knowingly permit to be written, in any register in any lodginghouse, hotel or tourist home in the city or in the police jurisdiction of the city, any other or different name or designation than the true name of the person registered therein, or the name by which such person is generally known. 
(Code 1977, § 9-10) 
Sec. 62-4. - Circulars, handbills, other printed matter. 
(a)  Attachments to and clearance around utility poles. In order to provide safe descent by linemen in cases of emergency, it shall be unlawful to attach handbills, posters, placards, advertising materials or any other object or obstruction to or place the same within three feet of any electric, telephone or other utility pole within the corporate limits of the city or the police jurisdiction thereof. 
(b)  Distribution upon public ways. It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute or to employ any person to distribute circulars, pamphlets, placards, advertisements or other printed matter upon the streets or place the same in or on any motor vehicle in the city or the police jurisdiction of the city. Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed as prohibiting the sale or distribution of newspapers, magazines or other regularly published publications of like character. 
(Code 1977, §§ 11-16, 11-17) 
Sec. 62-5. - Escaping from custody. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City prisoner means a person who has been convicted and sentenced to hard labor for the city for violation of a city ordinance; who is serving hard labor time in the city jail for being in default of the payment of a fine imposed for the violation of any city ordinance; who is serving hard labor time in the city jail for violation of a state law; or who is otherwise confined in the city jail pursuant to an order of court. 
    Custody means the state of being held in keeping whereby one's freedom or liberty is in some manner curtailed. It includes both actual and constructive supervision, and includes a restraint or detention in the city jail, or by any city police officer, and includes a work detail while under the actual or constructive supervision of any city employee to whom the city prisoner was entrusted by the chief of police or his designee. The definition includes the time traveling to and from the city jail or work detail. 
    Escape means its ordinary accepted meaning and connotes an unauthorized voluntary departure from, or substantial severance of, custody. 
    Work detail means a task or job assignment outside the city jail, on public property. Such task or job assignment shall begin and end as determined by the chief of police or his designee, not by any other city employee. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any city prisoner to escape or run away from custody. 
(c)  Prima facie evidence of escape. For purposes of this section, it shall be prima facie evidence of escape that a city prisoner failed to return to his place of confinement when scheduled to do so on the day of his work detail. 
(Code 1977, § 9-23) 
Secs. 62-6-62-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MINORS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 62-36-62-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CURFEW 

Sec. 62-66. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City means the City of Dothan, Houston County, Alabama, with administrative offices at 126 N. St. Andrews Street, Dothan, Alabama 36303. 
    Minor/Juvenile means any person 17 years of age or younger and not emancipated. 
    Parent means any person having legal custody of a minor: 
(1)  As a natural adoptive; 
(2)  As a legal guardian; 
(3)  As a person who stands in loco parentis; or 
(4)  As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of court. 
    Street means a way or place, of whatsoever nature, open to the use of the public as a matter of right for purposes of vehicular travel or, in the case of a sidewalk, for pedestrian travel. The term "street" includes the legal right-of-way including, but not limited to, the cartway or traffic lanes, the curb, the sidewalks (whether paved or unpaved), and any grass plots or other grounds found within the legal right-of-way of a street. The term "street" applies irrespective of what it is called or formally named, whether an alley, avenue, court, road or otherwise. 
    Time of night means based upon the prevailing standard of time whether Central Standard Time or Central Daylight Saving Time, generally observed at that hour by the public in the city, and prima facie the time then observed in the city administrative offices and police station. 
(Code 1977, § 9-5) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 62-67. - Penalty for violation of division. 
    Upon a violation of this division for the first time, a parent shall be given a warning citation. A parent, upon further violations, shall be summoned to municipal court and if convicted may be fined up to $500.00 and/or six months in jail. Upon further violations, a minor/juvenile shall be subject to and dealt with under proper procedure in juvenile court pursuant to state law. Each violation of this division shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1977, § 9-7.1) 
Sec. 62-68. - Restrictions enumerated. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any minor 17 years of age or younger to loiter, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any place unsupervised by an adult having the lawful authority to be at such places, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day; provided, however, that on Fridays and Saturdays the effective hours are between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply in the following instances: 
(1)  When a minor is accompanied by his parent or guardian having the lawful care and custody of the minor; 
(2)  When the minor is upon an emergency errand directed by his parent or guardian having the lawful care and custody of such minor; 
(3)  When the minor is returning directly home from a school activity, entertainment, recreational activity or dance; 
(4)  When the minor is going to or returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the places described in subsection (a)(3) of this section during the prescribed period of time; 
(5)  When the minor is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of first amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly or free exercise of religion; 
(6)  When the minor is in a motor vehicle with parental consent for normal travel in interstate and intrastate travel through the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian, or other person having custody or control of any child 17 years of age or younger to permit, or by insufficient control to allow, such child to be in or upon the public streets or any other places listed in subsection (a) of this section within the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. the following day, or on Fridays and Saturdays, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. the following day except in circumstances set out in subsection (a)(1)-(a)(6) of this section. 
(Code 1977, § 9-6) 
Sec. 62-69. - Police procedures. 
(a)  A police officer of the city, upon finding or having attention called to any minor on the streets in violation of this division, normally shall take the minor to the police station, where a parent shall immediately be notified to come for such minor, whereupon he shall be questioned. This is intended to permit ascertainment, under constitutional safeguards, of relevant facts, and to centralize responsibility in the supervisor there and then on duty for accurate, effective, fair, impartial and uniform enforcement and recording, thus making available experienced supervisory personnel, the best of facilities and access to information and records. In the absence of convincing evidence such as a birth certificate or driver's license, a police officer on the street shall in the first instance use his best judgment in determining age. 
(b)  Police procedures shall constantly be refined in the light of experience and may provide, inter alia, that the police officer may deliver to a parent thereof a minor under appropriate circumstances, for example a minor of tender age near home whose identity and address may readily be ascertained or are known. 
(c)  In any event, such police officer shall, within 24 hours, file a written report with the chief of police, or shall participate to the extent of the information for which he is responsible in the preparation by himself and the supervisor involved in such case, and in the filing of such report within 24 hours. 
(d)  When a parent, immediately called, has come to take charge of the minor, and the appropriate information has been recorded, the minor shall be released to the custody of such parent. If the parent cannot be located, or fails to take charge of the minor, then the minor shall be released to the juvenile authorities, except to the extent that in accordance with police regulations, approved in advance by juvenile authorities, the minor may temporarily be entrusted to a relative, neighbor or other person who will on behalf of a parent assume the responsibility of caring for the minor pending the availability or arrival of a parent. 
(e)  In the case of a first violation by a minor, the chief of police shall, by certified mail, send to a parent written notice of such violation with a warning that any subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of this division, including enforcement of parental responsibility and of applicable penalties. 
(Code 1977, § 9-7) 
Secs. 62-70-62-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISE 

Sec. 62-101. - Loud, disturbing or unnecessary; prohibited generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make, create or maintain any unreasonable, loud, disturbing or unnecessary noise within the city or police jurisdiction thereof. Noise of such character, intensity or duration as to be detrimental to life, health, comfort or repose of any individual is prohibited. 
(Code 1977, § 11-19) 
Sec. 62-102. - Enumeration of prohibited acts. 
    The following noises and other noises of the same characteristics, intensity or annoyance shall be prohibited at all times and at all places within the city and police jurisdiction thereof: 
(1)  Horns and signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle on any street or public place of the city except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; the use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up. 
(2)  Radios, phonographs and other devices for production or reproduction of sound. The following devices for the production or reproduction of sounds are restricted as follows: 
a.  The use or operation of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person of normal hearing who is in the room, vehicle or chamber of which such machine or device is operated and who is a voluntary listener thereto or allowing such use or operation. 
b.  It is hereby declared a nuisance and shall be unlawful to operate or play any radio, phonograph or similar device, whether from a motor vehicle or by a pedestrian, in such a manner as to be plainly audible to any person other than the player or operator of the device at a distance of five feet in the case of a motor vehicle or ten feet in the case of a pedestrian. 
c.  It is hereby declared a nuisance and shall be unlawful to operate or play any radio, television, phonograph, musical instrument or similar device which produces sound, whether from a business or a residence, in such a manner as to be plainly audible to others at a distance of 50 feet to any person in a commercial, residential, multifamily dwelling or public place. 
(3)  Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising and other similar machines and devices. The use or operation of any radio, receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building, product, service, merchandise or political candidate, or allowing such use or operation, except as authorized by the board of commissioners. 
(4)  Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity. 
(5)  Animals and birds. The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity. 
(6)  Steam whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work, or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon the request of proper city authorities. 
(7)  Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any engine, stationary internal combustion engine or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(8)  Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noises. 
(9)  Loading, unloading and opening boxes, bales, crates and containers. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any vehicle, or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers on Sundays, Christmas, New Year's or Thanksgiving or before 7:00 a.m. or after 11:00 p.m.; provided, however, that under emergency conditions the city may grant exceptions thereto. 
(10)  Adjacent to schools, courts, churches and hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while such institution is in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institutions, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital; provided, however, that conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the institution is a school, hospital, church or court street. 
(11)  Hawkers, peddlers and vendors. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(12)  Drums or other devices. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show or sale. 
(13)  Firearms and fireworks. The explosion of firecrackers, skyrockets, Roman candles, pinwheels or any other form of fireworks or the unnecessary shooting of any firearms, except as specifically authorized by law or the proper official. 
(14)  Transportation of metal rails, pillars and columns. The transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material, over and along the streets and other public places upon carts, drays, cars, trucks or in any other manner so loaded as to cause loud noises or as to disturb the peace and quiet of such streets or other public places. 
(15)  Operation of public transportation buses. The causing, permitting or continuing of any excessive, unnecessary and avoidable noise in the operation of a public transportation bus. 
(16)  Piledrivers, hammers and similar appliances. The operation of any piledriver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise, except on written permission of the city prescribing the locality where the hours during which such operation is permissible. 
(17)  Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan, or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise. 
(18)  Air conditioning units. Self-contained, one-room air conditioning units, up to one-ton capacity attached to the outside walls or windows of buildings within the city, and operated for the comfort of the occupants of such buildings, shall be maintained in good mechanical condition. Air conditioning units of more than one-ton capacity may not be operated within the city except where remote compressors are housed in soundproof rooms, or where attached or immediately adjoining compressors are sound treated or baffled, and cooling coil and condensation water is disposed of, as prescribed by the city. 
(Code 1977, § 11-20) 
Sec. 62-103. - Operation of automobiles and light delivery vehicles. 
    The requirements of sections 62-101 and 62-102 shall not be construed to prevent the operation of automobiles or light delivery vehicles at any time; provided, however, that such motor vehicles shall not have any attachment thereon for creating unnecessary noise, shall at all times be properly muffled and shall be so operated as to create the least possible noise or nuisance. 
(Code 1977, § 11-21) 
Sec. 62-104. - City may waive requirements of sections 62-101 and 62-102. 
    The city shall have the right to waive any or all of the requirements of sections 62-101 and 62-102 in cases of emergency where the welfare of persons or property may be jeopardized by their strict enforcement or on such special occasions as the commission may determine. The following exceptions also apply: 
(1)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the ringing of bells or chimes by churches within the city. 
(2)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit any noises or sounds produced by radios, sirens or other equipment attached to, or being operated by, any police, fire, rescue or other emergency vehicles or personnel. 
(3)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the conducting of live remote broadcasts by duly licensed radio stations upon business premises, at the request of the owner of the business. Such live remote broadcasts shall be limited to daylight hours only. 
(Code 1977, § 11-22) 
Sec. 62-105. - Penalty for violation of article. 
(a)  Violations of sections 62-101 and 62-102 shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $200.00 on a first offense. Subsequent or repeated violations shall subject the violator to arrest and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 and/or six months in the municipal jail. 
(b)  The police department is authorized to issue a citation for a first offense. Subsequent and repeated violations will result in arrest. 
(c)  Each violation shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 1977, § 11-22.1) 
Secs. 62-106-62-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND MORALS 

Sec. 62-136. - Prostitution. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in the city or in its police jurisdiction to: 
(1)  Engage in prostitution. 
(2)  Aid or abet prostitution, or frequent the company of prostitutes. 
(3)  Procure or solicit for purposes of prostitution. 
(4)  Keep or set up a house of ill fame, brothel or bawdy house. 
(5)  Receive any person for purposes of lewdness, assignation or prostitution into any vehicle, conveyance, place, structure or building. 
(6)  Permit any person to remain for the purpose of lewdness, assignation or prostitution in any vehicle, conveyance, place, structure or building. 
(7)  Lease or rent, or contract to lease or rent, any vehicle, conveyance, place, structure or building or part thereof, knowingly or with good reason to know that it is intended to be used for any of the purposes prohibited in this section. 
(8)  Attempt to do any of the acts prohibited by this section. 
(9)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or manager of any hotel, boardinghouse, lodginghouse, motel or any other place wherein rooms are for hire, to employ any person who has been convicted under this section. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed to encompass Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 13A-12-111, 13A-12-112. 
(c)  In addition to other penalties, the violation of this section shall be cause for revocation of the city privilege license of the person guilty of such violation. 
(Code 1977, § 9-14) 
State Law reference- Authority to control, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-113. 
Sec. 62-137. - Volatile and noxious substances. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Noxious substance means any substance that produces an offensive odor; lacrimation; irritation of the skin, mucous membranes, or eyes; difficulty in breathing, damage to any part of the human body, damage to any surface or object when applied, any corrosive substance, any liquid substance containing oleoresin capsicum or similar substance; any substance commonly known as tear gas, mace, CS, CN, smoke grenade or smoke device, stink bomb, or similar device or substance, whether in crystal, aerosol, liquid or other form; and any incendiary device, grenade or other device that may dispense any of the enumerated substances. 
    Volatile substance means any substance that has the capability of giving off vapors or fumes, or of being inhaled, that upon being inhaled may produce symptoms of intoxication, dizziness, euphoria, paralysis, or other symptoms that impair the person to a degree that they are a danger to themselves or another person. This definition does not apply to the legitimate utilization of licensed anesthesia for medical or dental purposes under the supervision of a physician or dentist. Volatile substances include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Model glue; 
(2)  Gasoline, kerosene, other hydrocarbon liquids; 
(3)  Acetone; 
(4)  Amylacetate; 
(5)  Benzene; 
(6)  Butyl acetate, butyl alcohol; 
(7)  Carbon tetrachloride; 
(8)  Chloroform; 
(9)  Cyclohexanone; 
(10)  Ethanol and ethane; 
(11)  Ethyl acetate; 
(12)  Hexane; 
(13)  Isopropyl alcohol; 
(14)  Methyl acetate; 
(15)  Methyl ethyl ketone; 
(16)  Methyl isobutyl ketone; 
(17)  Toluol or toluene; 
(18)  Trichloroethylene; 
(19)  Xyol or xylene; 
(20)  Petroleum derivatives; 
(21)  Aerosol sprays of any type, including paints; 
(22)  Butane, ethane; 
(23)  Fluorocarbons; 
(24)  Nitrous oxide; and 
(25)  Any other solvent, gas, material, substance, chemical or combination that has the property of being inhaled, producing vapors or fumes that may produce the effects described in this definition, including any product upon which the container carries a warning therefor. 
(b)  Use of volatile substances. It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally inhale any volatile substances for the purpose of producing intoxication, impairment or any of the symptoms described in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Having symptoms of volatile substance impairment. It shall be unlawful for any person to have any of the symptoms described in subsection (a) of this section from inhaling any of the volatile substances. A person having the symptoms of impairment, or any of the symptoms or conditions described in subsection (a) of this section, present with any of the volatile substances is sufficient for a violation of this section. 
(d)  Possession of volatile substances. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any of the volatile substances with the intent of violating any part of this section. Possession of any of the volatile substances with the commonly used paraphernalia to inhale such substances is sufficient to prove intent. 
(e)  Furnishing of volatile substances to minors. It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish, sell, give or otherwise provide to any minor model glue, unless such minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian or has written consent to purchase such model glue. No minor may possess any model glue or any of the volatile substances for any purpose without permission of their parents or guardian. 
(f)  Possession by and sales to minors of noxious substances. It shall be unlawful for any minor to possess any noxious substance and illegal for any person to sell, provide, give or otherwise furnish any minor a noxious substance. 
(g)  Possession of and intent to use noxious substances. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any noxious substance with the intent to use such noxious substance unlawfully. Possession of a noxious substance within a gathering of persons, near such a gathering, or within a structure or vehicle is sufficient to prove intent. 
(h)  Possession of noxious substances prohibited generally; exceptions. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than school officials or law enforcement officers, to possess any noxious substance on school grounds or within school buildings, stadium grounds, school buses, school property, or school parking lot, or within any vehicle located on or in such areas. 
(i)  Possession of noxious substances on city property. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any noxious substance within any city-owned building, city-owned property, city parking lot, civic center, recreation facility, city park or other city facility, or within any vehicle located on or within such areas. 
(j)  Application of section to enforcement officials and employees. No portion of this section shall apply to law enforcement officers or other authorized city employees who may utilize such substances as part of their job tasks. 
(k)  Penalty for violation of section. Violation of any portion of this section is punishable as specified in section 1-4. 
(Code 1977, §§ 9-38-9-45) 
Secs. 62-138-62-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER 

Sec. 62-171. - Weapons; carrying and discharging firearms or air gun. 
(a)  No person shall carry a pistol which uses a powder or air propellant on or about his person, except on his own real property, in his own abode or fixed place of business, without a license therefor, or except as provided for under Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-11-52. 
(b)  No person shall hunt any wild game with a firearm within a distance of 100 yards of any public street, road, highway, residence or place of business. 
(c)  No person shall discharge a firearm or gun which uses a powder or air propellant closer than 100 yards of any residence, except for protection of his property and members of his household in and about which he shall be responsible for damage, injury or endangering the lives and property of others. 
(Code 1977, § 9-12) 
Sec. 62-172. - Assaulting or harassing a public safety officer, judicial official, elected official, department head or city manager. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Public safety officer means any peace officer; any city firefighter, fire medic, jail security officer, traffic or parking enforcement officer, public safety dispatcher, revenue officer, fire official or reserve police officer; any permitted EMT or other employee of a licensed ambulance service within the city; any city magistrate, court clerk, judge, city attorney, city prosecutor, assistant city attorney, mayor and city commissioners, city manager, and city department heads. 
(b)  Assault or harassment by physical contact a misdemeanor. Any person who assaults, attempts to assault, harasses by physical contact, menaces with any object or weapon, or places any public safety officer, or the officials described in subsection (a) of this section, in danger by their negligence or reckless actions, during the performance of their duties or as a result of their position or job, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(c)  Assault or harassment by telephone, mail, electronic or other means a misdemeanor. It shall be unlawful for any person to communicate with, call by telephone, communicate with electronically or in writing, to verbally harass or annoy, any public safety officer, or above enumerated officials, during the performance of their duties, or as a result of their position or job. Such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(d)  Violators of section to be fined and jailed. Any person found guilty of violating any part of this section shall receive a minimum fine of $250.00 and a minimum jail sentence of 30 days. Neither the fine nor sentence shall be suspended. 
Sec. 62-173. - Police service animals. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Handler means a law enforcement officer who is especially trained, and uses a police service animal as part of their job duties. 
    Police service animal means any animal used by law enforcement. 
(b)  Misdemeanor. It is a misdemeanor for any person to intentionally or negligently: 
(1)  Cause or attempt to cause injury to a police service animal; 
(2)  Engage in conduct likely to produce or cause bodily injury to a police service animal; 
(3)  Lay out, place, or administer any poison, trap, substance or object which is likely to produce bodily injury to a police service animal; 
(4)  Strike, hit, torment, or otherwise harass or assault a police service animal; 
(5)  Throw any object or substance at, toward or in the path of a police service animal; 
(6)  Interfere with or obstruct a police service animal, or interfere with the handler in any manner to inhibit, restrict or deprive the handler of control of the police service animal; 
(7)  Releases a police service animal from its area of control, such as a vehicle, kennel, or pen, or trespass in that area; 
(8)  Places any food, object, or substance into a police service animal's area of control without permission of the handler. 
(9)  Offer or agree with one or more persons to engage in or cause the performance of an act, which constitutes a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 98-330, § 1, 11-10-98) 
Secs. 62-174-62-189. - Reserved. 
Article VI. - Extended Magistrates' Fine Schedule 

Sec. 62-190. - Fine schedule adopted. 
    The extended magistrates' fine schedule is hereby adopted in whole as provided for in the Code of Alabaman, Section 23A, Rules of Alabama Supreme Court, Rule 20(c), of the Alabama Rules of Judicial Administration (ARJA) and the same may be changed upon amendments by the state. 
(Ord. No. 2003-199, § 1, 7-22-03) 
Chapter 70 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; cemeteries, ch. 22; subdivisions, ch. 90; zoning, ch. 114. 
State Law reference- Planning, zoning and subdivisions generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 70-1-70-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 70-31. - Created; members; appointment; terms; service without compensation. 
(a)  Pursuant to and under the authority contained in Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-14, there is hereby adopted an alternate structure for the planning commission of the city, which was created pursuant to and under the authority of Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-3. 
(b)  The commission shall consist of nine members: eight regular members appointed by the commission and representing as equally as possible the several districts, wards or other areas of the municipality, such representation to be determined by the commission, and one regular member to be appointed by the mayor. 
(c)  The regular members of the planning commission shall elect a chairman and a vice-chairman, both of whom shall be regular members, and a secretary which need not be a member of the planning commission. 
(d)  The city commission shall appoint four supernumerary members to the planning commission, and the mayor shall appoint one supernumerary member to the planning commission. 
(e)  Supernumerary members shall serve at the call of the chairman, only in the absence of regular members or in the event that one or more regular members excuse themselves from deliberation on a particular item being considered by the planning commission. While so serving, supernumerary members shall have and exercise the power and authority of regular members. 
(f)  The terms of the regular members and supernumerary members appointed by the commission shall be four years or until their successors take office. Any regular member or supernumerary member may be reappointed. 
(g)  After the public hearing, the commission, in the case of regular or supernumerary members appointed by it, or the mayor, in the case of the regular or the supernumerary member appointed by him or a previous mayor, may remove a regular or supernumerary member for reason of inefficiency, neglect of duty, malfeasance in office or continued failure to attend meetings. The commission or mayor, as the case may be, shall file a written statement of reasons for removal. 
(h)  Vacancies occurring other than through expiration of term shall be filled for the duration of the unexpired term by the mayor in the case of the regular member and supernumerary member appointed by him or a previous mayor; and by the commission in the case of the regular members and supernumerary members appointed by it. 
(i)  The city engineer of the city shall be an ex officio member of the planning commission but shall have no voting privileges. 
(j)  All regular members and supernumerary members shall serve as such without compensation, and shall hold no other municipal office. 
(Code 1977, § 2-7) 
Sec. 70-32. - Functions; duties; authority as prescribed by law. 
    Unless specified otherwise in Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-14, the duties, powers, responsibilities and procedures of the planning commission shall be as provided for in tit. 11, ch. 52, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-82-1 et seq. 
(Code 1977, § 2-8) 
Chapter 74 - RAILROADS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86. 
State Law reference- Authority regarding railroads generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-81. 

Sec. 74-1. - Construction and repair of sidewalks, streets, sewers, culverts and approaches-Required. 
(a)  It is the duty of each railroad company operating a railroad into or through the city to build and keep in repair all sidewalk or street crossings over or along its line of railway and all approaches to such crossings corresponding to the streets and sidewalks of adjacent city property. Railroad companies shall also build and keep in repair all bridges along or across its line and all approaches thereto. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of each railroad company operating a line of railway into or through the city to build and maintain sewers and culverts along and under its railroad or right-of-way of sufficient capacity to carry off the surface waters flowing to its railroad or right-of-way, and to keep the sewers and culverts in repair and free from obstruction to water flowing through such sewers and culverts. 
(Code 1977, § 16-1) 
Sec. 74-2. - Same-Noncompliance; notice; penalty. 
    When any railroad company fails to comply with section 74-1 it shall be the duty of the city attorney to give such railroad company notice by serving a written notice on any agent of such company to build such crossings or bridges or approaches thereto, or to make repairs, as the case may be; and, after notice served such company, shall be liable to a fine as provided in section 1-4 for each day that it shall be in default, which penalty may be recovered by suit. 
(Code 1977, § 16-2) 
Sec. 74-3. - Obstructing streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person operating a railroad into or through the city to stop its trains, cars or locomotives on any street in the city or otherwise obstruct any street by stopping a train, car or locomotive on any railroad, so that free use of any person traveling over and along such street would be impeded and the streets obstructed for more than five minutes. 
(Code 1977, § 16-3) 
Sec. 74-4. - Kicking; making a flying switch. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to kick or make a flying switch of railroad cars, loaded or empty, on or across the streets or public ways of the city. Each time that a railroad car, empty or loaded, is so kicked, or a flying switch made of any such car over or across the streets or public ways of the city, it shall constitute a separate offense; provided, however, that the yardmaster or conductor or any other employee of the railroad company responsible shall be deemed to be the guilty party within the meaning of this section. 
(Code 1977, § 16-4) 
Chapter 82 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2007-117, § 1, adopted Apr. 3, 2007, amended Ch. 82 in its entirety, in effect deleting Ch. 82 as being superseded and enacting a new Ch. 82 to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 82 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1977, §§ 11-14, 11-15, 20-71-20-73, 20-75, 20-76. 
Cross reference- Utilities, Ch. 102. 
State Law reference- Authority regarding garbage generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-135. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 82-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall have the meanings given in this section: 
    Ashes. Ashes refers to all residue resulting from the combustion of coal, coke, wood or any other material or substances in domestic stoves, furnaces, boilers or fireplaces. 
    Authorized residential containers. Only containers furnished by the city will be emptied by the city. Any exceptions must be made by the public works director. 
    Building material. Building material refers to any material such as lumber, brick, block, carpet, stone, plaster, concrete, asphalt, roofing shingles, gutters, flooring, carpeting or other substances accumulated as the result of repairs, remodeling, or additions to existing buildings or structures, or as the result of construction or demolition of buildings or structures or any part thereof. 
    Bulky refuse. Solid household or residential refuse weighing more than 50 pounds and/or having a volume greater than four cubic feet, including, but not limited to, appliances such as stoves, refrigerators, washing machines, dryers and furniture. 
    Establishment. An establishment shall include all structures, businesses, and/or units located on one common ground. The public works director shall determine the appropriateness of such definition on a case-by-case basis. 
    Garbage. Garbage refers to all putrescible animal and vegetable waste, liquid or other waste resulting from the handling, processing, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, and all cans, bottles or other containers originally used for foodstuffs. 
    Garden refuse. All accumulations of plants, stems, roots, vegetables and fruits remaining after harvest are referred to as garden refuse. 
    Hazardous refuse. Any chemical, compound, mixture, substance or article, which may constitute a hazard to health or may cause damage to property by reason of being explosive, flammable, poisonous, corrosive, unstable, irritating, radioactive or otherwise harmful is referred to as hazardous refuse. 
    Industrial waste. Industrial waste refers to all wastes peculiar to industrial, manufacturing or processing plants. 
    Landscape debris. Any material such as dirt, soil, rock, mulch, timbers, cross ties, concrete blocks, pavers or other substances accumulated as a result of landscaping activity is referred to as landscape debris. 
    Litter. Rubbish, refuse, waste material, garbage, dead animals or fowl, offal, plastic, paper, glass, cans, bottles, trash, scrap metal, debris, or any foreign substance of whatever kind or description, and whether or not it is of value. Any agricultural product in its natural state that is unintentionally deposited on a public road, highway, street or right-of-way shall not be deemed litter for purposes of this section. 
    Nonresidential establishment. A nonresidential establishment is any establishment except those defined under "residential establishment." Nonresidential establishments shall be divided into the following categories: 
(1)  Commercial. Restaurants, motels, hotels, private cemeteries, retail and wholesale business establishments and offices where a product is not manufactured; 
(2)  Educational facilities. All public schools and universities; 
(3)  Fraternal, social and professional clubs and organizations. Lodges, social clubs, labor unions, etc; 
(4)  Governmental. Local, state and federal governmental agencies; 
(5)  Industrial. All manufacturing and fabricating businesses; 
(6)  Multiple-family structures. Any apartment complex with four or more units or any type of condominium, any mobile home park with four or more units, and public housing; 
(7)  Private educational facilities. All nonpublic schools, colleges and universities; 
(9)  Professional. All hospitals, doctors' offices, animal hospitals, clinics, etc; and 
(10)  Religious. All churches, synagogues and church-operated or affiliated agencies. 
    Park. A park is any reservation, playground, recreation center or any other public area in the city, owned or used by the city, and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
    Private premises. Any dwelling, house, building or other structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule, or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building, or other structure. 
    Producer. The producer is either the person responsible for the ashes, garbage, refuse, trash, industrial waste and any other waste material or the occupant of the place or building in which such is produced or in which the person responsible for such has a place of business or residence. 
    Public place. Public places refer to any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings. 
    Refuse. Refuse refers to all perishable and nonperishable solid wastes (except body wastes) including garbage, trash, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, cuttings and bulky refuse. 
    Residential establishments. Residential establishments refer to single or multiple-family dwelling units up to and including apartment complexes, condominiums or trailer parks of three or less units. 
    Sanitary refuse disposal site. Any site wherein solid waste is properly disposed of, including but not limited to landfills, public incinerator plants, publicly operated convenience centers, publicly operated transfer station sites, publicly operated recycling centers, and brush burner sites operated by the city are referred to as sanitary refuse disposal sites. 
    Trash. Trash is the non-putrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes such as paper, boxes, cloth, wrappings, crates, grass clippings, cuttings, leaves, glass and similar material. It shall not include bulky refuse, meaning stoves, refrigerators, water tanks, washing machines, furniture, bedding, furnaces or similar bulky material weighing more than 50 pounds and/or having a volume greater than 30 gallons. Trash shall be divided into three categories: 
(1)  Household trash. Waste accumulations of paper, sweepings, dust, rags, bottles, cans or other matter of any kind, other than garbage, which is usually attendant to housekeeping; 
(2)  Yard trash. Cuttings, leaves, grass clippings, garden refuse, etc., resulting from normal maintenance and care of landscaped, manicured grounds and lawns, but does not include cuttings and leaves from that portion of grounds that have been left in its natural state without normal maintenance; and 
(3)  Cuttings. Cuttings refer to all tree limbs, trimmings, shrubbery, etc. 
    Vacant property. Vacant property refers to all parcels of land without any permanent dwelling or business structure or any parcels of land with a dwelling or business structure that have remained vacant for a period of six months without routine maintenance to that yard and grounds. This shall also include portions of grounds and/or yards left in their natural state. 
(Ord. No. 2007-117, § 1, 4-2-07) 
Sec. 82-2. - Purpose. 
    This section is determined and declared to be a sanitary measure for the protection and promotion of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Dothan. 
(Ord. No. 2007-117, § 1, 4-2-07) 
Sec. 82-3. - Rules and regulations. 
    The public works director may make necessary or desirable rules and regulations that are not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter in order to aid in its administration and in order to ensure compliance and enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 2007-117, § 1, 4-2-07) 
Secs. 82-4-82-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESIDENTIAL COLLECTION 

Sec. 82-19. - Containerized refuse, collection frequency, placement, etc. 
(a)  Refuse such as ashes, garbage, household trash, and containerized "yard trash" shall be collected from each residential establishment once a week by the city. No hazardous refuse will be collected by the city. In the event of severe weather or other unforeseen disaster, collection may be suspended until the following week. The public works director shall prepare schedules for regular collection of refuse. 
(b)  Residential collection shall be made from curbside and approved city alleys at the exact location as determined by the public works director. Where there is no approved alley or curbside, carts shall be located as indicated by the public works director. Alley collection service may be denied to residential establishments by the public works director, if such alley is not easily accessible to the city garbage truck. 
(c)  If two or more residential establishments are located on a private road and not within a reasonable distance of a public street or alley, as determined by the public works director, collection of refuse stored in authorized residential carts may be made along the private road only if the owner(s) provides written approval for city collection trucks to travel on the private road. The city shall not be liable for any damages done to the private road as a result of normal use for ingress and egress. If approval is not granted by all owners along private drive, said owners must place containers along a public street at a location determined by the public works director. 
(d)  Residential carts shall be placed at the appropriate location as described in subsection (b) above no later than 6:00 a.m. on the day of collection and removed from curbside by 6:00 a.m. the day after collection has occurred. Carts shall be stored inconspicuously behind the front building line at the residence as determined by the public works director. 
(Ord. No. 2006-O-002, § 1, 9-5-06) 
Sec. 82-20. - Yard trash, cuttings and bulky refuse, collection, frequency, placement, etc. 
(a)  Yard trash piles, cuttings piles, and bulky refuse shall be collected from each residential establishment not more than once a week by the city and on a schedule developed by the public works director. 
(b)  Yard trash piles, cuttings piles and bulky refuse collection shall be made from curbside only. Where there is no curb, yard trash and bulk refuse shall be located as indicated by the public works director. 
(c)  Collection of yard trash piles during the leaf season shall be scheduled for each residential establishment twice per month and more frequently if possible. 
(d)  Yard trash piles of pine straw, leaves and grass clippings and garden refuse shall be piled free of limbs, rocks, boards and other hard, bulky materials that may be injurious to, or noncompatible with, mechanical pickup equipment. 
(e)  Cuttings, piles of brush, limbs and shrubbery shall be stored in neat piles separate from grass cuttings, leaves and pine straw. Each tree and shrubbery branch and limb shall be cut in lengths of not more than five feet and shall not be more than eight inches in diameter. 
(f)  Certain bulky refuse items, such as appliances, stoves, refrigerators, water tanks, washing machines, dryers, furniture, mattresses, bedsprings, and air conditioners shall be collected by the city when placed curbside on the scheduled trash collection day. 
(g)  Residents with empty moving boxes can be accommodated by contacting environmental services. 
(h)  Trash or any other refuse not stored and placed as provided in articles II and III shall be removed from the premises by the producer or at his expense. The following items of refuse shall also be removed by the owner and/or producer or at his expense: 
(1)  Building material (from other than minor repairs by the owner as determined by the public works director) as defined in article I, whether generated by a contractor, the owner, or any other person; 
(2)  Any refuse not resulting from the normal and routine maintenance of yard, grounds and residences, such as refuse removed from property after the owner was ordered to remove such refuse by any authorized official; 
(3)  Automobile, truck, tractor, and other vehicle tires and any other motor vehicle parts shall be disposed of by the owner or producer; 
(4)  Any trash pushed or pulled into piles by mechanical means shall be disposed of by the owner or producer; 
(5)  Any trash or landscape debris resulting from work performed by contractors or any other person for economic gain, whether such gain is in the form of cash or barter, shall be removed by the owner, occupant, or producer except normal and routine yard trash generated by "yard-workers" shall be collected in accordance with articles II and III. "Yard-workers" as used herein shall mean persons hired by citizens to perform routine lawn maintenance on a repetitive basis and does not include persons hired to do one-time tasks; 
(6)  Any other trash or refuse, except certain household items and appliances defined in subsection (4) of this section, weighing in excess of 50 pounds or having a volume of more than 35 gallons shall be removed by the producer; 
(7)  Any trees or limbs in excess of eight inches in diameter and associated stumps; 
(8)  Any trees, tree trunks, tree tops, tree limbs, stumps or any other tree part thereof resulting from cutting or any other work performed by contractors or any other person for economic gain, whether such gain is in the form of cash or barter, shall be removed by the owner, occupant or producer; and 
(9)  Any hazardous refuse. 
(i)  Refuse collection from vacant property located in residential areas will be limited to debris resulting from cleaning such property. "Cleaning" is defined as the removal of brush, leaves, litter, and other refuse already lying on the ground. It also includes grass cuttings and small volumes of vines appropriately cut and stacked. Refuse resulting from the clearing of vacant property shall be removed by the owner or at their expense. "Clearing" is defined as the cutting or pruning of trees, grubbing, clearing of fence rows, demolition of structures, or grading and excavation of the property. 
(j)  The placing of any trash, refuse, bulk items, etc., in public streets, gutters, or over storm drains is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2007-117, § 1, 4-2-07) 
Sec. 82-21. - Private property. 
    The city shall not be liable for damage done to private streets, driveways, parking lots, utility wires and connections, or other properties, resulting from normal use for ingress and egress to collect refuse, unless caused by negligence on the part of the city or its employees. 
(Ord. No. 2007-117, § 1, 4-3-07) 
Secs. 82-22-82-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NONRESIDENTIAL COLLECTION 

Sec. 82-36. - Garbage and trash collection; frequency, placement, etc. 
(a)  Refuse from nonresidential establishments will not be collected by the city and shall be removed by the owner or producer unless otherwise approved by the city manager. 
(b)  Tenants, lessees, occupants, or owners of nonresidential establishments shall provide a safe and convenient entrance to and through the premises for the purpose of collecting refuse. The city shall not be liable for damage done to private streets, driveways, parking lots, utility wires and connections, or other properties, resulting from normal use for ingress and egress to collect refuse, unless caused by negligence on the part of the city or its employees. 
(c)  The public works director shall determine the method of solid waste collection for each nonresidential establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2007-117, § 1, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 82-37. - Hazardous refuse. 
    No hazardous refuse shall be placed in any receptacle, container, or unit used for refuse collection by the city. The collection and disposal of such refuse shall be the responsibility of the owner, lessee, occupant, or producer. 
(Ord. No. 2007-117, § 1, 4-3-07) 
Secs. 82-38-82-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AUTOMATED COLLECTION PROGRAM 

Sec. 82-51. - Providing of rollout refuse cart. 
(a)  One rollout refuse cart will be provided by the city at no cost to the following establishments: 
(1)  Single-family residence; and 
(2)  Each unit of any multi-family structure as approved by the public works director. 
(b)  An additional cart may be obtained for a one-time fee of $50.00. 
(c)  The city will service no more than two authorized carts per residence. A third cart will be available upon approval of the public works director. 
(d)  All carts shall remain the property of the city and shall stay at the residence when the resident moves. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to borrow, steal, damage or otherwise remove any roll-out cart from use in the refuse collection program. 
(Ord. No. 2007-117, § 1, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 82-52. - Location of rollout refuse cart, placement time. 
(a)  The public works director will designate the exact location of each cart to be collected. Carts must be located no greater than three feet from edge of pavement or gutter unless specified otherwise. Carts shall not be placed in the street or gutter. 
(b)  Carts must be three feet from stationary objects such as mailboxes and utility poles. Carts shall not be located under any overhead obstacles, such as utility lines and canopies. 
(c)  Carts not placed in a manner as directed by the public works director, such as the direction of container opening, location, etc., shall not be collected. 
(Ord. No. 2007-117, § 1, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 82-53. - Contents of rollout refuse cart. 
(a)  Cart must not contain hot ashes, liquids, paints, tires, hospital waste, animal carcass or parts, household hazardous waste, or automobile parts. 
(b)  All animal waste must be double bagged prior to placing it in the cart. 
(c)  Total weight of cart and contents shall not exceed 250 pounds. 
(d)  Lid of cart must be in fully closed position to ensure collection. 
(e)  Loose garbage must be bagged before putting in cart to reduce wind-blown litter and ensure the cart is kept clean. 
(f)  Carts may be used for leaves, pine straw, cuttings, prunings, and grass. It is recommended that these items be bagged. 
(g)  All cardboard boxes, cartons, and crates shall be completely collapsed prior to being deposited in cart. 
(Ord. No. 2007-117, § 1, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 82-54. - Collection of rollout refuse cart. 
(a)  Only those carts provided or approved by the city will be collected. 
(b)  Any refuse placed outside the cart will not be collected except for the first scheduled collection day following Christmas day. 
(c)  Carts will not be collected on regular collection day due to: 
(1)  Not being out at times of collection; 
(2)  Improper location; 
(3)  Not facing street properly; 
(4)  Overloaded; 
(5)  Unacceptable contents; 
(6)  Contents lodged or frozen in cart; or 
(7)  As otherwise determined by the public works director. 
(d)  Notification will be given to the residential producer of the reason his or her refuse was not collected. A notice will be left at the residence specifying which requirement(s) in subparagraph three were not met. 
(e)  It is the producer's responsibility to remove and dispose of any unacceptable refuse in an approved manner. 
(Ord. No. 2007-117, § 1, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 82-55. - Replacement of carts. 
(a)  Carts that are assigned to individual establishments remain the property of the city. Carts removed from such establishments will be considered stolen and such will be appropriately processed through applicable courts of law. 
(b)  Any cart that is lost, stolen, or damaged by the user shall be replaced by that user at his or her cost of $50.00 each. Repair or replacement of city carts due to normal wear and tear shall be by the city. If the cart is lost or stolen, the customer should contact both environmental services and the police department. 
(Ord. No. 2007-117, § 1, 4-3-07) 
Secs. 82-56-82-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CONTAINERS 

Sec. 82-71. - Required; premises kept clean. 
(a)  All persons within the city are required to keep their premises in a clean and sanitary condition, free from the accumulation of refuse, except when stored as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  Every person in possession, charge or control of any premises of a residential establishment and the owner, manager or custodian of any nonresidential establishment where garbage or trash is accumulated, shall keep or cause to be kept at all times containers for the deposit of garbage and trash generated on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2007-117, § 1, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 82-72. - Unsatisfactory rollout carts. 
    Rollout carts used for the deposit of garbage or household trash shall be in such good condition that collection thereof shall not injure the person collecting the contents nor be unsuitable for the healthful and sanitary storage of refuse substances. The city is hereby authorized to confiscate or to remove unsatisfactory carts as determined by the public works director from the premises of residential establishments that do not comply with the requirements of this article; provided, however, that the owners, or their agents or lessees, of such carts shall be duly notified of such impending action by five days' notice in writing delivered to the premises on which the unsatisfactory cart is located or affixed to such cart deemed to be unsatisfactory. 
(Ord. No. 2007-117, § 1, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 82-73. - Proximity of other personal effects. 
    Garbage and trash shall not be stored in close proximity to other personal effects, which are not desired to be collected, but shall be reasonably separated in order that the collector can clearly distinguish between what is to be collected and what is not to be collected. Personal effects stored or placed within three feet of a cart or pile of trash shall be presumed to be garbage or trash and collected accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 2007-117, § 1, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 82-74. - Residential rollout carts; storage. 
    Lids or covers of authorized residential rollout carts shall be kept tightly closed and watertight at all times other than when refuse is being deposited therein or removed there from. Refuse shall be stored for collection in the following manner: 
(1)  Ashes, garbage and household trash shall be stored in authorized residential rollout carts. Bulky refuse such as furniture, appliances, and yard trash shall also be separated from garbage and placed for collection as provided in articles II and III; and 
(2)  Grass clippings, leaves and pine straw may be placed, either bagged or unbagged, in the city collection cart so long as the weight of such loaded cart does not exceed 250 pounds in weight. 
(Ord. No. 2007-117, § 1, 4-3-07) 
Secs. 82-75-82-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SANITARY REFUSE DISPOSAL SITES AND FEES 

Sec. 82-91. - Designation. 
    The city manager may select and designate, subject to approval of the board of commissioners, suitable and proper sites or locations for sanitary refuse disposal sites for the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-117, § 1, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 82-92. - City use. 
    Sanitary refuse disposal sites selected, designated and approved shall be used by such persons or other entities as is expressly permitted by the public works director. When it is advantageous to the city and where a shorter haul can be made than to a normal disposal site, waste dirt, straw and leaves may be deposited on private premises where requested and consented to in writing by the resident or owner of the property. 
(Ord. No. 2007-117, § 1, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 82-93. - Days and hours of operation. 
    Any dumping of refuse in sanitary refuse disposal sites by individuals or private haulers shall be done at such times as may be designated by the public works director. Such dumping shall be subject to the direction and control of, and at the specific places designated by, the attendant in charge at such sanitary refuse disposal sites. 
(Ord. No. 2007-117, § 1, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 82-94. - Material disposal control, fees, rates. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of refuse, not suitable for the applicable disposal site as determined by the board of commissioners. All federal and state rules and regulations concerning hazardous and special waste disposal processes shall be followed. Disposal fees, rates, and credits, if any, at the applicable disposal site(s), including transfer station sites and city operated recycling centers, shall be established by resolution of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2007-117, § 1, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 82-95. - Schedule of fees, rates, credits, etc., for disposal. 
(a)  The following fees shall be paid to the city for refuse, including garbage, trash, debris, etc. delivered to the city landfill for disposal: 
(1)  Nonbusiness pickups/cars with refuse generated within the corporate limits of the city, no charge; 
(2)  Inside the county, commercial and business, and nonbusiness pickups/cars; $38.00 per ton; and 
(3)  Outside the county, excluding that area located in other counties which are a part of the corporate limits of the city, commercial, business, and residential; $120.00 per ton. 
(b)  The fees in subsection (a) of this section are subject to change, by ordinance of the board of commissioners. 
(c)  The public works director shall have the right to waive any landfill fees in connection with public works projects within the city limits. 
(d)  Fees for the delivery of refuse by any person or business without an established account shall be paid at the time of delivery. For all other deliveries, statements shall be billed to the person or business making said delivery at the close of each calendar month. Such statements shall be paid within two weeks of the billing date. Failure to pay account will terminate landfill access. 
(Ord. No. 2007-117, § 1, 4-3-07; Ord. No. 2008-307, § 1, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 82-96. - Service charge for the collection, hauling and disposing of refuse. 
(a)  Beginning on the 1st day of March 2013, and continuing monthly thereafter a fee of $14.75 shall be paid to the city by every residential customer for the collection, hauling and disposing of refuse. 
(b)  All bills for service hereafter shall be due and payable monthly for service commencing with billings on or after March 1, 2013. For any total account balance, including electricity, water, sewer or solid waste service billed, that has not been paid by the date due, a late fee of five percent of the delinquent account balance, with a minimum late fee of $5.00, will be added to the account. 
(c)  Any customer being billed for garbage collection only and whose account becomes delinquent will be subject to the city's collection policy. 
(Ord. No. 2012-319, § 1, 12-4-12) 
Sec. 82-97. - Exceptions to the service charge. 
(a)  Any household whose sole source of income is Social Security Benefits shall be granted an exemption from the payment of any service charge required under section 82-96, provided the household seeking to claim the exemption shall present proof of income to the county health officer no later than the first billing date of any calendar year in which the exemption is desired. The county health officer shall notify the city utility collections office in writing of the intention to grant a certificate of exception and no such certificate of exception shall be granted for an individual household without prior written approval of the city finance director or his or her designee. The exemption shall apply only so long as the household's sole source of income is Social Security and shall be requested each year in which the exemption is desired. Falsification of records is a class "C" felony. 
(b)  If a household is expected to be vacant for a minimum of three months, an application for exemption of the service charge may be submitted to the city utility collections division. Upon approval of the application, the garbage cart will be removed from the household. If the household is not vacant for a minimum of three months, the household will be assessed the unbilled service charge. Any exemption will be applied only after application is approved. 
(Ord. No. 2012-319, § 1, 12-4-12) 
Secs. 82-98-82-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - LITTERING, UNAUTHORIZED ACTIVITIES 

Sec. 82-111. - Unauthorized dumping is littering. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly deposit in any manner litter on any public or private property or in any public or private waters having no permission to do so. 
(b)  For purposes of this subdivision, items found in an accumulation of garbage, trash or other discarded material including, but not limited to, bank statements, utility bills, bank card bills, and other financial documents, clearly bearing the name of a person shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the person whose name appears thereon knowingly deposited the litter. Advertising, marketing, and campaign materials and literature shall not be sufficient to constitute a rebuttable presumption of criminal littering under this subsection. 
(c)  No action for criminal littering based on evidence that creates a rebuttable presumption under subsection (a) shall be brought against a person unless he or she has been given written notice by a designee of the city commission that items found in an accumulation of garbage, trash, or other discarded materials contain his or her name, and that, under subsection (a), there is a rebuttable presumption that he or she knowingly deposited the litter. The notice shall advise the person that criminal littering is a misdemeanor, and shall provide that, unless the person can present satisfactory information or evidence to rebut the presumption to the designee of the governing body within 15 days of the date of the notice, an action for criminal littering may be filed against him in the municipal court. If the person responds to the notice and presents information or evidence to the designee of the city commission, the designee shall review the information or evidence presented and make a determination as to whether or not an action should be brought against the person for criminal littering. The designee shall provide written notice to the person of its determination, and if the intent is to proceed with an action for criminal littering, the notice shall be sent before any action is filed. 
(Ord. No. 2007-117, § 1, 4-3-07) 
State Law reference- Ala. Code 1975 Sec. 13A-7-29. 
Sec. 82-112. - Carrying material; trucking foreign material. 
    The owner, lessee or operator of every vehicle engaged in hauling any sand, gravel, dirt, stone, rock, brick, coal, limestone, limestone dust, asphalt, garbage, trash, or any material which, as a result of such a vehicle movement, may be likely to blow, fall or be scattered on or along city streets and alleys shall maintain such a vehicle in a secure condition and shall direct and supervise the loading of said vehicle in such a manner as to prevent any portion of such materials, products or substances from falling, blowing or being scattered on city streets or alleys. Nor shall garbage or other materials offensive to the sight or smell be removed or carried on or along the streets and alleys of the city except in trucks having watertight beds or boxes with proper cover. All vehicles transporting solid waste or other aforementioned material in public places shall be covered or tarped during transportation, and shall be secured to prevent such materials, products, or substances from blowing, falling, or scattering on city streets or other public places. No person shall drive or more any vehicle or truck within the city, the wheels and tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, "litter" or foreign matter of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 2007-117, § 1, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 82-113. - Burning refuse on streets, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any persons to burn, or cause to be burned, refuse on any street, alley, highway, or right-of-way thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2007-117, § 1, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 82-114. - Unauthorized removal of material from garbage collection and recycling containers. 
(a)  Any and all garbage, trash, refuse or other material, of whatever nature, placed in containers utilized by the city for the purpose of collecting garbage, trash, or refuse for the purpose of disposal or recycling shall be deemed to be abandoned property, and its removal from any of said containers by any person not authorized to carry out such removal by the city manager is hereby prohibited. 
(b)  Interference with the contents of any garbage can or container by removing such contents from such can or container and placing same upon the streets, sidewalks, lanes, avenues, or other public or private property in the city is hereby prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2007-117, § 1, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 82-115. - Unauthorized accumulation of refuse. 
(a)  No person shall allow garbage, trash, paper or litter to accumulate on premises under his control in such manner that it may be scattered or blown onto any street, public place, the premises of others or that premises. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, or cause to be placed, any concrete, garbage, food waste or other material in any drain, ditch or other place within the corporate limits or police jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-117, § 1, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 82-116. - Penalties for violation of this article. 
(a)  Except where otherwise specified herein, whenever any person is arrested for a violation of this article, the arresting officer shall take the name and address of such person and such other pertinent information as may be necessary and issue a summons or otherwise notify him in writing to appear at a time and place to be specified in such summons or notice. Such officer shall thereupon and upon the giving by such person of a sufficient written bond, approved by the arresting officer, to appear at such time and place, forthwith release him from custody. Any person refusing to give such bond to appear shall be taken immediately by the arresting officer before the city magistrate. Any person who willfully violates his written bond to appear, given in accordance with this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, regardless of the disposition of the original violation charged. 
(b)  Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this article shall be fined not less than $20.00 nor more than $500.00, the costs of court and restitution shall be ordered for any and all costs incurred by the city or any other person associated with the violation. Failure to pay the amount as ordered by the court shall be cause for disconnection of city electric and/or water service. Times and conditions for disconnection, fees for reconnection and returned checks shall be according to the provision of chapter 102 herein. 
(c)  Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate misdemeanor offense. Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 2007-117, § 1, 4-3-07) 
Secs. 82-117-82-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - RECYCLING 

Sec. 82-121. - Purpose. 
    The city's recycling program is established for the purpose of reducing the residential solid waste stream and the associated costs of solid waste disposal, conserving landfill space and conserving natural resources. 
(Ord. No. 2007-117, § 1, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 82-122. - City manager to establish a program. 
    City manager shall create and implement a recycling program for city residential refuse collection. The program shall be designed to comply with state law requirements and guidelines. The program may set forth rules for the types of recyclables to be collected, the frequency of collection, the day of collection, separation requirements and any other provisions which are necessary or reasonable for the implementation of the program. 
(Ord. No. 2007-117, § 1, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 82-123. - Voluntary residential program. 
(a)  All city residential refuse producers may participate in the city-wide residential recycling program by: 
(1)  Collecting all their recyclable materials; and 
(2)  Placing appropriate materials in recycling containers at curbside by 6:00 a.m. on the designated day for collection of those materials; or 
(3)  Bringing appropriate recyclable materials to a city recycling drop-off site if provided. 
(b)  The recycling container shall be the standard container issued by the city. 
(c)  No customer shall place his or her recycling container at the designated curbside point of collection earlier than dusk on the day preceding the scheduled collection. Each producer shall remove his or her container from the curbside or other collection spot to behind the front building line as soon as practicable after the container has been emptied, but in no case later than 6:00 a.m. the day after collection. 
(d)  No person shall use recycling containers for anything but participation in the city's recycling program. No person may place garbage or other refuse in a recycling container. It shall be unlawful for any person to borrow, steal, damage or otherwise remove any recycling container from use in the curbside recycling program. 
(e)  The standard city issued recycling container is the property of the city and shall remain at the residence when the resident moves. 
(Ord. No. 2007-117, § 1, 4-3-07) 
Chapter 83 - STORMWATER 
ARTICLE I. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE 

Sec. 83-1. - Intent. 
    This article is enacted to preserve, protect and promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Dothan, Alabama, through the reduction, control and prevention of the discharge of pollutants to the city municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). It is the expressed intent of this document to provide for and promote compliance by the city with federal and state laws governing the discharge of pollutants from the MS4 and to provide for and promote compliance with an NPDES permit issued to the city for such discharge. The city does not intend for this article to conflict with any existing federal or state law. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user. 
(2)  To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(3)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-82, § 1, 3-23-10) 
Sec. 83-2. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, the following terms are defined as hereinafter set forth: 
    ADEM shall mean the Alabama Department of Environmental Management. 
    BMPs or best management practices shall mean schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants to the MS4. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control facility site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
    City shall mean the City of Dothan, Alabama, a municipal corporation organized under the laws of the State of Alabama. 
    Clean Water Act shall mean the Federal Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq., and regulations promulgated thereunder. 
    Commercial area shall mean any facility associated with commercial activity which is not subject to its own NPDES permit or an ADEM general stormwater permit. 
    Discharge or discharge of a pollutant shall mean any addition of any "pollutant" to the MS4. This term does not include an addition of pollutants by any "indirect discharger" or from any source specifically excluded from the definition of "point source." 
    Discharge monitoring report or DMR shall mean the EPA or ADEM uniform form for the reporting of self-monitoring results by NPDES permittees. 
    EPA shall mean the Federal Environmental Protection Agency. 
    Good housekeeping shall mean the use of practical, cost-effective methods to maintain a clean and orderly facility and keep contaminants out of separate storm sewers. It includes activities such as sweeping/trash collection, establishing protocols to reduce the possibility of mishandling chemicals or equipment, and the proper training of employees. 
    High-risk facility shall mean municipal landfills; other treatment, storage, or disposal facilities for municipal waste (e.g., transfer stations, incinerators, etc.); and hazardous waste treatment, storage, disposal and recovery facilities. 
    Holder shall mean a person to whom a BMP plan approval has been issued. 
    Illicit discharge shall mean any discharge to the MS4 that is not composed entirely of stormwater except discharges pursuant to a NPDES permit (other than the NPDES permit for discharges from the MS4) and discharges from fire fighting and emergency management activities. 
    Indirect discharger shall mean a nondomestic discharger introducing "pollutants" to a "publicly owned treatment works." 
    Industrial facility shall mean any facility associated with industrial activity. 
    Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) shall mean a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains), which is owned or operated by the city, designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, and is neither a POTW nor a combined sewer. 
    NPDES or national pollutant discharge elimination system shall mean the national permitting program implemented under the "Clean Water Act." 
    Person shall mean any individual, partnership, syndicate, group, firm, company, association, trust, corporation, business, or any entity recognized by law, or any combination of the foregoing. 
    Person responsible or responsible person shall mean a person who has or represents having: 
(1)  An ownership interest in or financial or operational control of a source or potential source of a discharge or a discharge regulated by this article; 
(2)  Possession or control of a source or potential source of a discharge regulated by this article who directly or indirectly allowed, either by act or omission, a discharge regulated by this article; or 
(3)  Benefited from a source or potential source of a discharge or a discharge regulated by this article. There may be one or more "persons responsible" or "responsible persons." 
    Point source shall mean any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance, including but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation, landfill leachate collection system, vessel or other floating craft from which pollutants are discharged. This term does not include return flows from irrigated agriculture or agricultural stormwater runoff. 
    Pollutant means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical waste, biological materials, radioactive materials (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended), heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, domestic, and agricultural waste discharged into water. 
    Public works director means the director for the City of Dothan Public Works Department or his designated representative. 
    Publicly owned treatment works or POTW shall mean any device or system used in the treatment of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature which is owned by the city. This definition includes sewers, pipes or other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to a POTW providing treatment. 
    Significant materials shall include, but not be limited to: raw materials; fuels; materials such as solvents, detergents, and plastic pellets; finished materials such as metallic products; raw materials used in food processing or production; hazardous substances designated under section 101(14) of CERCLA; any chemical the facility is required to report pursuant to section 313 of title III of SARA; fertilizers; pesticides; and waste products such as ashes, slag and sludge that have the potential to be released with stormwater discharges. 
    Stormwater shall mean stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff and surface runoff and drainage. 
    Stormwater discharge associated with industrial activity shall have the same meaning as in the "Clean Water Act" and regulations promulgated there under. 
    Stormwater discharge from sites of industrial activity shall mean stormwater discharges from industrial facilities that are subject to section 313 of title III of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986 (SARA) (42 U.S.C. § 11023(b)) or that have significant materials, raw materials, material handling equipment or activities, intermediate products or industrial machinery exposed to stormwater, except for those industrial facilities which possess their own NPDES permit or are subject to an ADEM general stormwater permit. In addition, this definition also shall include industrial facilities that the public works director determines are contributing a substantial pollutant loading to the MS4. 
    To the extent practicable when used in reference to terms and conditions of NPDES permits (other than the NPDES permit issued to the city) and procedures and methods established by federal regulation, shall mean that the public works director shall defer to these terms, conditions, procedures, and methods so long as the city's compliance with its own NPDES permit, or federal or state law is not jeopardized in any manner. 
    Water Pollution Control Act shall mean the Alabama Water Pollution Control Act of 1972, and regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2010-82, § 1, 3-23-10) 
Sec. 83-3. - Discharge prohibitions. 
(a)  The illicit discharge of pollutants to the MS4 is prohibited. 
(b)  The discharge of pollutants to the MS4 by discharging stormwater associated with industrial activity is prohibited except as authorized by a NPDES permit. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this article which relate to such discharge. 
(c)  The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater to the MS4 is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2010-82, § 1, 3-23-10) 
Sec. 83-4. - Exceptions to prohibition. 
    The following discharges are specifically excluded from the prohibitions included in section 83-3: 
(a)  Water line flushing (including fire hydrant testing). 
(b)  Landscape irrigation. 
(c)  Diverted stream flows. 
(d)  Rising ground waters. 
(e)  Uncontaminated ground water infiltration (infiltration is defined as water other than wastewater that enters a sewer system, including sewer service connection and foundation drains, from the ground through such means as defective pipes, sewer service connections, or manholes. Infiltration does not include, and is distinguished from, inflow.) 
(f)  Uncontaminated pumped ground water. 
(g)  Discharges from potable water sources. 
(h)  Uncontaminated groundwater from under drains (French drains or tile drains). 
(i)  Air conditioning condensation. 
(j)  Irrigation water. 
(k)  Springs. 
(l)  Water from crawl space pumps. 
(m)  Foundation or footing drains. 
(n)  Lawn watering. 
(o)  Individual residential car washing. 
(p)  Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands. 
(q)  Swimming pool discharges (if dechlorinated - typically less than one part per million chlorine). 
(r)  Street wash water. 
(s)  Discharges or flows from fire fighting activities. 
(Ord. No. 2010-82, § 1, 3-23-10) 
Sec. 83-5. - Inspection and monitoring. 
(a)  The public works director shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this article as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access. 
(b)  Facility operators shall allow the public works director ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law. 
(c)  The public works director shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the public works director to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge. 
(d)  The public works director has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(e)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the public works director and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator. 
(f)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the public works director access to a facility is a violation of this article. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this article. 
(g)  If the public works director has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the public works director may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2010-82, § 1, 3-23-10) 
Sec. 83-6. - Best management practices (BMPs). 
    All industrial facilities and high risk facilities are required to implement, at their own expense, structural and nonstructural BMPs, as appropriate, to prevent the discharge of pollutants to the MS4. Further, the public works director may require any person responsible for a property or premise, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the discharge of pollutants to the MS4. To the extent practicable, the public works director shall recognize that storage and handling of significant materials, material handling equipment or activities, intermediate products or industrial machinery in such a manner that they are not exposed to stormwater is an effective BMP. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed in compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2010-82, § 1, 3-23-10) 
Sec. 83-7. - Good housekeeping. 
    Commercial areas and industrial facilities shall employ good housekeeping practices to prevent debris such as paper, bottles, cans, plastic, etc. from entering the MS4 from areas such as parking lots, loading zones, sidewalks, trash cans and dumpster sites. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge chemicals, waste products or any pollutant to the parking lot or grounds of a commercial area or an industrial facility. 
(Ord. No. 2010-82, § 1, 3-23-10) 
Sec. 83-8. - BMP plan. 
    Whenever stormwater will be discharged into the MS4 from a site of industrial activity or a high risk facility, the person responsible for such site, except as such site may be expressly excepted from coverage of this article, shall develop and implement a BMP plan sufficient enough to control discharges from his facility. If requested by the public works director, such BMP plan must be provided for review within ten days of the request. 
(Ord. No. 2010-82, § 1, 3-23-10) 
Sec. 83-9. - Modifications to BMP plan. 
    A BMP plan may be modified in order to comply with any federal, state or local law, regulation, order or standard, or when, in the opinion of the public works director, a modification is necessary to accurately control changes in the character or amount of pollutants of stormwater discharged into the MS4, or any other applicable condition. Deadlines for compliance with the modified requirements shall be determined on a case specific basis. 
(Ord. No. 2010-82, § 1, 3-23-10) 
Sec. 83-10. - Revocation of a BMP plan. 
(a)  The public works director may revoke authorization to discharge under a BMP plan, if he determines that one or more of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The holder provided false information; 
(2)  The holder provided false information with respect to any monitoring, record keeping, or reporting requirements; 
(3)  The holder is convicted of violating the provisions of this article; 
(4)  Any term or condition imposed under a BMP plan was not satisfied; 
(5)  Any federal, state or municipal statute, law, ordinance, regulation, order or standard is being violated by the holder; 
(6)  The holder has refused entry to the public works director for purposes of inspection or monitoring; or 
(7)  For any other reason if, in the judgment of the public works director, the continuance of a BMP plan is not consistent with the purposes of this article. 
(b)  Whenever the public works director determines that grounds exist for revocation of a BMP plan, he shall serve upon the holder a written notice of proposed revocation, stating the facts or conduct which warrant revocation of the BMP plan approval, and providing the holder with an opportunity to demonstrate or achieve compliance with all lawful requirements. Within ten days of the date of the notice of proposed revocation, the holder must provide written or demonstrative evidence of satisfactory compliance or a written plan for achieving satisfactory compliance. 
(c)  If the holder fails to respond to a notice of proposed revocation or fails to provide adequate evidence of satisfactory compliance or an adequate written plan for achieving satisfactory compliance, the public works director shall deliver, by certified mail/return receipt requested, a written notice of revocation to the holder. Said notice of revocation shall be effective immediately and shall include a statement of the reasons for revocation and the appeal procedure. 
(Ord. No. 2010-82, § 1, 3-23-10) 
Sec. 83-11. - Emergency suspension of BMP plan. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the public works director may, without notice, suspend a BMP plan by delivery to the holder, by hand delivery, certified mail/return receipt requested, or the posting in at least three conspicuous places at the site subject to the BMP plan, a notice of emergency suspension of BMP plan. A BMP plan will be suspended under this section only when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the public works director, to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to the environment, or causes interference with the MS4 or causes the city to violate any condition of its NPDES permit. Said notice of emergency suspension of BMP plan shall state the grounds for suspension and the corrective action necessary for reinstatement of the BMP plan. 
(b)  Any holder notified of suspension under this section shall immediately stop the activity generating the discharge noted in the notice of emergency suspension. The public works director shall reinstate resumption of activities upon proof of the elimination of the endangering discharge or circumstances. 
(c)  Emergency suspension of a BMP plan approval may be appealed in accordance with the provisions of section 83-12. 
(Ord. No. 2010-82, § 1, 3-23-10) 
Sec. 83-12. - Appeal. 
    A person denied discharge under an existing BMP plan (hereinafter "appellant") may appeal the decision of the public works director. Appellant may commence said appeal by filing a written notice of appeal, specifying the grounds for said appeal, with the city manager within 15 days following receipt of the public works director's notice of denial, notice of revocation, or notice of suspension. At the hearing, the public works director shall state his grounds for denying, revoking, or suspending discharge and shall provide any evidence supporting such action. Evidence on appellant's behalf may be presented at such hearing. The decision of the hearing shall: 
(1)  Sustain the decision of the public works director; or 
(2)  Reverse or vary the decision of the public works director, specifying the manner in which any variations shall be made, the conditions upon which they are to be made and the reasons therefore. 
(Ord. No. 2010-82, § 1, 3-23-10) 
Sec. 83-13. - Sections 83-7 through 83-12, inapplicable to discharges or activities authorized by a NPDES permit. 
    The provisions of sections 83-7, 83-8, 83-10, 83-11 and 83-12 shall not apply to a discharge or activity specifically authorized by a NPDES permit. 
(Ord. No. 2010-82, § 1, 3-23-10) 
Sec. 83-14. - Noncompliance. 
    It shall be unlawful to refuse or fail to comply with the terms or conditions of a BMP plan approval issued under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-82, § 1, 3-23-10) 
Sec. 83-15. - False information and tampering. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to provide false information to the public works director or anyone working under the public works director's supervision when such person knows or has reason to know that the information provided is false, whether such information is required by this article, any BMP plan approval granted under this article, or any inspection, record keeping or monitoring requirement carried out or imposed under this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to falsify, tamper with, or knowingly render inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article or a BMP plan approval issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2010-82, § 1, 3-23-10) 
Sec. 83-16. - Method of enforcement. 
    The public works director is authorized to issue citations to appear in municipal court to answer charges of violation of any of the provisions of this article. In no event shall any enforcement action under this article be taken for an alleged violation of this article if any of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  ADEM has issued a notice of violation with respect to the same violation and is proceeding with enforcement action; 
(2)  ADEM has issued an administrative order with respect to the same alleged violation and is proceeding with enforcement action; or 
(3)  ADEM has commenced and is proceeding with enforcement action or has completed any other type of administrative or civil action with respect to the same alleged violation. 
    However, enforcement action under this article may be pursued for continued or continuing violations, and each day that a violation of this article continues shall be considered a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-82, § 1, 3-23-10) 
Sec. 83-17. - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this article or any provision of a BMP plan issued under this article shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided by law, including those penalties set forth in Code of Ala. § 11-45-9 as adopted by chapter 1 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-82, § 1, 3-23-10) 
Sec. 83-18. - Existing authorities. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit the existing authority of the city to enforce rules and regulations regarding: 
(1)  Charges, limits and restrictions on the discharge of waste into the sanitary sewerage system of the city; 
(2)  Health or sanitation ordinances of the city enforced by the county health department; or 
(3)  Ordinances governing the sanitation of premises where animals are kept. 
    This article shall be cumulative to and in furtherance of any statutory, common law, or other legal right, duty, power, or authority possessed by the city. Compliance with this article or a BMP plan issued hereunder shall not excuse any person from compliance with any other federal, state or local law, ordinance, regulation, rule or order. 
(Ord. No. 2010-82, § 1, 3-23-10) 
ARTICLE II. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 83-19. - Purpose. 
    As required by The City of Dothan, Alabama's Phase II municipal separate storm sewer (MS4) National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit, issued by the Alabama Department of Environmental Management (ADEM), the city must develop, implement, and enforce a stormwater management program designed to reduce the discharge of pollutants from its MS4 to the "maximum extent practicable," to protect water quality and to satisfy the appropriate water quality requirements of the Clean Water Act (CWA). This article is therefore enacted to preserve, protect and promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Dothan, Alabama, through the reduction, control and prevention of the discharge of pollutants from newly developed and redeveloped sites to the MS4. It is the expressed intent of the city in enacting this article to provide for and promote compliance by the city with federal and state laws governing the discharge of pollutants from the MS4 and to provide for and promote compliance with the city's NPDES permit, issued by ADEM pursuant to its authority under the CWA. 
(Ord. No. 2013-149, § 1, 6-4-13) 
Sec. 83-20. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings established in this section. 
    Accidental discharge shall mean a discharge prohibited by this article into the municipal separate storm sewer system that occurs by chance and without planning or consideration prior to occurrence. 
    ADEM or The Alabama Department of Environmental Management shall mean the State of Alabama's regulatory agency created under Code of Alabama 1975, §§ 22-22A-1, et seq., responsible for administering and enforcing the Stormwater Laws of the United States of America and the State of Alabama. 
    Adverse impact shall mean any deleterious effect on waters or wetlands, including their quality, quantity, surface area, species composition, aesthetics or usefulness, for human or natural uses which are or may be potentially harmful or injurious to human health, welfare, safety or property or to biological productivity, diversity or stability, or which would unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property. 
    Agriculture shall mean activities undertaken on land for the production of plants, crops, and animals that are useful to man. 
    Alabama Handbook shall mean the most recent edition of the Alabama Handbook for Erosion Control, Sediment Control and Stormwater Management on Construction Sites and Urban Areas authored by the Alabama Soil and Water Conservation Committee, Montgomery, Alabama. 
    Applicant shall mean any individual, partnership, syndicate, joint venture, group, firm, company, association, trust, public or private corporation, business, estate, commission, board, utility, cooperative, county, city or other political subdivision, or any entity recognized by law including but not limited to any duly authorized agent, or any combination of the foregoing, that executes the necessary forms to procure an effective, issued permit to discharge under the NPDES. 
    AWPCA or The Alabama Water Pollution Control Act, Code of Alabama 1975, §§ 22-22-1, et seq., and the Alabama Environmental Management Act, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 22-22A-1, et seq., both as amended, and regulations promulgated thereunder. 
    BMPs or Best Management Practices shall mean activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures and management practices, designed and implemented to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants to the MS4. Nonstructural BMPs are strategies implemented to control stormwater runoff that focus on pollution prevention such as alternative site design, zoning and ordinances, education, and good housekeeping measures. Structural BMPs are engineered devices to control, treat, or prevent stormwater runoff pollution. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices, to control facility site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal or drainage from raw material storage and construction sites. 
    BMP plan or Best Management Practices Plan shall mean a set of drawings and/or other documents submitted by the applicant to the city as a prerequisite to obtaining approval to commence construction activities at a development site falling partially or entirely within the city's territorial jurisdiction. The site specific BMP plan contains all of the information and specifications pertaining to the BMPs the applicant will use to control erosion and sedimentation for its development. 
    Clearing shall mean the removal of trees, shrubs, grass, brush and/or other varied ground cover and vegetation from the land, which, in its undisturbed state, is useful for windbreaks, water retention and the maintenance of topsoil. This definition does not include the ordinary mowing of grass or the maintenance of previously cleared land. 
    Contour shall mean a line of equal elevation above a specified datum, usually meaning sea level. 
    CWA or The Federal Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1251, et seq., which was formerly referred to as the Federal Water Pollution Control Act and Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, Public Law 92-500, as amended by Public Law 95-217, Public Law 95-576, Public Law 6-483 and Public Law 97-117, 33 U.S.C. § 1251-1387. 
    Discharge shall have the meaning set out in Alabama Administrative Code Section 335-6-6-.02. 
    Drainage shall mean the removal of surface water from a given area either by gravity or by pumping; commonly applied to surface water and groundwater. 
    Drainage area shall mean the area contributing runoff to a single point measured in a horizontal plane, which is enclosed by a ridgeline; the area of a drainage basin or watershed, expressed in acres, square miles or other units of area. 
    Engineer shall mean a person currently licensed by the Alabama State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors. 
    EPA shall mean The Environmental Protection Agency. 
    Erosion shall mean the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind or water. 
    Erosion and sediment controls shall mean the application of measures to reduce erosion of land surfaces and discharges of sediment from a development site. 
    Grading shall mean any act by which soil is cleared, stripped, stockpiled, excavated, scarified, or filled, or any combination thereof. 
    Land disturbing activities shall mean activities that include any land change, which may result in erosion and the movement of sediment to the MS4, including but not limited to the clearing, dredging, grading, excavation, transporting, and filling of land. 
    MS4 or the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System , is comprised of a system of man-made conveyances designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, and storm drains which are owned and operated by a city, town, county or other public body created by or pursuant to state law. An MS4 does not include a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) or a combined sewer. 
    NOI or Notice of Intent shall mean the application that must be submitted to ADEM to obtain coverage under the agency's general permit regulating land disturbing activities, applicable to discharges from sites that result in total land disturbance of one acre or greater and sites less than one acre but are part of a common plan of development or sale. 
    NPDES or the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System NPDES shall mean the national program of issuing, modifying, revoking, etc., permits under Sections 307, 318, 402, and 405 of the CWA, as well as the state permitting program implemented under the CWA and the AWPCA. 
    Outfall shall mean a point source (meaning any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, including but not limited to any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation, landfill leachate collection system, vessel or other floating craft from which pollutants are or may be discharged, but not including return flows from agriculture or agricultural water runoff) at the point of a discharge to waters of the United States of America. 
    Permit shall mean any permit issued pursuant to this article, permitting discharges to the MS4 under the NPDES. 
    Permittee shall mean any applicant that receives a permit to discharge under the NPDES. 
    Pollutant shall mean that which includes but is not limited to, the pollutants specified in § 22-22-1(b)(3) of the AWPCA and any other effluent characteristics specified in a permit. 
    Post-construction strategies shall mean BMPs and other measures for activities that take place after construction occurs, including structural and non-structural controls to obtain permanent stormwater management over the life of the property's use. 
    PSC or the Alabama Public Service Commission shall mean The State of Alabama's regulatory agency created under Code of Alabama 1975, §§ 37-1-1, et seq., responsible for the regulation of utilities including but not limited to those providing electricity, gas, water, and steam. 
    QCP or Qualified Credentialed Professional which can be a professional engineer (PE), an Alabama Natural Resources Conservation Service professional designated by the State of Alabama's Conservationist, a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC) as determined by CPESC, Inc., other registered or certified professionals such as a registered landscape architect, registered land surveyor, registered geologist, registered forester, a registered environmental manager as determined by the National Registry of Environmental Professionals (NREP), or a Certified Professional and Soil Scientist (CPSS) as determined by ARCPACS, and other ADEM accepted professional designations, certifications, and/or accredited university programs that can document requirements regarding proven training, relevant experience, and continuing education, that enable recognized individuals to prepare BMP plans, to make sound professional judgments regarding Alabama NPDES rules, the requirements of Alabama Administrative Code Chapter 335-6-12, planning, design, implementation, maintenance, and inspection of construction sites, receiving waters, BMPs, remediation/cleanup of accumulated offsite pollutants from the regulated site, and reclamation or effective stormwater quality remediation of construction associated land disturbing activities, that meet or exceed recognized technical standards and guidelines, effective industry standard practices, and the requirements Chapter 335-6-12. The QCP shall be in good standing with the authority granting the registration or designation. 
    Sediment shall mean solid material settled from suspension in a liquid that has been transported and deposited from its site of origin by air, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion and has come to rest on the earth's surface either above or below a water surface, usually inorganic or organic particles originating from weathering, chemical precipitation or biological activity. 
    Sedimentation shall mean the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by action of water, wind, ice and gravity. 
    Silviculture shall mean the care and cultivation of forest trees, including site preparation, planting, pruning, thinning and harvesting. 
    Site shall mean any tract, lot, or parcel of land or combination of contiguous tracts, lots or parcels of land to be developed as a unit, subdivision or project. 
    Stabilization shall mean the prevention of soil movement by any of various vegetative and/or structural means. 
    Stormwater shall mean the excess water running off from the surface of a drainage area during and immediately after a period of rain or snow melt. It is that portion of the surface flow that is in excess of that which can be absorbed through the infiltration capacity of the surface of the basin. 
    Stormwater management shall mean the incorporation of a variety of activities and equipment into a plan to address concerns associated with stormwater for the purpose of preventing pollution, improving water quality, keeping pollutants out of the runoff, and the implementation of BMPs. 
    Variance shall mean the modification of the minimum stormwater management requirements in situations in which exceptional circumstances, applicable to the site with respect to which the variance is requested, exist so that strict adherence to the provisions of this article would result in unnecessary hardship and the granting of such modification would not result in a condition contrary to the intent of this article. 
    Vegetative control measures shall mean the establishment of vegetative ground cover that shields the soil surface from raindrop impact and the scouring effects of overland stormwater flow. 
(Ord. No. 2013-149, § 1, 6-4-13) 
Sec. 83-21. - Administration. 
    The city will enforce the provisions of this article throughout its jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2013-149, § 1, 6-4-13) 
Sec. 83-22. - Permits. 
(a)  No land disturbing activities for non-residential development, regardless of size, or that disturb either (i) greater than or equal to one acre; or (ii) less than one acre but whose activity is part of a larger common plan of development or sale that disturbs one acre or more, other than those land disturbing activities exempted from the provisions of this article as set out in section 5, shall be conducted within the city without first obtaining the necessary permit(s) from the city. 
Before the commencement of any land disturbing activities, the applicant must file with the city an application for a permit. All applications for such a permit must include, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, telephone number, and email address of the applicant; 
(2)  If the applicant is not the owner of the project and/or property, the name, address, telephone number, and email address of the owner of the project, the owner of the property on which the project is to be located, and the ground lessee of the property, if any, on which the land disturbing activities are to be conducted; 
(3)  General description of the construction activity for which coverage is desired, along with the address, if any, or latitude and longitude to the nearest second of the entrance to the site upon which the land disturbing activities are to be conducted; 
(4)  A map or a plot of the land on which the land disturbing activities will be conducted and any other information that is required under the provisions of section 83-25 of this article. 
(b)  Multiple operators conducting land disturbing activities in a common plan of development may jointly submit an application and be covered by the same permit. An application requesting coverage for multiple operators must include a site plan clearly describing each operator's area(s) of operational control. 
(c)  Each application for the issuance of a permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as established in Chapter 14, Article I of this Code of Ordinances. The applicant must submit its BMP plan with its application and fee to the city. 
(d)  The city may require the applicant to post a bond in the form of a government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to but not exceeding $5,000.00 per acre of the proposed land disturbing activities. If the applicant fails to comply with the conditions of the permit, the bond may be called by the city and used to bring the site into compliance. 
(e)  An applicant's BMP plan will either be approved or disapproved by the city within ten days of the day a complete application, BMP plan, applicable fee, and bonding requirement, if any, are filed with the city. 
If the BMP plan is disapproved, the city will inform the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for its disapproval. If the applicant, on one or more occasions, revises the BMP plan or submits to the city additional documents or information in connection with the BMP plan, the city will make a written response to the applicant with respect to whether such revised BMP plan and/or additional documents and information have been approved or disapproved by the city. All such additional responses will be made by the city to the applicant within ten days of the day such revised BMP plan or additional documents or information are submitted to the city. 
Should the city fail to approve or disapprove any initial or revised BMP plans within 30 days of the day said BMP plans are submitted to the city, the BMP plan shall be deemed approved and the applicant may commence land disturbing activities. 
All BMP plans certified by a QCP shall be deemed approved by the city, which shall allow the applicant to immediately commence land disturbing activities upon submission of a complete application, BMP plan, applicable fee, and bonding requirement, if any, to the city. 
Payment of the applicable fee and bonding requirement, if any, by the applicant, coupled with the city's approval of the application and BMP plan, shall result in issuance of a permit to the applicant. 
(f)  The city must be notified immediately upon any change in ownership of property for which a BMP plan has been registered, and/or any change in the person or persons responsible for ensuring compliance with the provisions of this article. 
A permit may be amended without the payment of an additional fee upon filing with the city an amended or restated permit application containing all changes from the original application; provided, that the holder of the permit shows to the reasonable satisfaction of the city that there are no proposed changes which may affect the quantity and/or quality of stormwater runoff. If an amended or restated application is filed with the city with respect to land disturbing activities for which a permit has been issued, such existing permit shall continue in effect, and the permittee may continue to operate under it unless and until an amended permit is issued, at which time the original permit shall expire and all land disturbing activities must be conducted in accordance with the amended permit. 
A permit may be transferred without the payment of an additional fee upon filing with the city an application for transfer; provided, that the current permittee and proposed transferee of the permit show to the reasonable satisfaction of the city that, upon or following the transfer, there will be no proposed changes which may affect the quantity and/or quality of stormwater runoff. If the city is not satisfied with any such showing by the current permittee and proposed transferee, the new owner or operator must apply for a new permit prior to participating in the operation of such project. 
Any proposed transferee of the permit shall be subject to paragraph (d) of this section. 
(g)  All applications and correspondence required by this article to be submitted to the city must be signed by an individual with adequate legal authority to act for or on behalf of the applicant or permittee. Any person signing any application, correspondence or other documentation required by this article must make the following certification: 
"I certify, under penalty of law, that this document and any attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision and that I have personally examined, and I am familiar with, the information in this document and any such attachments. Based on my inquiry of those individuals immediately responsible for obtaining the information, I believe the submitted information is true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and civil penalty." 
(h)  The issuance of a permit shall not excuse the owner from the need to obtain other required federal, state, and local permits or licenses. 
(Ord. No. 2013-149, § 1, 6-4-13) 
Sec. 83-23. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The following land disturbing activities are excluded from the requirements of this article: 
(1)  Any land change on property about which the owner of the property has submitted information to the city proving, to the satisfaction of the city, that such property does not discharge to the MS4. 
(2)  Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property, or natural resources. Immediately upon completion of emergency activity the responsible party shall install all control measures and initiate restoration/cleanup activities as required by this article. 
(3)  Agriculture. 
(4)  Silviculture. 
(5)  Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens, landscaping, home repairs, home maintenance work, minor additions to houses, the construction, maintenance or repair of accessory structures and other related activities which result in minor erosion. 
(6)  Minor land disturbing activities, such as minor grading for driveways, yard areas and sidewalks, or individual connections for sewer services for single or two-family residences. 
(7)  The construction, repair or rebuilding of railroad tracks. 
(8)  Minor subsurface exploratory excavations under the direction of soils engineers, engineering geologists, or soil scientists. 
(9)  The opening of individual burial sites in property which has been approved for such use by all necessary governmental authorities. 
(10)  The construction of water wells or environmental monitoring wells. 
(11)  Any and all land disturbing activities conducted by entities under the jurisdiction and supervision of the PSC. 
(b)  Although not required to obtain a permit, persons engaged in excepted activities shall remain responsible for otherwise conducting such activities in accordance with the provisions of this article and any other applicable regulation or permit(s), including the proper control of sediment and discharges to the MS4. 
Sec. 83-24. - Construction Best Management Practices Plan (BMP Plan). 
(a)  The City of Dothan, Alabama's Phase II MS4 NPDES permit allows the city to rely upon ADEM for the setting of standards for appropriate erosion and sediment controls. The city hereby expresses its intent to rely upon the aforementioned standards established by ADEM and requires any BMP Plan filed with the city to be in a format acceptable to ADEM and contain all necessary information and details required by ADEM's applicable regulations and NPDES construction stormwater permit. 
(b)  The BMP plan shall be updated as necessary to address changes in the construction activity, site weather patterns, new TMDLs established or approved by EPA, new 303(d) listings approved by EPA, manufacturer specifications for specific control technologies, or as otherwise required by ADEM. 
The BMP plan shall be amended if inspections or investigations by federal, state or city officials determine that the existing erosion and sediment controls or other site management practices are ineffective or do not meet the requirements of applicable permits. All necessary modifications to the BMP plan shall be made within seven calendar days following notification of the inspection findings unless granted an extension of time. 
If existing erosion and sediment controls or other site management practices prove ineffective in protecting water quality or need to be modified; or if additional erosion and sediment controls or other site management practices are necessary, implementation shall be completed before the next storm event whenever practicable. If implementation before the next storm event is impracticable, then new land disturbing activities must cease until the modified or additional controls can be implemented. 
(c)  Whenever the city determines that a BMP plan does not comply with this article, it will notify the applicant in writing of the ways in which the BMP plan does not comply with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-149, § 1, 6-4-13) 
Sec. 83-25. - Post-construction requirements for new development and redevelopment. 
(a)  The permittee shall develop and implement post-construction strategies for new development and redevelopment that include, at a minimum, a combination of structural and/or non-structural BMPs designed to require, to the maximum extent practicable, that the volume and velocity of pre-construction stormwater runoff is not significantly exceeded, as determined by the city. Said combination of post-construction strategies shall be designed to function during rainfall events with intensities including 2-, 10-, and 25-year-24 hour storm events. The city reserves the right to require the inclusion of larger storm events. 
(b)  Post-construction strategies may be incorporated into permittee's BMP plan filed with the city or in a separate document. Said post-construction strategies shall be reviewed, approved, and updated pursuant to the same requirements as those of the permittee's BMP plan. 
(c)  Permittee's post-construction strategies must show proposed final site conditions and describe how the volume and velocity of stormwater leaving the site will be managed after construction is complete to require, to the maximum extent practicable, that it does not exceed the volume and velocity of pre-construction stormwater runoff. 
(d)  Upon completion, permittee shall file with the city a certified copy of as-built drawings and calculations of any post-construction strategies implemented at the site. Such filing shall demonstrate, to the maximum extent practicable, that final post-construction site conditions comply with subsection (a), above. 
(e)  The city reserves the right to inspect post-construction strategies following implementation by permittee and require documentation allocating responsibilities for long-term operation and maintenance of post-construction strategies, as it deems necessary. The city may also require permittee to provide a method of funding to be established or provided to ensure the long term maintenance of any post-construction BMPs. 
(Ord. No. 2013-149, § 1, 6-4-13) 
Sec. 83-26. - Responsibilities of the permittee, property owner and/or developer. 
(a)  Once received from the city, the BMP plan bearing the stamp of approval of the city, along with the permittee's NOI, ADEM NPDES permit, any necessary building or other permits, and/or other required documentation shall be maintained at the site during the progress of the work and until a notice of termination has been filed with ADEM, unless impracticable. If impracticable, the aforementioned records may be maintained at another reasonable location, so long as they can be produced to the city within 48 hours of a request for said records. 
(b)  The permittee, or an agent, contractor or other representative of same, shall notify the city at least two working days before the start of construction, unless good cause exists for contacting the city within a lesser timeframe. 
(c)  Clearing, except that necessary to establish erosion and sediment controls, shall not begin until all erosion and sediment controls have been installed and have been stabilized. 
(d)  The person engaged in or conducting land disturbing activities shall be responsible for maintaining all temporary and permanent erosion and sediment controls during the development of a site. Grading, and erosion and sediment controls shall meet the design criteria set forth in the most recent version of the Alabama Handbook. 
(e)  To the maximum extent practicable, pollutants in runoff water must be minimized by using appropriate BMPs. 
(f)  Grading and erosion and sediment controls shall be designed and maintained to minimize erosion and the discharge of pollutants to the MS4 to the maximum extent practicable. 
(g)  Adequate protective measures shall be provided for the containment of hazardous substances and any other materials which may pollute the MS4, including petroleum products, lubricants and paint. 
(h)  When land disturbing activities are finished and stable vegetative control measures or other permanent controls have been established on all remaining exposed soil, the permittee shall notify the city and request a final inspection. The city will inspect the site within five working days after receipt of the notice, and may require additional measures to stabilize the soil and control erosion and sedimentation. If additional measures are required by the city written notice of such additional measures will be delivered to the permittee, and the permittee shall continue to be covered by the permit until a final and complete inspection is made and the city approves the project as having been satisfactorily completed. 
(Ord. No. 2013-149, § 1, 6-4-13) 
Sec. 83-27. - Inspections. 
(a)  The permittee must carry out all applicable inspection requirements set out in ADEM's applicable regulations and NPDES construction general permit. 
(b)  The city or its designated agent retains the right to enter property upon which any land disturbing activities are being conducted to carry out its own inspections, investigations, monitoring, observations, sampling, enforcement, and/or to address any complaint. Furthermore, the city or its designated agent retains the right to enter property upon which any post-construction strategies have been implemented pursuant to the requirements of this article to carry out its own inspections, investigations, monitoring, observations, sampling, enforcement, and/or to address any complaint. Prior to conducting any of the aforementioned activities, the representative(s) of the city will notify the permittee, or an authorized representative, at the site, of their presence and anticipated activities on the site. The city will conduct any such inspection activities at reasonable times, provided however that if the city has reasonable cause to believe that discharges from land disturbing activities to the MS4 may cause an imminent threat to human health or the environment, inspection of a site may take place at any time and without notice to the permittee, or an authorized representative at the site. 
Whenever information from a permittee, site owner, and/or an authorized representative at a site is requested by the city, said parties may identify certain documents, materials, and/or processes that contain trade secret(s), the inspection of which could potentially jeopardize such trade secret. If the city has no clear and convincing reason to question the proprietary assertion, omission of such materials, documents and/or processes will be noted by the city. To the extent practicable, the city will protect all information which is designated as a trade secret by the permittee, site owner or an authorized representative. 
(c)  The city may seek appropriate legal remedies from any court with competent jurisdiction over the site for any wrongful refusal by a permittee, site owner, and/or authorized representative to allow the city to enter and/or continue an inspection on a site. If a court grants a remedy to the city, the site owner must reimburse the city all costs and expenses incurred in obtaining such a remedy. 
(Ord. No. 2013-149, § 1, 6-4-13) 
Sec. 83-28. - Corrective action. 
(a)  Any poorly functioning erosion and sediment controls, post-construction strategies, non-compliant discharges, or any other deficiencies observed during inspections conducted pursuant to section 83-27 of this article shall be corrected as soon as possible, but not to exceed five days of the inspection, unless impracticable. 
(b)  The permittee shall take all reasonable steps to remove, to the maximum extent practicable, pollutants deposited offsite or in any MS4 conveyance structure. 
(Ord. No. 2013-149, § 1, 6-4-13) 
Sec. 83-29. - Enforcement. 
(a)  This article authorizes the following stormwater and non-stormwater discharges: discharges authorized by, and in compliance with, any separate NPDES permit, discharges from fire-fighting activities; fire hydrant flushings; waters used to wash vehicles where detergents are not used; water used to control dust; potable water including uncontaminated water line flushings not associated with hydrostatic testing; routine external building wash down associated with construction that does not use detergents; pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous materials have not occurred (unless all spilled material has been removed) and where detergents are not used; uncontaminated air conditioning or compressor condensate associated with temporary office trailers and other similar buildings; uncontaminated ground water or spring water; foundation or footing drains where flows are not contaminated with process materials such as solvents; and landscape irrigation. 
(b)  All discharges not explicitly authorized by this article are prohibited. Any discharge to the MS4 made in violation of this article or of any condition of a permit issued pursuant to this article shall be subject to correction and/or abatement in accordance with applicable law. 
(c)  The City of Dothan, Alabama's Phase II MS4 NPDES permit allows the city to rely upon ADEM for the enforcement of certain violations of this article. The city hereby expresses its intent to rely upon ADEM for enforcement of violations of this article, as allowed by the City of Dothan, Alabama's Phase II MS4 NPDES permit, and agrees to promptly notify ADEM upon observing evidence of any known or suspected violations. Furthermore, no enforcement action will be taken by the city for a violation of the terms of this article if any of the following has occurred: 
(1)  ADEM has issued a notice of violation with respect to the same alleged violation and is proceeding with an enforcement action with respect to such alleged violation; 
(2)  ADEM has issued an administrative order with respect to the same alleged violation and is proceeding with an enforcement action with respect to such violation; or 
(3)  ADEM has commenced, and is proceeding with, an enforcement action, or has completed any other type of administrative or civil action, with respect to such alleged violation. 
Any determination or resolution made by ADEM with respect to an alleged violation shall be final, and the alleged violation will not be made the subject of any additional enforcement action by the city for any alleged violations of this article and/or provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this article. However, for violations that have not been appropriately corrected and/or abated pursuant to ADEM's enforcement action, an enforcement action may be pursued by the city. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provision in this article to the contrary, in the event of an immediate threat to the public health or welfare, the city may take all appropriate measures to remove or alleviate such threat. 
(e)  In the event of any accidental discharge of a hazardous substance or a significant spill of a hazardous substance to the MS4 which could constitute a threat to human health or the environment, the permittee of the site shall give notice to the city and the local emergency management city in the same manner and within the same time as is required by state regulations for notice to ADEM. 
Absent a compelling public interest to the contrary, it shall not be a defense for the permittee in an enforcement action that it would have been necessary to halt or reduce the business or activity of the site, or any project or facility thereon, to maintain water quality and minimize any adverse impact that the discharge may cause. 
(f)  Whenever the city finds that any person is in violation of any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, the city may serve upon such person a written notice of the violation. Within ten calendar days of the date of such notice, unless an alternate date is approved by the city, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and future prevention thereof, including specific required actions, shall be submitted to the city. Submission of such plan shall in no way relieve such person in violation of this article of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. If the person fails to respond within the required timeframe and/or fails to take corrective action within the specified time, the city may proceed with the following enforcement action: 
(1)  Compliance order: When the city finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, this article, it may issue a compliance order to the violator, directing that, within a specified time period, adequate structures and devices be installed, or procedures implemented, and properly operated, or other action be taken, to remedy such violation. Compliance orders may also contain such other requirements as may be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address such violation, including the construction of appropriate structures, installation of devices and self-monitoring and management practices. 
(2)  Cease and desist orders: When the city finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, this article or any order issued under this article in such a manner as to materially adversely affect the health, welfare, environment, or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood or development Site so as to be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood; the city may issue an order to such person to cease and desist all land disturbance activities immediately, and direct such person in violation of this article to: 
a.  Comply with this article forthwith; or 
b.  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be required to address properly a continuing or threatened violation of this article. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Violate any provision of this article; 
(2)  Violate the provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this article; or 
(3)  Fail or refuse to comply with any lawful notice to abate or take corrective action issued by the city. 
Such person who violates any provision of this article or any provision of a BMP plan issued under this article shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided by law, including those penalties set forth in Ala. Code § 11-45-9 as adopted by Chapter 62 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(h)  The city may initiate proceedings in any court of competent jurisdiction against any person who has, or who, the city has reason to believe, is about to: 
(1)  Violate any provision of this article; 
(2)  Violate any provision of a permit; or 
(3)  Fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order issued by the city. 
    The city may also initiate civil proceedings in any court of competent jurisdiction seeking monetary damages for any damages caused to public Stormwater facilities by any person, and may seek injunctive or other equitable relief to enforce compliance with the provisions of this article or to force compliance with any lawful orders of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-149, § 1, 6-4-13) 
Sec. 83-30. - Variances and appeals. 
    The city may grant a variance from the requirements of this article if there exist exceptional circumstances applicable to a site such that strict adherence to the provisions of this article will result in unnecessary hardship. The applicant shall prepare a written request for a variance stating the specific variance sought and the reasons, with supporting data, for granting such variance. This request shall include descriptions, drawings, calculations, and any other information necessary to evaluate the proposed variance. The city will review the submitted material and make a written determination to approve or disapprove the variance within ten working days after receipt of such a request. There shall be no appeal process for the variance request. The city is the final arbiter of the variance request. 
(Ord. No. 2013-149, § 1, 6-4-13) 
Sec. 83-31. - Liability. 
    Neither the issuance of a permit pursuant to this article, nor compliance with the provisions of this article, shall relieve any person of the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law. 
    Nothing herein shall be construed to require the city or its officials, employees, agents or attorneys to restore or cause the restoration of property damaged by erosion or sedimentation in violation of this article or to otherwise seek or assist others in seeking compensation to private property owners for any such damage caused by a violation of this article. The city and its officials, employees, agents and attorneys shall not be liable for any condition or damages that result from any failure to observe or recognize a hazardous condition, any failure of an approved plan to prevent erosion or sedimentation, or any failure of the city to cause owners and builders to adhere to the terms of this article. Nothing herein shall be construed to expand the liability of the city or its officials, employees, agents or attorneys nor shall it create any additional, further, different or expanded claim or cause of action. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit the city to enforce rules and regulations regarding: (a) charges, limits and restrictions on the discharge of waste into the sanitary sewerage system of the city; (b) health or sanitation ordinances of the county enforced by the Houston County Health Department; or (c) ordinances governing the sanitation of premises where animals are kept. This article shall be cumulative to and in furtherance of any statutory, common law, or other legal right, duty, power, or authority possessed by the city. Compliance with this article shall not excuse any person from compliance with any other federal, state or local law, ordinance, regulation, rule or order. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to provide false information to the city when such person knows or has reason to know that the information provided is false, whether such information is required by this article or any approval granted under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-149, § 1, 6-4-13) 
Sec. 83-32. - Severability. 
    The provisions of this article are declared to be severable, and if any provision of this article is declared to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, this determination shall not affect, impair, or invalidate the remainder of this article, but shall be confined in its operation to the section, paragraph, subparagraph, clause or phrase of this article in which such determination shall have been made. 
(Ord. No. 2013-149, § 1, 6-4-13) 
Chapter 86 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Moving buildings, § 14-1; use of streets and sidewalks for residential door-to-door canvassing, § 18-311; railroads, ch. 74; traffic and vehicles, ch. 98; communication towers and telecommunication facilities, § 114-601 et seq. 

Sec. 86-1. - Obstructing with goods, implements, vehicles, or other articles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, keep or maintain on any sidewalk, street, alley or public way of the city any goods, wares, merchandise, vehicles, implements, animals, boxes, rubbish or other article of any kind which may obstruct such sidewalk, street, alley or public way or any part thereof or interfere with the free use thereof by the public. However, this section shall not be construed to prevent the temporary use of the sidewalks for the shipping or receiving of goods or commodities, provided sufficient passageway is at all times left for pedestrians, nor the use of portions of the streets or sidewalks under valid permit from the city. 
(Code 1977, § 17-1) 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18. 
Sec. 86-2. - Unsafe conditions along streets, sidewalks, curbs and gutters. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to create or cause to exist any unsafe condition or obstruction on the sidewalks, streets, curbs and gutters, and space between the sidewalks and curbs and the street or portion of the street traveled by vehicles. 
(b)  The public works department shall be responsible for maintenance and repair of known unsafe conditions on streets, including storm sewers, storm sewer manhole rings, covers, curb inlets, sanitary sewers, sanitary sewer manhole rings, covers, etc. 
(Code 1977, § 17-2) 
Sec. 86-3. - Curbs, gutters, drainage ditches or culverts-Permit to change, alter, rearrange curbs, gutters and ditches. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to alter, change or rearrange the curbs, gutters or drainage ditches or culverts along any street or other public way without first obtaining a permit from the city engineer, who shall supervise any such work in order that proper elevations be provided for the normal flow of stormwater drainage. 
(Code 1977, § 17-3) 
Sec. 86-4. - Same-Permit and supervision in installing drainage culverts. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to install any drainage culverts along or across any street or other public way without first having obtained a permit from the city engineer, who shall supervise or cause to be supervised the installation of the culvert. 
(Code 1977, § 17-4) 
Sec. 86-5. - Same-Permit fees. 
    The minimum fee for permits under sections 86-3 and 86-4 shall be $1.50, and the cost of construction labor and/or materials furnished by the city. 
(Code 1977, § 17-5) 
Sec. 86-6. - Same-Culvert size, elevation and installation. 
    The size of culvert in public ways, its elevation and manner of installation shall be determined by the city engineer through the assistance of the public works director, and in no event shall the diameter of the culverts be less than 18 inches. 
(Code 1977, § 17-6) 
Sec. 86-7. - Digging, tearing up or excavating streets; permit and deposit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dig, tear up or excavate any part of the streets or other public ways within the corporate limits or police jurisdiction of the city without first obtaining a permit from the city to do so, and under such conditions as the city may impose. Before any permit is issued the person applying therefor must make a deposit to guarantee the prompt readjustment of the street or way so dug up or excavated, the amount of which shall be determined by the city engineer or public works director. 
(b)  Additional curb cuts must be constructed to accommodate the disabled under the ADA. 
(Code 1977, § 17-7) 
Sec. 86-8. - Removal of dirt from, deposit of debris or dirt in, street, sidewalks and ditches; permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful to plow, dig, pick, shovel or remove any dirt from the streets or other public ways, or place any soil, trash, limbs, leaves or debris of any kind or substance thereon, or in any drainage ditch or culvert maintained under easement to the city or through which a natural flow of water has existed for 20 years or more, without first obtaining a written permit from the city engineer or public works director. 
(Code 1977, § 17-8) 
Chapter 90 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- A resolution adopted July 19, 2017, amended chapter 90 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 90, §§ 90-1-90-10, 90-41, 90-42, 90-76, 90-77, 90-101-90-106, 90-136-90-141, 90-171, 90-172, 90-196, 90-197, 90-221-90-226, pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; planning, ch. 70. 
State Law reference- Control of subdivisions generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-30 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 90-1. - Authority and delegation. 
    The subdivision regulations set out in this chapter are promulgated under the authority granted by Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-1 et seq. 
(a)  Delegation of powers to planning commission. The planning commission is vested with the authority to review, approve, conditionally approve, and disapprove preliminary plats of major subdivisions, and to grant variances from the requirements of this chapter as specified herein. 
(b)  Delegation of powers to planning director. The planning director is vested with the authority to review, approve, conditionally approve or disapprove final plats of minor subdivisions and minor re-subdivisions, lot combination plats, lot line adjustments, dedication plats, construction plans and final plats of major subdivisions when preliminary plat approval has been obtained from the planning commission. The planning director shall also be authorized to review minor subdivisions, major subdivisions and major re-subdivisions for conformity to the requirements of this chapter, and to make reports and recommendations to the planning commission on major subdivisions and major re-subdivisions, and to administer, interpret, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Delegation of powers to public works director. Public works director is vested with the authority to require and approve land development improvements and to require improvement guarantees for public and private improvements as specified in these regulations, and the City of Dothan Subdivision Specifications and Standard Details. 
(Res. of 7-19-17) 
Sec. 90-2. - Purpose. 
    It is declared to be the policy of the planning commission to consider land subdivision, both residential and commercial, public and private, as a part of the plan for the orderly, efficient and economical development of the city. This means, among other things, that land to be subdivided shall be of such character, that it can be used for building purposes without danger to health and safety; that in areas contiguous to brooks, rivers or other bodies of water subject to flooding, proper provisions shall be made for protective flood control measures and that provisions shall be made to prevent adverse effects of flooding on adjacent properties; that proper provision shall be made for water supply, surface drainage and sanitary sewerage; that the proposed streets shall be in harmony with existing or proposed principal thoroughfares shown in such sections of the city plan as may be in existence from time to time, especially in regard to safe intersections with such thoroughfares, and so arranged and of such width as to provide an adequate and convenient system for present and prospective traffic needs; that in places deemed proper by the planning commission, open spaces for parks and playgrounds shall be shown on the subdivision plan; that adequate access to properties for firefighting apparatus shall be provided; that adequate light and air shall be afforded to all properties; and that the completed subdivision shall accomplish the development of the city plan as may be in existence from time to time. 
(Res. of 7-19-17) 
Sec. 90-3. - Extraterritorial planning jurisdiction; submitting plat required. 
    The regulations set out in this chapter shall govern all subdivisions of land, as the term "subdivisions" is defined in section 90-6, within the corporate limits and extraterritorial planning jurisdiction of the city as now or hereafter established by the board of commissioners. Any owner of land within this area wishing to subdivide land shall submit to the planning commission a plat of the subdivision according to the procedure outlined in article II of this chapter, which plat shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in article III of this chapter. Improvements shall be installed meeting the standards contained in article III and installed meeting the requirement in article IV. Improvements in a special flood hazard area (SFHA) shall also be installed as required by section 90-171. 
(Res. of 7-19-17) 
Sec. 90-4. - Conditions for recording plats and for utility installations. 
(a)  No plat or plan of a subdivision of land into two or more lots located within the planning jurisdiction region shall be admitted to the land records of the county or received or recorded by the judge of probate of the appropriate county until such plat or plan has received final approval in writing by the planning commission. 
(b)  No board, public officer or authority shall light any road, lay or authorize the laying of water mains or sewers, construct or authorize the construction of other facilities or utilities in any road located within the planning area unless such road shall have been accepted or opened, or shall have otherwise received the legal status of a public or private road prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or unless such road corresponds in its location and lines to a road shown on a subdivision plat approved by the planning commission or on a road plan made and adopted by the planning commission. 
(Res. of 7-19-17) 
Sec. 90-5. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-4 of the Code of Ordinances, City of Dothan, Alabama. The city may enjoin such transfers, sales or agreements by action for injunction brought in any court of equal jurisdiction, or may recover the same penalty by a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Res. of 7-19-17) 
Sec. 90-6. - Definitions. 
(a)  General. Except as otherwise provided in this section, all words shall have the customary dictionary meaning. The word "lot" includes "plot" or "parcel." The word "building" includes "structure." The word "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or buildings, shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied." 
(b)  Specific definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Access means the provision for the immediate ingress and egress of vehicles from an abutting property to an adjacent street. 
    Access easements means the provision for ingress and egress of vehicles from a public right-of-way to abutting private property. 
    Alley means any public right-of-way designated primarily for vehicular access to the back or side of buildings or lots otherwise abutting on a street. 
    Block means a parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets, other than alleys. 
    Base flood (regulatory flood, special flood hazard area, SFHA) means the flood that has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year; also known as a 100-year flood or one percent annual chance flood. 
    Base flood elevation (BFE) is the water surface elevation of the base flood or one percent annual chance flood. 
    CAP means the capacity assurance program per administrative order on Consent No. CWA-04-2012-4780 and as approved by the Environmental Protection Agency ("EPA"). 
    Central sewer system means all equipment and property involved in the operation of a sanitary sewer utility, including wastewater lines and appurtenances, pumping stations, treatment works, disposal facilities, and general property necessary for the operation of such utility, which shall be fully installed, operable and providing service in compliance with applicable state laws and regulations. 
    Central water system means all of the equipment and property involved in the operation of a water utility, including water lines and appurtenances, pumping stations, treatment plants and general property relating to such utility, which shall be fully installed, operable and providing service in compliance with applicable state laws and regulations. 
    Commission means the City of Dothan Planning Commission. 
    Cul-de-sac means a local street having one end open to vehicular traffic and the other end permanently closed with a vehicular turnaround [see 90-137(e) and 90-138(f)]. 
    Curb or curb-line means the outside vertical face of a masonry curb, the centerline of a valley gutter or the edge of the pavement where no curb or gutter exists. 
    Dedication means the deliberate assignation of land by its owner for any general or public use or uses, reserving to himself no other rights than such as are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment or the public uses to which the property has been devoted. 
    Easement means a grant by a property owner of the use of land for a specific purpose or purposes, by the general public, a corporation or a certain person. 
    Engineer means a professional engineer registered by the Alabama State Board of Registration for professional engineers and surveyors. 
    Flag lot means a lot that has access to a public right-of-way by means of a narrow strip of land. 
    FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
    FIRM means the flood insurance rate map. 
    Flood means a temporary rise in stream level that results in inundation of areas not ordinarily covered by water. 
    Flood frequency means the statistically determined average for how often a specific flood level or discharge may be equaled or exceeded. 
    Floodplain means any normally dry land area that is susceptible to being inundated by water from any natural source. This area is usually low land adjacent to a river, stream, watercourse, ocean or lake. Floodplain can also be defined as the area comprised of the floodway and the floodway fringe. The regulatory floodplain is also known as the FEMA designated SFHA. 
    Floodway means the channel of a watercourse and portions of the adjoining floodplain which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the regulatory flood and is part of the FEMA designated SFHA. 
    Floodway fringe means the area adjoining a watercourse which, although not lying within a floodway, has been or may hereafter be inundated with water during the regulatory flood (a part of the FEMA designated SFHA). 
    Frontage means the distance for which the front boundary line of a lot and the public or private right-of-way are coincident. 
    Lot means a parcel or portion of land in a subdivision or plat of land, separated from other parcels or portions by description as a distinct and separate tract, and which is identified by a tract or lot number or symbol and which has been properly filed for record. 
    Plat, amended means a previously recorded plat that is changed to resolve a technical error. 
    Plat, final means the map or plan or record of all or a portion of a subdivision, and any accompanying materials presented for final approval and recording as required by these regulations. 
    Plat, minor subdivision means the division of land into six parcels or less with no public improvements. 
    Plat, preliminary means a tentative drawing or map of a proposed subdivision. A preliminary plat is the basis for the approval or disapproval of the general layout of a land subdivision. 
    Plat, subdivision means the division of a lot, parcel or tract of land into two or more lots, sites or other divisions of land, in addition to the parent parcel, whether described by metes and bounds or by any other description, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development for both residential and commercial land, both public and private. It includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or territory subdivided. 
    Plat, replat (resubdivision) means changing all or part of an existing recorded subdivision design, drainage plan, number of lots and/or street design. 
    Plat, replat (resurvey) means a map which changes the location of an internal boundary line between adjacent lots but that does not result in additional lots. 
    Planning director means Director for the City of Dothan Planning and Development Department or his designated representative. 
    Public works director means Director for the City of Dothan Public Works Department or his designated representative. 
    Reach means a hydraulic engineering term to describe longitudinal segments of a stream or river. A reach will generally include the segment of the flood hazard area where flood heights are influenced by a manmade or natural obstruction. In an urban area, the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive bridge crossings would typically constitute a reach. 
    Regional commission means the Southeast Alabama Regional Planning and Development Commission. 
    Reservation of sewer capacity per CAP means the capacity within the WCTS reserved, for a limited time, to convey flow from a specific connection. 
    Sewer flow means the rate of sewage discharged into the WCTS. 
    Sewer capacity means the maximum flow that can be conveyed in the WCTS within the parameters set forth in the CAP. 
    Special flood hazard area (SFHA) means the area subject to flooding by the base flood or one percent annual chance flood and is designated and regulated by FEMA. 
    Street means a thoroughfare which affords traffic circulation and principal means of access to abutting property, including avenues, places, ways, courts, circles, parkways, drives, lanes, boulevards, highways, roads and any other thoroughfare, except an alley. A public street is a thoroughfare accepted by dedication or otherwise by a governing body. A private street means a street not accepted for maintenance by the city or any street designated as a private street upon a recorded plat. 
    Street, complete means streets designed and operated to enable safe access for all users, including pedestrians, bicyclists and motorists of all ages and abilities. 
    Street, frontage means a street that is parallel and adjacent to a major street that provides access to abutting properties but is protected from heavy through traffic. 
    Street, local means a road used primarily for direct access to residential, commercial, industrial, or other abutting property. They do not include roadways carrying through traffic. Long local roadways will generally be divided into short sections by collector roadway systems. 
    Street, major arterial means that part of the roadway system serving as the principal network for through traffic flow. The routes connect areas of principal traffic generation and important rural highways entering the city. 
    Street, subdivision collector means a road that primarily serves to collect and distribute traffic between subdivision local streets and local, collector, and arterial roadways. A road is considered a subdivision collector if it serves greater than 50 lots or has a projected vehicle volume greater than 500 vehicles/day as determined by the Institute of Transportation Engineer's Trip Generation Manual. When determining the number of lots served, this includes lots directly abutting the roadway as well as all lots connected via subdivision local streets. 
    Street, subdivision local means a local street, but within a subdivision. Roads serving equal to or less than 50 lots or have a projected vehicle volume less than 500 vehicles/day, as determined by the Institute of Transportation Engineer's Trip Generation Manual, are consider subdivision local streets. 
    Subdivider or applicant means any individual or any other legal entity commencing proceedings under this chapter to effect a subdivision of land under this chapter for himself or for another. 
    Surveyor means a land surveyor registered in the State of Alabama by the Board of Registration for professional engineers and land surveyors. 
    Unit means one structure. 
    WCTS means the City of Dothan wastewater collection and transmission system. 
(Res. of 7-19-17; Res. of 6-20-18) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 90-7. - Minor subdivisions. 
    Minor subdivisions of land shall be reviewed and approved pursuant to the submittal requirements for a final plat or as modified by the Planning Director. 
(a)  Preapplication conference. A preapplication conference is required prior to acceptance of any application for a minor subdivision. This conference will review all documents and maps pertinent to the proposed development. It is suggested that applicants schedule an appointment to ensure staff availability. 
(b)  Official application and fee. An application for a minor subdivision shall include eight copies of the maps and documents meeting the stipulated requirements along with a completed application and $100.00 filing fee, plus the actual cost of advertising and legal notice which shall not be refunded. 
(c)  Notice. Upon acceptance of a complete application, notice will be sent by certified mail to the owner(s) of record according to records of the county tax assessor of all abutting property. The notice shall state the purpose of the review and indicate that the plat is on file for public review at the department of planning and development office for 14 calendar days during normal business hours. Failure of any owner to receive notice shall not invalidate the application. 
(d)  Administrative review. The application shall be reviewed according to the following criteria: 
(1)  The proposed subdivision contains no more than six lots or a reduction of the number of lots in an existing subdivision whether for residential or commercial purposes, not requiring any public improvements for utilities, storm drainage or roadways; 
(2)  Whether the proposed land division is consistent with any policies of any plan or program of the city adopted under the general guidance of the city plan; 
(3)  Whether the proposed land division is consistent with the general development patterns of the area, so that it will not unduly or adversely affect current and future planned development opportunities on adjacent land; 
(4)  All parcels are in conformance with any zoning regulations applicable to the subject property; 
(5)  All proposed lots will have adequate water and wastewater if available from existing facilities. Sanitary sewer capacity shall be verified by the City of Dothan before approval of any subdivision will be granted. The City of Dothan makes no representation that any lot eligible for approval by the Alabama Department of Public Health for a septic tank will be approved; 
(6)  All lots must front or have access (via a legal document) to a dedicated public right-of-way or private street acceptable to the planning director; 
(7)  The proposed subdivision does not involve the dedication of existing or new streets, right-of-way or public drainage easements; 
(8)  Proposed minor subdivisions lying within 1,320 feet from an existing public street intersection will be evaluated for the provision for future roads; 
(9)  Joint access driveways may be required and designated on the plat by the public works director in the interest of public safety; 
(10)  All existing structures must be shown on the plat. 
(11)  Flag lots: 
a.  Minimum width for flag lots for residential uses is 60 feet. Less than 60 feet may be approved on a case by case basis. 
b.  The distance to the building site from the nearest fire hydrant shall be no greater than 500 feet or as otherwise approved by the Fire Marshal. 
c.  Where the building site is located greater than 100 feet from the street, a driveway with a minimum width of 12 feet shall be provided designed to support 75,000 pounds. This requirement may be waived by the Fire Marshal if the structure is sprinklered. 
d.  All subdivisions utilizing flag lots for access shall be recorded with an easement allowing ingress/egress for emergency and public utility vehicles. A note shall be placed on the face of the plat holding the city harmless from damage to roads, bridges, gates, fences, landscaping, etc.; 
(e)  Required revisions. Upon completion of the administrative review, the applicant will be notified of any deficiencies. The applicant must resubmit revised maps and documents within 30 days for final review or the case will be void and the applicant must reapply for subdivision approval and pay the required fees. 
(f)  Decision. Within 30 days of the date of application or resubmittal, the applicant shall be notified of one of the following actions: 
(1)  The application is approved and shall be processed for recording in accordance with section 90-101 of these regulations. 
(2)  The application is not approved as submitted with deficiencies specifically noted. 
(g)  Appeal. If the application is not approved, the applicant may appeal the decision to the planning commission by submitting a written request for appeal within 30 days of the notification. An appeal to the planning commission shall be treated as an application for a preliminary plat according to these regulations. 
(h)  Recording. four mylar plats of any approved replat, resubdivision or resurvey shall be recorded in the office of the judge of probate of the appropriate county bearing the "recorded" stamp of the office of the judge of probate being returned to the planning department prior to being effective or the issuance of any building permits. 
(1)  Provide a digital copy utilizing the standard city layer name structure and AutoCAD or DXF format on electronic media. 
(2)  When submitting the plat to this office for the signatures of the planning commission chair and the public works director, all other signatures shall be affixed to the plat. 
(3)  All signatures shall be affixed to the plat before being recorded at the office of the judge of probate of the appropriate county. 
(Res. of 7-19-17) 
Sec. 90-8. - Planned unit development. 
    If a proposed planned unit development falls within the definition of a subdivision then it shall adhere to the regulations contained in this chapter or as otherwise acceptable to the planning commission and public works director. 
(Res. of 7-19-17) 
Sec. 90-9. - Private road subdivisions. 
    All design standards and requirements in these regulations shall apply. Private road subdivisions shall be subject to the same rules and standards as set forth in these regulations for subdivision with the following exceptions: 
(a)  All subdivision streets and infrastructure shall be available to the public unless otherwise approved by the planning commission. Gated developments shall incorporate design for a vehicle turn-around. 
(b)  A sign shall be placed at the entrance(s) to the subdivision stating "PRIVATE ROAD." It is the responsibility of the developer(s) or owner(s) of the subdivision to maintain the sign. 
(c)  All road and drainage improvements shall be constructed to the same standards normally required of a public road. 
(d)  The private status of the subdivision shall be clearly stated on the recorded final plat and deed with a statement printed on them stating that the "STREETS AND DRAINAGE ARE NOT CITY MAINTAINED." Streets must be labeled "private drive" in the final plat. 
(e)  It shall be clearly stated in writing on each property deed that the roads, drainage structures and/or drainage ditches and easements shall be maintained by the developer and/or property owners. The procedure for accomplishing this shall be outlined in a document and submitted as part of the submittal materials and recorded in the office of the judge of probate. The name and contact information of responsible parties shall be provided and noted on the plat. 
(f)  If a private subdivision is recorded in the office of the judge of probate and 100 percent of the property owners at some future date desire to eliminate the private subdivision and substitute in its place a city maintained subdivision, the owners must petition the Dothan Planning Commission for preliminary approval according to section 90-76. 
(1)  If preliminary approval is granted, the owners shall submit engineering plans to the planning department for review by the public works director including improvements and repairs that are required to existing infrastructure to bring the subdivision into compliance according to the Dothan Subdivision Regulations effective on the date of the petition and/or any repairs needed for the existing infrastructure. 
(2)  It shall be the responsibility of the owners to prepare and submit a revised final plat according to article II, division 3, of these regulations and record it in the office of the judge of probate for the appropriate county. 
(g)  Should the owners of property in an existing public subdivision desire to create a private subdivision, 100 percent of the property owners shall consent in writing explicitly stating their understanding that conversion to private status carries liability and responsibility for the following: 
(1)  The owners shall make application to the planning commission to change a public subdivision to a private subdivision. 
(2)  Vacation of right-of-way. After approval by the planning commission and at their expense, the owners shall take any and all steps legally necessary to vacate the public right-of-way. 
(3)  Maintenance. The maintenance of all pavements, curbing, drainage structures, private utilities, conduits, easements and any other conveying structures integral to the street shall be recorded in a Homeowners Agreement and Covenants that details how maintenance responsibility will be assessed to the owners. The agreement shall also address but not be limited to: 
a.  Easements granted for all utilities, public or private. 
b.  Life safety - coordination with police, fire and rescue services to attain entry. 
(h)  A subdivision will not be considered as a "private subdivision" if the proposed development prevents access or "land locks" adjoining property without providing access to said property through means approved by the planning commission and the public works director. 
(i)  Only private subdivisions are allowed to have entrance gates which restrict public access if approved by the planning commission. Emergency vehicles and utilities personnel shall have access at all times. 
(j)  The fire marshal must review and approve all plats containing private streets to ensure suitable access and turning capability is available along with the location of fire hydrants. 
(k)  The following certification statement shall be added to the face of the plat along with any other required signature blocks before it is recorded: 
Maintenance of the private street(s), private utilities, drainage structures, conduits, easements and any other conveying structures integral to the street and drainage system shown on this plat are intended to be the responsibility of the duly incorporated homeowners association. Public utilities shall remain the responsibility of the appropriate utility provider. A copy of the Homeowners Agreement shall be recorded in the county courthouse. (Note: This statement shall not serve as a substitute for any other statutory disclosure requirements.) 
___________ 
Owner(s) 
(l)  A private development agreement between the owner and Dothan Utilities must be signed by the owner and approved by the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 7-19-17) 
Sec. 90-10. - Other subdivision actions. 
(a)  The replat (resubdivision) of an existing recorded lot or lots or the amendment of an existing recorded subdivision shall require the approval of the planning commission in accordance with sections 90-76 through 102 inclusive. The planning director may authorize the approval of replats or amended plats not creating additional lots to be approved in accordance with sections 90-101 through 90-102 inclusive. 
(b)  The replat (resurvey) of a lot resulting in a change to a boundary line which does not create an additional lot may be approved in accordance with sections 90-101 through 90-102 inclusive. 
(c)  For replat (resubdivision and resurvey) of existing subdivisions, all existing lots with changes to existing lot lines shall be reviewed by Dothan Utilities for any required utility relocations, additions or modifications to be accomplished by the owner at his expense. If the existing subdivision requires utility relocations, a set of construction plan is required showing all existing utility locations and proposed locations for the utility relocations. 
(d)  For review purposes, all existing structures, as well as existing and proposed lot lines, shall be shown on the plat. Structures shall not be shown on the recorded Mylar copies. 
(Res. of 7-19-17) 
Secs. 90-11-90-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLATS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 90-41. - Platting authority; applicability of chapter. 
(a)  Unless otherwise designated, the city planning commission shall be the official platting authority. 
(b)  The regulations contained in this chapter shall govern the subdivision of land in all areas allowed by state law. 
(Res. of 7-19-17) 
Sec. 90-42. - Preapplication review. 
    Whenever the subdivision of a tract of land within the jurisdiction of the planning commission is proposed, the subdivider should consult early and informally with the public works direct or and the planning director. The subdivider may submit sketch plans and data showing existing conditions within the site and in its vicinity and the proposed layout and development of the subdivision. Sanitary sewer flows associated with the development shall be provided as early as possible to ensure that there is adequate capacity in the sewer system for the development. Should conditions warrant, the planning director may return the submitted sketch plans along with any pertinent comments to the subdivider indicating where the plans do not comply with the regulations set forth in this chapter. No fee shall be charged for the preapplication review, and no formal application shall be required. 
(Res. of 7-19-17) 
Secs. 90-43-90-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PRELIMINARY PLAT 

Sec. 90-76. - Procedure for approval. 
    It is the intent of the Planning Commission that the preliminary plat is to provide the total development area of a project. Prior to the cutting or grading of any street or the making of any street improvements or the installation of utilities, the subdivider shall submit to the Planning Commission a preliminary plat and construction plans of the proposed subdivision in accordance with the following procedure: (Note: The subdivider shall ensure compliance with the subdivision criteria of the state department of public health.) 
(a)  Application for preliminary plat approval. The procedure for application for preliminary plat approval is as follows: 
(1)  Following the preapplication review of a proposed subdivision, the subdivider or its authorized agent, shall submit to the planning commission, in accordance with the submittal schedule as approved by the planning commission, an application for approval of a preliminary plat on a form provided by the city along with a fee of $100.00 filing fee, plus the actual cost of advertising and legal notice which shall not be refunded, a list of adjacent property owners, names and mailing addresses, eight copies of the preliminary plat, one digital copy in pdf or AutoCAD format, and other documents as specified in section 90-77. 
(2)  The subdivider shall post a sign on the property to be subdivided prior to the planning commission's review of the preliminary plat. The public notice sign must be erected and maintained at the applicant's expense not less than 14 calendar days prior to the date of the public hearing. The public notice sign must be placed on all street frontages for proper notification of adjacent property owners. The applicant will be responsible for making sure the sign is erected and conforms to specifications established by the planning commission. Tabled applications shall be required to post notice before being heard by the planning commission. 
(3)  Notice of the time and place of the hearing at which the proposed development shall be discussed shall be sent by certified mail to the address of the subdivider and all adjacent property owners not less than five calendar days before the date of the hearing. It shall be the responsibility of the planning commission to send the notice. 
(b)  Review of preliminary plat. The planning commission shall forward one copy each to the public works department, traffic engineering department, planning department, and fire marshal and two copies to the utilities department and other appropriate officials for review and retain one copy for its records. All parties shall review the preliminary plat and submit written recommendations to the planning commission for action. Sanitary sewer capacity shall be verified at this point if not established previously at the pre-application phase. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing at which the recommendations of the reviewing parties will be presented. 
(c)  Preliminary approval. Following the hearing on the preliminary plat and other related material, the planning commission may detail its approval by written report or by noting the conditions of such preliminary approval on four copies of the preliminary plat with one copy being returned to the subdivider, and one copy to the office of the Public Works Director and one copy to the planning commission. Approval of the preliminary plat shall constitute authorization to proceed with submission of construction plans for approval and shall constitute reservation of sewer capacity as specified in section 90-76(d). Approval of a preliminary plat does not constitute approval of the final plat. It is, however, the intent of this article that a final plat which adheres to the conditions of approval for a preliminary plat will be approved in accordance with Section 101(c). 
(d)  Expiration time. Preliminary approval, including reservation of sanitary sewer capacity shall be in effect 18 months from the date of the approval. Construction plans shall be submitted and approved within 12 months from the date of the approval. If construction plans have not been submitted and approved within 12 months and/or construction has not been completed within 18 months from the date of the approval, the applicant shall be required to submit a new application and the reservation of sanitary sewer capacity is no longer valid. The applicant may request an extension, to complete construction, of up to six months from the public works director and planning director, which also constitutes a six month extension of the reservation of sewer capacity. Based on the complexity and size of the proposed development, the public works director and planning director may, upon written request, grant additional time beyond the maximum 24 month completion requirement. Any approval shall be at their discretion and shall include a proposed construction schedule for completion. New applications shall be required for any subdivision where no activity has occurred in 12 months and any previous reservation of sewer capacity shall be null and void. 
(e)  Disapproval. Following the hearing on the preliminary plat and other related material, the planning commission may find reasons detrimental to the public safety, health and general welfare, or in conflict with adopted plans of the planning commission which requires the disapproval of the preliminary plat. A statement of the reasons for disapproval shall be made on two copies of the preliminary plat with one copy being returned to the subdivider and one copy being added to the record of the planning commission. The applicant may reapply for preliminary plat approval in accordance with section 90-76(a)(1). 
(f)  Automatic approval. Failure of the planning commission to act on the preliminary plat within 30 days after submission by the developer thereof, without due cause, shall be deemed to be approval of the plat and a certificate of preliminary approval shall be issued by the planning commission on demand; provided, however, that the subdivider may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of time. 
(Res. of 7-19-17; Res. of 6-20-18) 
Sec. 90-77. - Specifications. 
(a)  Name of subdivision. The name of the subdivision must have the approval of the planning commission. The name shall not duplicate nor closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision. 
(b)  Scale. The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale not smaller than 200 feet to one inch. 
(c)  Ground elevation. The preliminary plat shall show ground elevations based on the datum plan of the NAVD 88. Contours at vertical intervals of not more than five feet are required, unless specified by the planning commission. Verification of the existing land contour is essential. A centerline profile of the proposed streets will be required by the public works director on construction plans. 
(d)  Information to be provided on preliminary plat. The preliminary plat shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of owner of record and subdivider and name and registration number of surveyor, planner and/or engineer. 
(2)  Proposed name, acreage and location of the subdivision to the one-quarter of a one-quarter section, township and range, flood zone, zoning and/or proposed zoning, acreage and month and year of review in the title. Title shall be in the center or left side of the plat and shall state "A Preliminary Plat of_____". 
(3)  Total number of lots and blocks and a table listing the square footage of each lot and any non-residential use proposed (commons area, stormwater detention, etc.). 
(4)  North arrow and graphic scale and date. 
(5)  Vicinity map showing location of the subdivision and north point. 
(6)  Approximate boundary lines of the tract. The boundary of the subdivision should be the most solid bold line. The R-O-W should be the next boldest line. All lot lines shall be solid lines. Easements shall be dashed lines. 
(7)  A list of names and mailing address for all adjacent property owners on all sides and across the street according to the official tax records of the appropriate county with the approximate acreages of the adjacent land. 
(8)  Existing streets, utilities and easements on and adjacent to the tract, including the size and width of each. Detention ponds in residential subdivisions shall be labeled as a public drainage easement and shall also be labeled as a common area. In private subdivisions, detention ponds, all drainage structures and any associated easements shall be labeled as private drainage easements and shall not be maintained by the city. 
(9)  Proposed layout including streets, alleys, sidewalks and associated easements, with both approximate dimensions and proposed street names; lot lines with approximate dimensions; land to be reserved or dedicated for public uses; and any land to be used for purposes other than single-family dwellings. 
(10)  Blocks shall be represent by letters and lots shall be number sequentially in each block (the letters "I" and "O" shall be excluded). 
(11)  Indication of zoning district boundaries. Such boundaries, if they exist, to be shown and dimensioned on the plan. Proposed lots shall conform to the minimum requirement of the zoning district in which they are located. 
(12)  Proposed provisions for water supply, sewerage and drainage, detention areas and any associated easements, as required by the public works director, Dothan Utilities and proposed by the design engineer. An overall conceptual drawing will be required for phased construction. 
(13)  Minimum building front yard setback lines for the current or proposed zoning, which is subject to change in the future. A table with all applicable yard setback requirements shall also be provided. 
(14)  Location of streams, lakes, swamps and land subject to flooding as determined from past history of flooding, and as delineated by available USGS, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or other approved information. 
(15)  The area designated as a special flood hazard area (SFHA) by FEMA as shown of the current flood insurance rate map as having a one percent annual chance flood hazard area and base flood elevation (BFE) associated with the SFHA shall be shown on the plat. All natural streams, lakes, wetlands and waterways through a development shall be part of an improved drainage easement or an unimproved private drainage easement (denoted as common area "do not disturb" as determined by the public works director in accordance with section 90-142(b). 
(16)  Location of land dedicated for a neighborhood park or open space. 
(17)  Location of designated residential or commercial landscape buffers. 
(18)  Any other information that may be considered necessary by the public works director for full and proper consideration of the proposed subdivision. 
(19)  A sanitary sewer plan meeting or exceeding the standards contained in section 90-224(a). 
(20)  Provide a general stormwater drainage plan including detention areas and easements for stormwater conveyance. 
(21)  Provide the average daily sanitary sewer flows for the entire development expressed in gallons per day (gpd) as well as anticipated peak flow rates in accordance with engineering standards for sanitary sewer design. Designs shall be signed and sealed by a registered professional engineer in the State of Alabama. No development shall be approved unless there is sufficient sanitary sewer capacity in the sanitary sewer system. 
(e)  Approval from the health department. When City of Dothan sanitary sewer is not available, the county health department must be notified by the developer by letter of the intent to construct a subdivision with individual wells and/or septic tanks if applicable. A copy of this letter shall be submitted with the preliminary plat. 
(f)  Construction and approval of physical improvements. The subdivider shall submit eight copies of detailed construction plans, including a stormwater runoff siltation control plan (developments greater than one acre require a NPDES permit and if required a copy shall be provided) to the department of planning and development for distribution to all reviewing agencies. No construction activity on the site shall commence without an approved grading plan and permit. Such plans shall be prepared by a professional engineer. After receiving approval of the preliminary plat by the planning commission and approval of construction plans by the public works director, the subdivider may proceed to clear the land, grade the streets and install all improvements in accordance with the approved construction plans. Minor deviations may be made from the approved construction plans which do not alter the scope of the project and which are authorized by the design engineer and approved by the public works director. Approval of construction by the public works director in no way approves or sanctions any noncompliance with ADEM/EPA NPDES permitting regulations or any other state or federal laws, rules or regulations. Anytime there are discrepancies from the approved plans and the specifications/standard details for subdivisions in the City of Dothan, the specifications/standard details for subdivisions shall apply and override the approved plans unless plans are more stringent. See sections 90-220-90-225 for construction plan specifications and procedures. 
(g)  Before the final plat is signed by the chairman of the planning commission, all applicants shall be required to satisfactorily complete all improvements specified in the preliminary subdivision plat (approved construction plans) and to submit necessary offers of dedication for streets, easements, and land intended for public purposes. Satisfactory completion of improvements shall be certified by the public works director or, where required by statute, by the county engineer. Any land offered for dedication for any public purpose, and any improvements thereon, shall be free and clear of all liens and encumbrances. It is the sole responsibility of the developer to ensure that all plans utilized in construction are of the latest approved revision. 
(h)  Digital format. A copy of the preliminary plat and construction plans shall be submitted to the city with the application in digital form in a .PDF, .JPEG or similar format on electronic media. 
(Res. of 7-19-17; Res. of 6-20-18) 
Secs. 90-78-90-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FINAL PLAT 

Sec. 90-101. - Procedures for approval. 
    After substantial completion of the physical development of the subdivision in accordance with article IV of these regulations, the subdivider shall submit to the department of planning and development a final plat in accordance with the following procedure: 
(a)  Application for final plat approval. After the preliminary plat of a proposed subdivision has been given approval, the subdivider may within one year or within such additional time as may be granted by the planning commission, submit to the planning department for review, the following: 
(1)  A completed subdivision application requesting review and approval of the final plat, including a listing of names and mailing addresses for all adjacent property owners on all sides and across the street according to the official tax records of the appropriate county. 
(2)  Eight printed copies of the final plat and one .PDF copy along with signed certifications and other documents as specified in section 90-102. 
(3)  A fee of $100.00 which shall not be refunded. 
(b)  Review of the final plat. The final plat shall be checked for conformance with the previously approved preliminary plat and approved construction plans and with conformance to these regulations. 
(c)  Public hearing. No public hearing shall be required for a final plat provided if it is in substantial conformance with the approved preliminary plat, or in the case of a minor subdivision, concerns have not been raised, which in the opinion of the planning director, require a public hearing. If it is determined by the planning director that a public hearing is required, the applicant shall be responsible for the actual cost of advertising and legal notice which shall not be refunded. 
(d)  Decision. Within 30 days of the date of application, the planning director shall notify the applicant in writing of one of the following actions: 
(1)  The application is approved in compliance with these regulations. 
(2)  The application is approved conditionally subject to comments and conditions of city staff. 
(3)  If the application is found not to be substantially in conformance with the previously approved preliminary plat, the application shall be scheduled for public hearing at the next available regularly scheduled planning commission meeting. Notice of the time and place shall be sent by certified mail to the address of the subdivider and adjacent property owners as required for preliminary plats as stipulated in section 90-76(a)(1). Notice shall be sent not less than 14 calendar days before the meeting. Any costs for sending the notice shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(e)  Recording. Any approved final plat shall have all required signatures before being recorded in the office of the probate judge of the appropriate county. 
(f)  Automatic approval. Failure to act on the final plat within 30 days after submission by the developer thereof shall be deemed to be approved and a certificate of final approval shall be issued by the planning commission on demand; provided, however, that the subdivider may waive this subsection and consent to an extension of time. 
(Res. of 7-19-17) 
Sec. 90-102. - Final plat specifications and requirements. 
(a)  Digital format. The final plat shall also be submitted to the city in digital form utilizing the standard city layer name structure in AutoCAD or .DXF format on electronic media. 
(b)  Conformance with the preliminary plat. The final plat shall conform to the conditions of the approved preliminary plat. 
(c)  Original tracing specifications. The final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn on any acceptable synthetic tracing material. The scale shall be a minimum of 100 feet to an inch on a sheet size of 24 inches by 36 inches. If the complete plat cannot be shown on one sheet of this size, it may be shown on more than one sheet with an index map at a reduced scale. 
(d)  Bond required. A maintenance surety is required before the final plat will be signed. This surety is required for 25 percent of the total cost of all improvements in the development. The design engineer shall provide a cost schedule for these items. A two-year maintenance warranty on these items is also required. The developer must provide a letter agreeing to maintain these items for two years from the day the final plat is signed or when all punch list items are corrected and the city has inspected and accepted the work, whichever is later. 
(e)  Design engineer's certification required. A design engineer's certification of completion must be submitted and the final inspection completed or a cash performance and two year maintenance bond must be provided before the final plat will be signed. 
(f)  As-built engineering drawings required. Certified as-built engineering drawings for both residential and commercial developments (water, sanitary sewer and electrical for private commercial subdivisions) must be submitted. As-built plans shall be submitted in AutoCAD or .DXF format on electronic media. Once compaction test reports, water/sewer test reports, and paving density test reports have been received, the City of Dothan Public Works Department requires the submission of the following for update of the GIS system prior to having the final plat or replat signed: 
(1)  Provide one digital drawing titled "(name of project) as constructed" in state plane coordinates with: 
a.  A circle with the sanitary sewer lateral length and depth, plus a distance to the downstream sanitary sewer manhole for all sanitary sewer laterals. All of this information should be on one layer named "ss_lats". 
b.  Symbols in the drawing for all sanitary sewer structures. All structures will have a description, northing and easting coordinates, elevation of top, depth and direction of inverts, line sizes and type of material used for the lines. All of the structures and text shall be on layers named "ss_structures" and "ss_text", respectively. 
c.  Symbols in the drawing for all storm drainage structures. All structures will have a detailed (i.e.: Type II inlet, slope paved headwall, etc.) description, northing and easting coordinates, elevation of top, depth and direction of inverts, line sizes and type of material used for the lines. All of the structures and text shall be on layers named "d_structures" and "d_text", respectively. 
d.  Symbols in the drawing for all water structures. All structures will have a description and northing and easting coordinates. All fire hydrants will be located with a point on the side of the fire hydrant closest to the roadway. Only water valves and water manholes need elevation listed. All of the structures and text shall be on layers named "w_structures" and "w_text", respectively. 
e.  The edge of pavement and/or back of curb on a layer named "eop" or "curb", respectively. 
f.  A complete topographic survey with volume calculations for all detention ponds in the subdivision including all outlet structure as-built information. 
g.  All easements and descriptions on a layer named "easements". 
(2)  After the information submitted on the as-constructed drawing is deemed correct by engineering services and the as-constructed drawing is approved, a digital drawing referenced to state plane coordinates of the final plat or replat will be required. This drawing will be named "(name of project) final plat". 
(g)  HOA and Condominium Association Agreements required. A copy of the stamped recorded Home Owners Association and Condominium Association Agreements providing for maintenance of any common element and/or area shown on the final plat shall be provided to the planning and development department. 
(h)  Additional specifications. The final plat shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of owner of record and subdivider and name and registration number of surveyor or engineer. 
(2)  North arrow, subdivision acreage, graphic scale and date. 
(3)  Vicinity map showing location and north point of the subdivision. 
(4)  Location of streams, lakes, and swamps and land subject to flooding. 
(5)  Names and addresses of owners of record of all adjoining land. 
(6)  Bearing and distance to permanent points on the nearest existing street or benchmark or other permanent monuments. The plat shall show the location of the subdivision in relation to the U.S. government land survey by distances and bearing to a line and corner of a one-quarter section or one-quarter of a one-quarter section. Local tie for horizontal and vertical control must be made to two or more monuments in the state horizontal and vertical control monumentation system which is based on NAD 83 and NAVD 88 datums. 
(7)  Municipal and county lines shall be shown and accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distance and angles when such lines traverse or are reasonably close to the subdivision. 
(8)  Designation of land to be dedicated for a neighborhood park or open space area and designation of any commonly owned property. 
(9)  Location of designated landscape buffers. Generally, landscape buffers shall not be part of utility, drainage or any other easement. However, on a case by case basis, the Planning, Dothan Utilities and Public Works Director's may consider allowing a portion of any required buffer to be located within an easement. 
(10)  Exact boundary lines of the tract, determined by a field survey, giving distances to the nearest 1/100 foot and angles to the nearest second, shall be balanced and closed with an apparent error of closure not to exceed one in 10,000 feet. 
(11)  Name of subdivision, exact locations, width, and names of all streets and alleys within and immediately adjoining the new subdivision shall be shown on the plat. 
(12)  Street rights-of-way shall show all curvature information including central angle, tangent length, radius length and chord length and bearing. Lot lines along street rights-of-way shall show a minimum of chord length and bearing and radius length for each curved section and the length and bearing for each straight section. Supply the length and bearing across each road right-of-way that crosses the boundary of the subdivision. Any road with varying right-of-way width shall have distances shown from the center line of the existing road to the right-of-way lines on both sides of the road at both ends of the development. 
(13)  Lot lines shall be shown with dimensions to the nearest 1/100 foot and bearings to the nearest second. 
(14)  Lots shall be numbered by numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically (excluding the letters "I" and "O"). 
(15)  Location, dimensions, and purposes of any easements and any areas to be reserved or dedicated for the public or private use shall be shown on the plat. 
(16)  Accurate location, material and description of monuments and markers shall be described on the plat. 
(17)  Minimum building front yard setback lines for the current zoning shall be shown for all street frontages. The remaining setback lines per current zoning shall be listed in a table or list. 
(18)  Zoning designations with zoning boundaries clearly shown. Show zoning for all adjacent properties. 
(19)  Title shall be in the center or left side of the plat and shall state "A Final Plat of_____". Name and location of the subdivision to the one-quarter of a one-quarter section, township and range, flood zone, acreage and month and year of review in the title. 
(i)  Surveyor's certification. A signed certification by a registered land surveyor certifying to the accuracy of the survey and the plat shall be placed on the final plat as follows: 
"I certify that this plat is a correct representation of the land subdivided and has been prepared in conformity with the minimum standards and requirements of law and has been calculated for closure by latitudes and departures and is found to be accurate within one (1) foot in ten-thousand (10,000) feet." 
By ______________________________________________ 
Land Surveyor, Alabama Registration Number ______________________ 
(j)  Owner's Certification. A signed certification of ownership shall be placed on the final plat and notarized as follows: 
"State of Alabama, County of _______. The undersigned certifies that he is the owner of the land shown on this plat and acknowledges this plat and allotment to be his free act and deed and dedicates forever to public or private use all areas shown or indicated on this plat as streets, alleys, easements or parks." 
Date          Owner's Name         
Notary Certification 
State of Alabama
Houston County 
I, ________________, a notary public in and for said county and state, do hereby certify that ________________, whose name(s) ________________ signed to the foregoing certificate and who ________________ known to me, acknowledge before me on this date, that, of being informed of the contents of said certification, ________________ executed the same voluntarily on the date same bears. Given under my hand this ________ day of _________, 20________. 
Date          Notary Public         
(k)  Health Department certification (only if served by septic tank). A signed certification of the county health department shall be placed on the final plat as follows: 
[INSERT NAME OF COUNTY WHERE SUBDIVISION IS LOCATED] County Health Department on LFD's that will utilize OSS. 
Date          Health Officer         
(l)  Certificate of approval by the public works director. A signed certification by the public works director shall be placed on the final plat as follows: 
"I certify to the best of my knowledge and belief that the owner, or his agent, has completed the construction and installation of the streets, drainage, utilities and other improvements in accordance with the laws and specifications of Dothan, Alabama, or has posted a cash performance bond in lieu thereof." 
Date        Public Works Director       
(m)  Certificate of final approval by the planning commission. Certificate of final approval by the planning commission shall be placed on the final plat only after every item in sections 90-101 and 90-102 has been complied with and shall state the following: 
"I certify that all the requirements for final approval of this plat have been fulfilled in accordance with the regulations of Dothan, Alabama, and the requirements of the Planning Commission." 
Date     
Dothan Planning Commission Chairman     
(n)  Construction certification. A signed certification by a registered professional engineer certifying to the conformity with these regulations shall be placed on the final plat as follows: 
"I, ___________________________, a professional engineer registered in the State of Alabama, Registration Number ________________, do hereby certify that the streets, water system, sewer system, and drainage system for __________________________ subdivision have been constructed under my general supervision in accordance with the construction plans submitted to and reviewed by the Public Works Director. 
I further certify that the public improvements constructed herein have been installed in accordance with the typical sections, profiles and plan details and meet minimum requirements as set out in the most current edition of the City of Dothan Code of Ordinances and shall have no adverse impact on adjacent or downstream properties. 
I acknowledge that in the event that the certification given herein shall be determined by the Public Works Director to be grossly incorrect, the City may hereafter refuse to accept the certification of the undersigned." 
NAME: _________________________ 
TITLE: ________________________ 
P.E. #: __________________________ 
FIRM: ________________________ 
DATE: __________________________ 
(Res. of 7-19-17; Res. of 6-20-18) 
Sec. 90-103. - Approval. 
(a)  Distribution of copies of final plat. Upon approval of the final plat by the planning commission and upon certification of the final plat by all necessary parties, the owner or his agent shall submit a minimum of four mylar copies to the planning commission for final certification. 
(b)  General requirements. General requirements for final approval are as follows: 
(1)  No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be made in any subdivision plat after approval has been given by the planning commission and endorsed in writing on the plat. If any subdivision plat, when recorded, contains any changes, the plat shall be considered null and void, and the planning commission shall then file a correct plat as approved, noting the reason for such filing. 
(2)  Upon application by the subdivider, the planning commission may make a reasonable extension of the approval; provided, however, that the commission may require that the layout be revised according to any changes in regulations or ordinances applicable to the layout subsequent to the first approval. 
(3)  Expiration of an approval shall mean that any further action will require a new filing fee as well as a review of all previous findings. 
(Res. of 7-19-17) 
Sec. 90-104. - Recording. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-33, upon the approval of a final plat by the planning commission, the owner or his agent shall have the final plat recorded in the office of the probate judge of the appropriate county prior to the sale of any lot in the subdivision. One original mylar copy bearing proof of recordation shall be returned to the planning commission for its records. 
(Res. of 7-19-17) 
Sec. 90-105. - Subdivision of property located on public thoroughfares. 
    At its discretion, the planning commission may adopt special procedures that would require a comprehensive access utility and drainage plan to facilitate the orderly development of land located on public thoroughfares. 
(Res. of 7-19-17) 
Secs. 90-106-90-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DESIGN REQUIREMENTS AND MINIMUM STANDARDS 

Sec. 90-136. - General requirements. 
(a)  Every subdivision shall have access to a public street. 
(b)  Conformance to adopted comprehensive plan or major street plan. All streets and other features of the city shall be platted by the subdivider in the location and to the dimension indicated on the major street plan adopted by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  Through traffic. Residential streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. 
(d)  Each lot in a subdivision shall have a designated E-911 address. 
(Res. of 7-19-17) 
Sec. 90-137. - Requirements for streets and other rights-of-way. 
(a)  Continuation of existing streets. Existing streets shall be continued at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required width as stated in section 90-223(d)(3). 
(b)  Connections with future subdivisions. Streets shall be reserved at strategic locations to provide for future access to adjoining properties which may be subdivided in the future. Paved temporary turnarounds shall be required at the end of streets not exceeding 150 feet in length. Each street connection shall intersect property lines at not less than a 75-degree angle. 
(c)  Street names. Street names shall require the approval of the public works department. Streets that are obviously in alignment with streets already in existence and already named shall be given the name of the existing street. Names of new streets shall not duplicate or closely approximate those of existing streets. 
(d)  Street jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 200 feet shall not be permitted. 
(e)  Cul-de-sacs. Unless otherwise approved, all dead-end streets shall terminate in a cul-de-sac and shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Cul-de-sacs on streets longer than 150 feet shall have an outside pavement radius of at least 48 feet and the property line radius shall be at least 58 feet. 
(2)  In commercial and industrial developments, an outside pavement radius of at least 90 feet and a property line radius of at least 100 feet unless directed otherwise by the fire marshal. 
(3)  A continuous ten foot utility and drainage easement is also required outside of the right-of-way for all cul-de-sacs. 
(4)  Cul-de-sac length should generally not exceed 750 feet but may be longer with the concurrence of city staff. 
(5)  In cul-de-sacs, minimum grade shall be determined by the length of the curb line rather than the length of the centerline. 
(f)  Development along major street, limited access highway or railroad right-of-way. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an expressway, freeway, arterial or collector street, or a railroad right-of-way, the planning commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, either as a marginal access street, or at a distance suitable for an appropriate use of intervening land, with a non-access reservation suitably planted. Due regard should be given requirements for approach grades and future grade separations in determining distances. Lots shall have no access to expressways, freeways or arterial or collector streets, but only to an accessible street in which case the planning commission may require double frontage lots. 
(g)  Access lanes. The requirements for providing access lanes within a subdivision are as follows: 
(1)  They shall not be provided in residential developments unless the subdivider provides evidence satisfactory to the planning commission of their need. 
(2)  They may be provided at the rear of all lots intended to be used for commercial purposes. 
(3)  They shall be generally parallel to the streets, shall not be less than 20 feet wide and shall be paved according to city design standards. 
(4)  Right-of-way shall not be dedicated to the public. 
(5)  Where two access lanes intersect, a triangular flair of not less than 20 feet from the normal intersection of the property line shall be provided along each property line. 
(6)  Dead-ends shall be prohibited. 
(h)  Reserve strips and easements. 
(1)  Reserve strips may be implemented to control vehicular access to and physical access to public or private utilities to all unplatted property or properties which abut onto a dedicated public or private street. Said reserve strip shall be five feet in width and contained within the public or private street right-of-way or easement and shall not be removed until such time as the adjacent unplatted property or properties are platted, approved by the Dothan Planning Commission and duly recorded in the office of the county probate judge of the appropriate county. 
(2)  The planning commission may require easements for access, poles, wires, conduits, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, gas lines, water lines or other utility lines along all rear lot lines, and alongside lot lines as determined necessary by the public works director. The minimum width needed for easements shall be determined by the design engineer in accordance with the utility which is involved and shall be approved by the public works director for each specific subdivision. In no case, however, shall the width of a public easement be less than 20 feet and further, where multiple utilities are located within an easement, ten additional feet shall be added for each utility unless otherwise approved by the public works director. 
(3)  Medians or islands located in the right-of-way may be permitted as part of the approved subdivision design. Maintenance shall be the responsibility of the developer or homeowners association. Fences or perimeter walls installed by the developer shall be the responsibility of the developer or a homeowners association. Underdrain pipe is required back of the curb on both sides of the median island for any island that is sprinkled or will be. Median islands shall be designed with pavement breaks to enable easy access all lots affected by said median islands. Turning radius for boats, RVs, trailers and other tow-behind vehicles shall be considered during design. 
(i)  Auxiliary lane requirements. In order for the internal subdivision streets and the adjacent existing roadways to operate safely and efficiently, it is necessary to evaluate the need for channelization of traffic movements, especially at major un-signalized intersections. The warrants outlined here shall be followed for un-signalized intersections that provide access to new subdivisions or developments and for major un-signalized intersections internal to the subdivision or development. The warrants apply both to subdivisions and developments that require a Traffic Impact Study (TIS), and to those that do not. 
Please note that left and right turn lanes can be required by the public works director even if the proposed development generates a lower turning volume than shown below in Table 1 and Table 3. These turn lanes may be required to mitigate traffic concerns (i.e. roadway capacity or safety), or if there are other traffic specific problems aggravated by the proposed development. If a turn lane is required by the traffic engineer over 500 feet away from the development's entrance, the developer can submit a traffic impact study providing information showing otherwise, approved by the traffic engineer and/or public works director, to remove this requirement. 
(1)  Left turn lane warrants. The methodology presented here applies to all subdivision or development access points where a left turn must be executed from a two-lane roadway to enter the subdivision. The intent is to identify locations where lack of left turn lanes presents a potential safety concern. 
The need for an exclusive left turn lane can be determined from Table 1 if the following parameters are known: 
 ADT: The bi-directional average daily traffic on the roadway from which the left turn is executed. If a TIS for the subdivision is not available, ADT can be obtained from the City of Dothan Traffic Engineering Division if traffic counts exist for the roadway. 
 LT: Number of left turns in the peak hour ( PH ). If a TIS for the subdivision is not available, the number of left turns can be estimated based on the number of trips generated by the subdivision or development in the peak hour (using the trip generation rate from the current edition of the Trip Generation Manual) divided by the number of access points where left turns are (or will be) permitted, as shown in the following equation: 
LT = 0.5 Trip Generation PH. /Access Pts 
For residential subdivisions the equation simplifies to: 
LT = 0.5 Dwelling Units/Access Pts 
 Posted Speed: The posted speed limit on the roadway from which the left turn is executed. 
Table 1 shows the maximum number of left turn movements allowed in the peak hour without a dedicated left turn lane. If those values are exceeded for any ADT and speed combination, a left turn lane shall be provided. Table 2 shows the minimum left-turn approach and bay taper lengths. 
An exclusive left turn lane will also be required regardless of the size of the subdivision or development, if an access point to the subdivision is located in an area where sufficient stopping sight distance is not provided on the major roadway. If the roadway shoulders or any pedestrian or bicycle facilities are affected by the addition of a left turn lane they must be replaced. The minimum storage length required for the lane must comply with the requirements in the City of Dothan turn lane specifications. 
Table 1. Maximum left turn volume in the peak hour without a left turn lane 
ADT (2-way) Posted Speed (mph) <2,500 2,500-5,000 5,000-10,000 >10,000 =35 75 50 30 15 40-50 75 40 20 10 =55 75 30 10 5  
Table 2. Minimum Left-Turn Approach and Bay Tapers 
Design Speed (mph) Approach 1 (in feet) Approach 2 (in feet) 25 125 100 30 180 120 35 245 140 40 320 160 45 405 180 50 500 200 55 605 220 60 720 240  
(2)  Right turn lane warrants. The methodology presented here applies to all subdivision or development access points where a right turn must be executed from a roadway to enter the subdivision. The intent is to identify locations where the lack of right turn lanes presents a potential safety concern. 
The need for an exclusive right turn lane can be determined from Table 3 if the following parameters are known: 
 ADT: The bi-directional average daily traffic on the roadway from which the right turn is executed. If a TIS for the subdivision is not available, ADT can be obtained from the City of Dothan Traffic Engineering Division if traffic counts exist for the roadway. 
 RT: Number of right turns in the peak hour. If a TIS for the subdivision is not available, the number of right turns can be estimated based on the number of trips generated by the subdivision or development in the peak hour (using the trip generation rate from the current edition of the Trip Generation 4 Manual) divided by the number of access points where right turns are (or will be) permitted, as shown in the equation below: 
RT = 0.5 Trip Generation PH /Access Pts 
For residential subdivisions the equation simplifies to: 
RT = 0.5 Dwelling Units/Access Pts 
Table 3 shows the maximum number of right turn movements allowed in the peak hour without a dedicated right turn lane. If those values are exceeded, a right turn lane shall be provided. Table 4 shows the length of lanes and tapers for right-turn lanes. 
Table 3. Peak Hour Volume Warrant for Right Turn Lanes 
ADT (2-way) Max. Peak Hour Right Turn Volume (w/o RT Lane) 2,500-5,000 100 5,000-10,000 70 >10,000 40  
Table 4. Speed Change Lane Lengths for Right-Turn Lanes 
Stop Condition 15 mph Turn Design or Posted Speed (mph) Accel Decel Accel Decel Minimum Acceleration Lane Taper Ratio Minimum Deceleration Lane Taper Ratio 25 100 200 90 150 7.5:1 7.5:1 30 190 235 190 185 10:1 8:1 35 270 275 240 235 12.5:1 10:1 40 380 315 320 295 15:1 11.5:1 45 550 375 480 350 17.5:1 13:1 50 760 435 700 405 20:1 15:1 55 960 485 910 450 22.5:1 18.5:1  
(3)  Auxiliary lanes sample calculation. 
 Given the following information, determine the need for dedicated left turn and right turn lanes: 
 Turns made from a two lane collector roadway. 
 Posted speed: 40 mph. 
 ADT on collector roadway: 8,000 vehicles/day. 
  150 single-family residences. 
 Two access points. 
To calculate LT and RT: 
LT = RT = (0.5×150)/2 = 38 
To evaluate need for left turn lane: 
Reading in Table 3 for ADT between 5,000 and 10,000 and posted speed of 40, the maximum number of left turns allowed in the peak hour is 20. 
Since LT (38) > 20, a left turn lane IS warranted (at each access point). 
To evaluate need for right turn lane: 
Reading in Table 3 for ADT between 5,000 and 10,000 and posted speed of 40, the maximum number of right turns allowed in the peak hour is 70. 
Since RT (38) < 70, a right turn lane IS NOT warranted. 
(Res. of 7-19-17; Res. of 6-20-18) 
Sec. 90-138. - Right-of-way or easement width requirements. 
    The minimum street right-of-way widths shall be as follows: 
(a)  Freeways and expressways: 150 feet. 
(b)  Arterial streets: 120 feet. 
(c)  Collector streets: 80 feet, or 60 feet with additional ten feet of utility and drainage easements on each side of proposed right-of-way if approved by the public works director. 
(d)  Minor commercial and industrial streets: 60 feet with additional ten-foot utility and private drainage or private utility & private drainage easements. 
(e)  Minor residential streets: 60 feet, or 50 feet with additional ten feet of utility and drainage easements on each side of the proposed right-of-way. 
(f)  Marginal access streets: 50 feet or as otherwise required by the public works director. 
(g)  Access lanes: 20 feet and shall be located in an easement and not a right-of-way. 
(h)  Or as directed by state and federal regulations. 
(Res. of 7-19-17; Res. of 6-20-18) 
Sec. 90-139. - Street design requirements. 
    Street intersections. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible with no street intersection being at any angle of less than 75 degrees. 
(a)  Right-of-way radius. The street right-of-way radius at street intersections shall be at least 20 feet. A longer radius may be required by the public works director. Where the angle of street intersection is less than 90 degrees, the public works director may require a longer radius. 
(b)  Additional width on existing streets. Additional width on existing streets shall be determined according to the following: 
(1)  The entire right-of-way shall be provided where any part of the subdivision is on both sides of the existing streets. Refer to section 90-138 for required right-of-way width. 
(2)  When the subdivision is located on one side of an existing street, one-half of the required right-of-way width, measured from the centerline of the existing roadway, shall be provided. 
(3)  The planning commission may control access to expressways, freeways and arterial streets by requiring all lots to face and have access only to minor streets. 
(c)  Street connectivity. 
(1)  A proposed development should provide or enable direct connections to the public street system from adjacent similarly zoned properties. Each development should incorporate and continue all local and collector streets stubbed to the boundary whether previously approved but unbuilt or to existing streets. 
(2)  In the event adjacent developable properties are unzoned or zoned for a less intense use and to ensure future street connections to adjacent developable parcels whose use is indicated on the adopted future land use map to contain compatible development, the planning commission may require local street connections as appropriate given the existing land use, topography and market conditions. Should the proposed development site not be shown on the future land use map, the planning commission may determine whether a connection is appropriate given its location, proposed use and market potential. 
(3)  Streets shown on the adopted transportation plan shall be incorporated into the proposed development. 
(4)  Public works director may require the installation of any access or speed management control or traffic calming device. 
(5)  Private residential streets whose purpose is to avoid complying with this standard are prohibited. 
(6)  Notwithstanding section 90-197 of these regulations, the requirements of (a), (b), and (c) above may be waived if, in the opinion of the planning and public works directors, they are infeasible because of unusual topographic features, existing development, or the presence of an existing natural area containing environmentally sensitive lands. 
(d)  Complete streets design features. Complete streets design features are roadway design features that accommodate and facilitate convenient access and mobility by all users, including current and projected uses, particularly pedestrians, bicyclists and individuals of all ages and abilities. These features may include, but not be limited to, sidewalks, paved shoulders suitable for use by bicyclists, lane striping, bicycle lanes, share the road signage, crosswalks, road diets, pedestrian control signalization, curb cuts, raised crosswalks and ramps and traffic calming measures. 
(Res. of 7-19-17; Res. of 6-20-18) 
Sec. 90-140. - Design standards for blocks and lots. 
(a)  Design lengths and widths. Block lengths and widths shall be determined or based on the following requirements: Blocks shall not be greater than 1,320 feet between intersections with other public or private streets unless topographic or other constraints shall make it impractical. 
(b)  Lots abutting public streets. Each lot shall abut upon a dedicated public street unless otherwise approved as a private street by the planning director and the public works director. 
(c)  Double frontage lots. Double frontage lots should be avoided except where essential to provide separations of residential development from traffic arterials or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. Access shall be taken from only one side. 
(Res. of 7-19-17) 
Sec. 90-141. - Sidewalks. 
(a)  Sidewalks shall be provided on at least one-side of the street in all new residential developments and both sides of the street in commercial developments. Alternative locations and widths may be proposed to the planning commission in conjunction with preliminary plat submittals. 
(b)  For residential and commercial developments, sidewalks shall be provided along the frontage of the property being subdivided adjacent to the street providing access. 
(c)  Sidewalks shall be a minimum five feet in width and be constructed with a minimum 3,000 psi concrete. Sidewalks shall have a thickness of four inches. 
(d)  If feasible, sidewalks in residential areas shall be at least 24 inches from the back of the curb and/or in line with existing area sidewalks. The area between the curb and sidewalk shall be sodded or otherwise landscaped. 
(e)  All sidewalks shall slope one-fourth of an inch per foot toward the curb. 
(f)  The planning commission may allow alternative sidewalk materials and/or designs, such as elevated boardwalks, where needed to protect wetlands or other environmentally sensitive areas with approval of the public works director. 
(g)  Where the proposed development is in a rural area (lots are generally one acre or greater), the planning commission may choose to grant an exemption to the sidewalk requirements. Such exemptions shall be considered on a site by site basis. 
(Res. of 7-19-17; Res. of 6-20-18) 
Sec. 90-142. - Stormwater plan. 
    Storm sewers and drainage. Subdivision drainage design shall include a hydrological analysis sealed by a professional engineer registered in the State of Alabama and include all land upstream from and through the proposed subdivision. This analysis shall include, but not be limited to, a map of the upstream basin showing the contributing drainage area, runoff coefficients or curve selection criteria, the time of concentration and how it was calculated and a map showing the route. Drainage computations should be calculated by using the rational method for subdivisions of 40 acres or less and by using the soil conservation service (SCS) method for subdivisions of greater than 40 acres. 
(a)  Storm drainage calculations to support a storm drainage plan are required for review and approval with the complete set of construction plans. The post-development peak flow, at a minimum, shall not exceed the pre-development peak flow for the two, ten, and 25-year frequency storm events. In addition, at the determination of the public works director the post-development peak flow shall not exceed the pre-development peak flow for the two percent annual chance 50-year and the one percent annual chance 100-year frequency storm events. Any deviation of this limitation of peak flow shall be determined and/or approved by the public works director. This can be accomplished by the construction and maintenance of detention ponds or other approved remedies. A freeboard of one vertical foot for the greatest design storm shall be provided in detention ponds. The minimum slope of the bottom of the detention pond shall be two percent unless otherwise approved by the public works director. The analysis shall be submitted to the public works director when the construction plans are submitted. 
(1)  Detention ponds in residential subdivisions shall be labeled as a public drainage easement and shall also be common area. The City of Dothan will maintain public drainage easements associated with the detention pond for structural maintenance of the pond and structures only. All aesthetic maintenance shall be by a homeowners association or the property owner. All other public drainage easements shall also be aesthetically maintained by a homeowners association or the property owner. The City of Dothan will not maintain drainage easements or detention ponds within any private or commercial subdivision. These shall be labeled as private drainage easements. Retention ponds in any development or subdivision, whether commercial, public, or private, shall be in a private drainage easement to be maintained by a Homeowner's Association or the property owner. 
(2)  Storm sewers, drains and catch basins (inlets) shall be provided in each subdivision as follows: Branch catch basins shall be designed to intercept the runoff from a ten-year frequency storm, with the exception of sump inlets on roadways. Sump inlets shall be designed to intercept the runoff from a 25-year frequency storm. Inlets shall be adequately spaced to limit spread to one-half a lane width on local and collector streets based on the design storm for the subject inlet. Spread for arterial and high speed collector streets shall be as determined by the public works director. The minimum inlet size shall be a Type II, single inlet with one wing (seven-foot opening). Stormwater conduits (pipes, flumes, etc.) shall be designed to convey the runoff from the frequency storm (ten-year or 25-year associated with the controlling inlet upstream. The submitted storm drainage analysis shall show the effects of the one percent annual chance 100-year frequency storm event for the subject site and the impacted areas downstream. The acceptable runoff factor is 95 percent for pavements and buildings and additional runoff factors can be submitted for approval by the public works director depending upon topography and type and cover of soil for other areas. These storm drains shall be connected to or spilled into existing drains or ditches as approved by the public works director. Storm drainage pipes shall be sized in accordance with a method approved by the public works director. 
(3)  Where existing area drainage ditches, creeks, branches, swales, etc., occur through or alongside the proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall furnish pipe or paved bottoms with either sloped masonry or concrete sides for any opening of 24 square feet, as measured by circular concrete pipe equivalent or smaller, as determined by the public works director. Drainage channels carrying drainage requiring a pipe larger than 24 square feet shall be improved and maintained in a manner to be determined by the public works director on an individual basis. All drainage improvements shall be installed prior to the approval of the final plat. Routing or rerouting these ditches shall be a consideration in the layout of all lots, and only in exceptional cases due to natural topography shall a ditch bisect any lot in the subdivision. Culverts and bridges designed to the one percent annual chance storm event (100-year) shall be constructed by the developer over all watercourses at street crossings and shall extend the full width of the street, and be approved by the office of the public works director. Any existing ditch or water course not required to be improved as directed above shall be part of a common area and included in a private drainage easement not to be disturbed. 
(b)  All subdivisions are required to provide a detailed flood study and hydraulic analysis for any areas which are currently FEMA designated as being in flood zone "A". If the property being developed does not currently have an established floodway, the same applies for providing a detailed flood study and hydraulic analysis to determine the floodway. 
(c)  Any subdivision immediately adjacent to or within 1,000 feet of a FEMA designated special flood hazard area that has not been studied by FEMA shall have a detailed flood study and hydraulic analysis performed for the development. 
(d)  If the proposed subdivision is located in an area which is subject to inundation by water, the planning commission shall require a thorough review by the public works director. This review may require additional information to be provided by the subdivider in regards to valley cross sections, topography information, flood occurrence records or whatever is available to determine the potential of flooding on the proposed site or adjacent property. Any report issued to the planning commission concerning the flood hazard of an area must be prepared by a professional engineer. 
(e)  Drainage structures shall be designed as required in subsection (b) above. 
(1)  Size. The minimum size of roadway structures shall be18 inches or equivalent. A special design drawing will be required for any drainage structure having a required end area of 20 square feet or more. 
(2)  Material. Roadway pipe material shall meet the requirements as set forth in Section 850 of the current edition of the Alabama Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Highway Construction. Material shall be class 3 reinforced concrete. Material must meet Alabama Department of Transportation Standard Specifications. A vendor's certificate or test report must be furnished to the public works director. Reinforced concrete drainage structures shall be constructed in accordance with standard drawings and specifications approved by the public works director. 
(3)  Placement. Pipe shall be laid and backfilled in accordance with Alabama Department of Transportation specifications and procedures. 
(4)  Boxes, Headwalls, etc. Headwalls or boxes shall be installed on pipe culverts. Headwalls for precast concrete or brick masonry construction shall require preapproval by the public works director. Headwalls for pipe sizes larger than 48 inches shall be shown on the approved plans with a special detail. Boxes, headwalls, etc. will be constructed of 3,000 PSI concrete. Slope paved headwalls may be used when approved by the public works director. 
(Res. of 7-19-17; Res. of 6-20-18) 
Sec. 90-143. - Street address standards. 
    Structures shall be addressed according to E-911 addressing standards and guidelines promulgated by the E-911 board and may be amended or modified from time to time upon approval of the board of commissioners. They are adopted by reference and duplicated in this section as if fully set forth. 
(a)  Exceptions. This division section shall not apply to official traffic control devices erected by the state, the county or the city. 
(b)  Display of numerals or characters. 
(1)  All buildings, residences, mobile homes or other fixed structures, within the corporate limits and the city police jurisdiction, shall have address numerals/characters permanently and visibly displayed in accordance with the adopted City of Dothan E-911 Addressing Standards and Guidelines. 
(2)  For the purposes of this division section, an address for display is defined as the numerals and a character assigned, in compliance with this section, to a specific location but does not contain the street or road name. 
(3)  The actual complete address consists of the following: street number, pre-directional, primary street name, suffix and secondary number, if any, as defined by the United States Postal Addressing Conventions DM940-89-03. 
(4)  All numerals shall be Arabic numerals. 
(c)  Coordination of assignment of addresses. 
(1)  The public works department, engineering services division, shall coordinate the assignment of addresses with the Dothan-Houston County Communications District, and both entities shall keep the addresses assigned on file. The engineering services division shall assign addresses within the city. 
(2)  All city-maintained data must reflect the addresses and addressing criteria assigned within this section or the E-911 Addressing Standards and Guidelines. 
(3)  City of Dothan Public Works Department, Dothan-Houston County Communications District E-911 Board, and city postmaster shall have the authority to promulgate additional rules and regulations regarding addressing within the city consistent with the United States Postal Addressing Conventions DM-940-89-03. 
(4)  Violation of any promulgated rule shall be considered to be a violation of this section. 
(d)  New structures. 
(1)  As soon as initial construction of a new structure has begun, a clearly visible freestanding sign, as specified in the E-911 Addressing Standards and Guidelines, is required until the permanent address numerals/characters are attached or otherwise displayed when the structure is completed or occupied. 
(2)  Business structures must have addresses properly displayed before occupancy and use. 
(3)  Single-family residential structures must have addresses properly displayed within 30 days of occupancy. 
(e)  Existing structures. The resident or current occupant of any dwelling, the manager or occupier of any business structure or the owner of any structure that is not occupied is responsible for compliance with this section. 
(f)  Violations. 
(1)  It shall be a violation of this section to display any address in any manner other than that prescribed in this section or to display any address not officially assigned, as specified in this section. 
(2)  It shall be a violation of this section to publish, broadcast, disseminate or utilize any address, within the city and its police jurisdiction, not in compliance with this section, or to utilize in any manner any address not officially approved or officially issued, as specified in this section. 
(3)  Failure to comply with this section or any portion of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. The police department may cause to be issued an arrest warrant or summons to appear before the municipal court to answer such alleged violation. A summons to appear may be served upon an alleged violator either in person or by first class mail. 
(4)  The minimum fine for violation of this section shall be $25.00, plus court costs. The maximum sentence for violation of this section shall be six months in the city jail or a maximum fine of $500.00 or both. 
(g)  Confidentiality of emergency data. 
(1)  Under this section, all data collected by any agency related to the enhanced E-911 system shall be confidential and not released to any member of the public or any government agency, except to facilitate an emergency response. 
(2)  This information may be used in the creation and maintenance of maps, the E-911 database, and for confirmation of public records during the normal course of operations of the United States Post Office, the Engineering Services Division, the city police department, and the Dothan-Houston County Communications District. 
(3)  Nothing in this section shall prevent or hinder the operations of the city, any city department or the Dothan-Houston County Communications District, nor shall this prevent the release of this information, when any part of such information is contained in other sources that are a public record. 
(Res. of 7-19-17) 
Secs. 90-144-90-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 90-171. - Flood hazard areas. 
    Any filling, construction, development or improvements in flood hazard areas shall comply with chapters 42, floods and chapter 83, stormwater of the City of Dothan Code of Ordinances. 
(Res. of 7-19-17) 
Sec. 90-172. - Monuments. 
    Right-of-way and property line monuments shall be placed in each subdivision in accordance with the following: Concrete monuments shall be four inches in diameter or square, three feet long, with a flat top. The monument shall have rebar or an iron pin in the center of the monument with a durable marker or cap bearing the Alabama license number of the land surveyor or the company certificate or authorization number and shall be set flush with the finished grade. An iron, or other approved long-life material, pin embedded at least 18 inches into the ground shall be required at each lot corner and each point where the property line changes direction. Such iron pin shall be at least one-half of an inch in diameter and have a durable marker or cap bearing the Alabama license number of the land surveyor or the company certificate or authorization number. The top surface of such iron pin shall be approximately level with the finished grade. Concrete monuments shall be set at all street corners, and at all points where the street lines intersect the exterior boundaries bearing changes along the boundary of the subdivision and at all angle points and points of curve in each street. Individual lot corners not included above shall be marked with rebar or an iron pin with cap as noted above. 
(Res. of 7-19-17) 
Secs. 90-173-90-195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 90-196. - Approval of improvements. 
(a)  Maintenance agreement and bond. 
(1)  Upon determination that the final plat should be approved and that the installation of all required improvements has been satisfactorily completed in accordance with city specifications, the public works director shall secure a statement from the developer agreeing to be responsible for repairing any defects in the construction for two years after the final plat is recorded or completion of construction, inspected and approved by the city, whichever occurs last. The city's responsibility for acceptance and/or maintenance of streets and other designated public infrastructure does not begin until the final plat has been recorded, the two-year maintenance period has expired and any defects that are found have been corrected to the satisfaction of the city. 
a.  Type of bond. A bond shall be required to ensure the fulfillment of such agreement and shall be by cash, certified cashier's check, certificate of deposit, or surety bond produced by a company authorized to do business in the State of Alabama. The applicant shall not be released from said bond except by a release in writing from the public works director. 
b.  Bond amount. The bond amount shall be set at 25 percent of the bid cost of the improvements that are to be maintained by the city. A schedule of bid prices for all items to be bonded shall be submitted by a registered engineer for review by the public works director. This schedule shall clearly describe the items, quantities, unit cost and total cost of all the improvements. 
(2)  Once a maintenance agreement has been obtained, the public works director and planning commission chairman shall then sign a minimum of four mylar copies of the final plat. The certification statements of the owner, mortgagors and any other parties with an interest in the development shall have signed the mylar copies prior to submitting them to the final approving authorities. The owner, or his agent, shall then have the final plat recorded in the office of the probate judge of the appropriate county prior to the sale of any lot in the subdivision. One original mylar copy of the final plat bearing proof of recordation shall be returned to the office of the planning commission. 
(b)  Performance bond. The public works director, in consultation with the planning director may allow a cash performance bond to be submitted in lieu of full completion of the subdivision construction for final approval. The subdivider must substantiate the circumstances which warrant this request. Such cash bond shall not be less than 125 percent of the total cost of outstanding construction items as certified by the engineer of record. An itemized list of all incomplete construction items shall be submitted for review to the public works director for approval. The city is not obligated to accept the cash performance bond in lieu of completion. Performance bonds may not exceed ten percent of the required construction costs for the total development. The bond shall be sufficient to secure all lot improvements on the individual lots of the subdivision as required by these regulations. 
(c)  Acceptance of dedication offers. Acceptance of formal offers of dedication of streets, rights-of-way, public areas, public utilities, easements, parks and all associated infrastructure shall be by resolution by the local governing body. 
(d)  Cost of improvements. Determining the responsibility for the cost of improvements shall be done as follows: 
(1)  Subdivider's responsibility. The subdivider shall incur the cost of construction and installation of all required public improvements based on the following: 
a.  Streets. The entire cost for the construction of the full width of streets from back of curb to back of curb or from shoulder to shoulder and all right-of-way grading, grassing and dress up. 
b.  Water and sewer systems. The entire cost for the installation of all water and sewer systems which are required to serve the new subdivision and tie in with existing water and sewer systems, based on the specifications set forth herein and within the City of Dothan Subdivision Specifications and Standard Details. Upgrading of existing systems to provide proper capacity or flow or relocation of existing system if required to accommodate the development. 
c.  Monuments and iron pins. The entire cost of monuments and iron pins. 
d.  Street signs. The entire cost of street signs. Street signs may be provided and installed by the city at the expense of the developer if requested. 
e.  Pavement striping, legends and stop bars. Permanent markings shall be thermoplastic. The entire cost of pavement striping, legends and stop bars shall be included. 
f.  Storm drainage. The entire cost for storm drainage pipes, culverts, riprap, storm drainage detention basins and structures. 
g.  Sidewalks. The entire cost of sidewalks. 
(2)  Governing body's responsibility. The governing body shall partially participate in sharing the cost of construction and installation of required public improvements on the following conditions: Incur cost for any difference in the cost of laying of oversized pipe and outfall systems which are needed in excess of the required water and sewer facilities needed to serve exclusively the new subdivision as determined by the planning commission, the public works director and the utilities director. In the case of insufficient sanitary sewer capacity, the developer may pay all costs necessary for upgrades to the existing sanitary sewer system or may delay the development until such time that required improvements are constructed by the city or request that the city participate in the cost sharing of the required improvements. 
(Res. of 7-19-17) 
Sec. 90-197. - Deviations. 
    Where the subdivider can show that a provision of this article would cause unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to, and where, because of topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site, in the opinion of the planning commission, a departure may be made without destroying the intent of such provisions, the planning commission may authorize a deviation from these standards. Any deviation thus authorized is to be stated in writing in the minutes of the planning commission with the reasoning on which the departure was justified set forth. The planning commission shall not approve any deviation to the technical street or utility design or construction standards contained in sections 90-221 through 90-224 in these regulations without the approval of the public works director. 
(Res. of 7-19-17) 
Secs. 90-198-90-219. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONSTRUCTION PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 90-220. - Construction procedures. 
(a)  Construction plans. Construction and installation of any required public improvements as described in this section shall not begin until the planning commission has given preliminary approval of the new subdivision and the public works director has approved construction plans for the new subdivision. Construction plans must be prepared, signed and sealed by a professional engineer. The following shall be observed: 
(1)  Eight sets of construction plans shall be submitted to the department of planning and development for distribution and review by the appropriate reviewing agency. 
(2)  The designs for all utilities are to be submitted in the complete set of construction plans, including electric, gas, cable TV, and telephone. Locations of junction boxes and conduits should be shown as well as the location of proposed utilities in the typical roadway detail. A pre-design meeting shall be set up by the developer or design engineer with all applicable utility representatives and the City of Dothan. 
(3)  The owner/developer is responsible for relocating any utility facilities (water services, fire hydrants, street lights, utility poles, telephone boxes, etc.), including the isolation and lowering of existing utilities that may interfere or require relocating due to this development. 
(4)  Fire hydrants shall be located per the fire code as required by the fire marshal and approved by Dothan Utilities. 
(5)  The designer or contractor must submit a site plan or approved BMP plan depicting the placement and scheduling of erosion and/or sedimentation control prior to the commencement of work on the project. Provide a note on the construction plans stating that all erosion control measures shall be in place as required by the engineer, plans, and City of Dothan representative. An inspection log will be required to be submitted to the City of Dothan. Siltation control measures shall be inspected per the NPDES permit requirements and at a minimum once a month. Any deficiencies shall be corrected immediately and no further work will proceed until said deficiencies are corrected to the City of Dothan or engineer's approval. 
(6)  A copy of any NPDES, state, or other permits associated with this development shall be provided to the City of Dothan before construction plans will be approved or before the construction associated with the permit will be allowed to begin. It shall be the responsibility of the design engineer to obtain all required permits for the development. 
(7)  Water material submittals shall be provided to Dothan Utilities for approval before use in subdivision construction. 
(8)  Sidewalks shall be installed at the time of road construction. Once accepted, subsequent damage on each individual lot and/or address shall be the responsibility of the home builder to repair during construction. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for that address until repairs are completed and accepted. 
(9)  Addresses shall be shown on the construction plan for each lot and marked on the curb. 
(b)  Inspections and approval. All construction shall be inspected by the designing engineer or his designated representative. After completion of all the construction and the installation of the required public improvements and if the work has met the specifications as described in this section, and certified by the design engineer, the design engineer shall then supply one set of as-built (record) plans and profiles showing the locations of all improvements, including all lateral service lines to the public works director, along with/prior to a written request for a final inspection. Upon completion of the final inspection, a punch list will be generated. When the punch list items have been corrected and a letter has been sent to the public works director stating such, the public works director shall inspect the work and if satisfactory, notify the subdivider in writing of the approval of such work. Work outside the contract, such as electrical, telephone, etc., must be performed in accordance with the approved plans and be in agreement with the design engineer and the public works director. The public works director or his authorized agent may inspect all or any of the work associated with the subdivision. The term "as-built" (record) plans shall also include plans submitted in AutoCAD or .DXF format per section 90-102(f). 
(Res. of 7-19-17) 
Sec. 90-221. - Grades, horizontal curves, vertical curves, tangents and sight distances. 
    The following street design requirements shall be adhered to in addition to other requirements stated in this section: 
Standard Express- 
ways, 
Freeways, Arterial Streets Collector Streets Other Streets Maximum street grades 6 percent 8 percent 15 percent Minimum street grade 0.5 percent 0.5 percent 0.5 percent Minimum crown slope ?inch per foot ?inch per foot ?inch per foot Minimum radii of centerline curvature 800 feet 500 feet 100 feet Minimum length of tangent between reverse curves and approaches at intersections 300 feet 200 feet 100 feet Minimum stopping sight distance 350 feet 240 feet 200 feet Minimum curb-line radius 40 feet 30 feet 20 feet  
A street which ends at an intersection shall provide for a maximum grade of five percent for a distance not less than 100 feet from the centerline of said intersection. For grade transition, a vertical curve with a length, approved by the public works director, shall be used which shall not be less than the minimum set in this section. 
(Res. of 7-19-17) 
Sec. 90-222. - Basic construction requirements for streets and utilities. 
(a)  Grading. All streets, roads and alleys shall be graded to their full width by the subdivider so that pavements and sidewalks, where required or if installed in the future, can be constructed. The preparation of the right-of-way shall be complete before grading is started, and the construction of cuts and fills shall be accomplished in accordance with the construction plans approved by the public works director. Grading must meet the most current addition of the Alabama Highway Department of Transportation standard specifications for highway construction and the City of Dothan Subdivision Specifications and Standard Details for construction as published by the public works director's office. For all construction work within or adjacent to an existing right-of-way, construction zone traffic control signing and detour plans must be in place and in conformance with the current edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) prior to the start of work. 
(b)  Installation of utilities. After grading is completed and approved and before any base is applied, all of the underground utilities located in the street right-of-way and all service connections related thereto shall be installed completely and approved throughout the length of the street and across the section. Where alleys exist, utilities shall be installed in the alley right-of-way, unless specifically directed to do otherwise by the planning commission. It shall be the responsibility of the design engineer to coordinate installation of utilities with the appropriate utility departments or utility companies. 
(1)  Backfill for utilities crossing proposed roadway section shall conform to the Alabama Department of Transportation Standard Specification for Highway Construction in force at the time of installation and/or the City of Dothan Subdivision Specifications and Standard Details, whichever is more stringent. 
(2)  All utility installations under existing paving shall be bored and encased as set forth in the City of Dothan Subdivision Specifications and Standard Details unless otherwise approved by the public works director. 
(3)  All utility installations shall conform to current standards as set forth in the most current edition of the Alabama Highway Department Utility Manual and City of Dothan specifications and details. 
(c)  Slopes and shoulder improvements. The minimum ratio for all fill or cut slopes shall be three to one. The minimum width for shoulders from back edge of the curb shall be eight feet where sidewalk is required and three feet when sidewalk is not required. All sidewalks shall slope towards the street unless otherwise approved or required by the public works director. All shoulders shall slope, plus or minus two percent, to the right-of-way. When all construction is completed, all slopes and shoulders shall be cleared of all rubbish and shall have a stand of grass to prevent undue erosion, either by sodding, sprigging or seeding. 
(d)  Testing. Before starting construction, the subdivider or design engineer shall make necessary arrangements for adequate laboratory testing and construction inspection, excluding the contractor, to ensure that the proposed improvements comply with the requirements of the City of Dothan. All testing and associated costs shall be the responsibility of the subdivider and shall be done by a testing laboratory approved by the public works director. 
(Res. of 7-19-17) 
Sec. 90-223. - Roadway surfacing and paving. 
    For all streets, turn, acceleration or deceleration lanes, the following minimum requirements shall be adhered to for the surfacing and paving of the streets: 
(a)  Subgrade. Subgrade shall be modified as set forth in Section 230.01 of the current edition of Alabama Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Highway Construction. Finish grade shall conform to lines; grades and cross-sections as shown on approved plans unless specific permission is acquired in writing from the public works director. 
1.  Test requirements. 
a.  CBR. One test per each 5,000 feet or at each significant material change to design pavement buildup. This test is to be run prior to submission of the construction plans. 
b.  Proctor density and optimum moisture. One test each 2,000 feet or at each material change. 
c.  Compaction test. 
1.  Top six inches of subgrade course compaction shall conform to current Alabama Department of Transportation standards, Roadbed Processing, AASHTO T-99 to 100 percent density and ± two percent Optimum Moisture, minimum. All other subgrade and embankment fill shall meet AASHTO T-99 to 95 percent density. 
2.  One per 200 feet of finished roadway in locations to be approved by the city. 
d.  A reliable testing firm using the standard testing methods as approved by the Alabama Department of Transportation shall perform testing. Either the developer or developer's engineer, excluding the contractor, shall provide and pay for all testing. The testing lab shall be approved by the public works director. 
e.  Copies of all test reports both passing and failing shall be submitted to the public works director prior to placing overlaying layer. 
(2)  Mandatory inspections by public works director. The public works director or his representative shall inspect subgrade prior to placing the base material. The developer shall contact the public works director at least two days in advance of placement of the base course. 
(b)  Base. Base course shall meet the requirements for granular soil or soil aggregate as set forth in Section 301 of the Alabama Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Highway Construction. 
(1)  Thickness. Base thickness shall be determined by CBR Test. A minimum thickness of six inches for minor residential streets and eight inches for collector, arterial and commercial streets is required. 
(2)  Compaction. Base course compaction shall conform to current Alabama Department of Transportation standards and the requirements as set forth in this section. 
(3)  Test requirements. 
a.  Soils analysis minimum of one each 2,000 feet. 
b.  Proctor density and optimum moisture one each 2,000 feet. 
c.  Compaction test. 
1.  Base course compaction shall conform to current Alabama Department of Transportation standards, AASHTO T-180 to 95 percent density and ± two percent optimum moisture, minimum. 
1.  One per 200 feet of finished roadway in locations to be approved by the city. 
(4)  A reliable testing firm using the standard testing methods as approved by the Alabama Department of Transportation shall perform testing. Either the developer or the developer's engineer, excluding the contractor, shall provide and pay for all testing. The testing lab shall be approved by the public works director. 
(5)  Copies of all test reports both passing and failing shall be submitted to the public works director prior to placing overlaying layer. 
(6)  Mandatory Inspections by the public works director. The public works director or his representative shall inspect the base course prior to placing the overlaying layer. The developer shall contact the public works director at least two days in advance of the anticipated placement of the prime coat. 
(c)  Prime. Prime coat shall meet the requirements of bituminous treatment Type A as set forth in Section 401 of the current Alabama Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Highway Construction. 
Application. A bituminous surface treatment Type "A" shall be placed from curb to curb. Material and rates shall be as specified in the Alabama Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for highway construction. 
(d)  Pavement. Pavement shall meet the requirements for bituminous concrete wearing surface as set forth in Sections 424 of the current Alabama Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Highway Construction. 
(1)  Thickness. Thickness shall be as determined from CBR Testing prior to submission of plans but shall not be less than 165 lbs./square yard for plant mix for minor residential streets. Collector streets and all minor commercial streets shall have a minimum of 220 lbs./square yard for plant mix. Thickness for turn, deceleration and acceleration lanes and all major commercial industrial, commercial collector and arterial streets shall be as determined from CBR testing but shall not be less than 350 lbs./square yard binder course and 150 lbs./square yard wearing surface. 
(2)  Mandatory inspections by public works director. The public works director or representative shall inspect base course and/or prime coat prior to placement of the pavement. The developer shall contact the public works director at least three days in advance of the scheduled placement of the pavement. 
(3)  Width. The width of paving on through streets and cul-de-sacs shall be a minimum of 30 feet back of curb to back of curb. On residential streets with cul-de-sacs that are less than 600 feet in length, the paving width can be a minimum of 27 feet back of curb to back of curb. Single lane paving width with a median island shall be a minimum of 18 feet from face of curb to face of curb. Street widths not conforming to the above standard may be approved by the planning commission upon concurrence from the planning and public works directors. 
(4)  Resurfacing. Any existing street in a proposed subdivision to be platted for public R-O-W shall be resurfaced with a minimum of 110 lbs./square yard of 424 asphalt mix. Any development that was approved by the planning commission and has been constructed, and that has not been recorded and a mylar copy provided to the city for a period of more than two years, shall be inspected and at the discretion of the public works director, may require all streets to be recorded for public R-O-W to be resurfaced with a minimum of 110 lbs./square yard of 424 asphalt mix. 
(e)  Curbs and gutters. Two-foot combination curb and gutter shall be used equal to ALDOT standard type M-2 curb and gutter. Special combination curb and gutter sections (such as 30-inch mountable curb and gutter, etc.) shall require approval from the public works director. 
(f)  Pavement breaks for utility connections. When it is necessary for a subdivider, or any utility company, to break existing pavement for the installation of utilities or drainage facilities, or for any other purpose, the subdivider, or utility company, shall be financially responsible for the repair of the pavement. The pavement shall be repaired in accordance with the specifications required by the public works director. A minimum of 110 lbs./square yard of 424 asphalt mix overlay of the existing roadway full width is required over the cut and for a minimum of ten feet each side of edge of cut. 
(g)  Tile drainage (underdrain). Tile drainage shall be of material as set forth in Section 606.01 of Alabama Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Highway Construction. Subsurface tile drainage shall be installed in order to protect the base material as required by the public works director. The installation of tile drainage may be required by the public works director at any time during construction and throughout the entire two-year maintenance period. The cost of design and installation is the responsibility of the developer. Tile drainage is required back of curb on both sides of median islands for all median islands. 
(Res. of 7-19-17) 
Sec. 90-224. - Installation of utilities. 
    Water. Water mains for both domestic use and fire protection shall be properly connected with the public water system, or with an alternate water supply approved by the city. All new connections to the existing water utilities shall be completed by Dothan Utilities only after the acquisition of any required permits and the payment of the required fees. The water mains and associated facilities shall be constructed in such a manner as to serve adequately all lots shown on the subdivision plat. The water mains and associated facilities shall be specified and installed in conformance with the technical standards as established by the city and in accordance with City of Dothan Subdivision Specifications and Standard Details. 
(a)  Sewer. A sanitary sewer system shall be installed for all lots in the subdivision and in accordance with City of Dothan Subdivision Specifications and Standard Details. Sanitary sewer laterals shall be a minimum of 60 inches below finished grade at all locations on R-O-W and easements. Areas where this cannot be met shall require ductile iron laterals to be used. Sanitary sewer systems in commercial subdivisions shall be private. Existing public sanitary sewer systems through a commercial subdivision will remain public. Where subdivisions cannot be connected to the city sewer system in a manner which is technically feasible or economically reasonable, the planning commission may provide a waiver to the developer which provides for the installation of individual sewage disposal systems. This waiver will be contingent upon suitable soil conditions, as approved by the county health department, and may include a requirement for dry sewers to be constructed for future use. The waiver may in no case require less than a complete sewer design for the subdivision and provisions for all easements made for future sewer construction. 
(b)  Gas and electricity. When gas mains and/or electric lines are connected with the distribution systems, the lines shall be installed in such a manner as to serve adequately all lots shown on the subdivision plat. The gas and electric lines shall be specified and constructed in conformance with the technical standards as established by the appropriate utility owner. 
(c)  Gas, electricity, telephone, cable TV, and any other utility. All utilities within a subdivision shall be installed only within the designated area(s) as shown on the typical roadway detail of the approved construction plans. When they are shown on the subdivision construction plans, utilities that are installed during the construction phase of the subdivision will be covered under the approved construction plans. When the utilities are not shown on the plans, the utility or the subdivision design engineer must submit plans showing the proposed locations for approval. No utilities will be installed without consideration of the other existing or proposed utilities. If the utilities are not installed during the construction of the subdivision, and after the final plat is signed and recorded, a permit will be required. A set of plans showing the locations and depths of all other utilities and the location and depth of the proposed utility to be installed will be required before any permit will be issued. The plans and location of proposed utilities must be approved by the public works director. 
(d)  The utility will agree to carry out excavation activities and in locations as shown by the plans so as to occasion the least possible interference with the maintenance of the street and/or other public utilities and facilities. The utility will also agree to conform to the provisions of the current City of Dothan Subdivision Specifications and Standard Details and the laws of the City of Dothan. 
(e)  Any existing permanent property pins or monuments that are damaged during the installation process must be replaced and reset by a registered land surveyor in the State of Alabama and paid for by the utility. 
(f)  Location of water services, fire hydrants, water valves and sewer service locations shall be permanently marked on curb. 
(Res. of 7-19-17) 
Sec. 90-225. - Street signs. 
    All streets shall be designated by name on a street signpost approved by the public works director. The post shall be so located as to be visible for both pedestrian and vehicular traffic. At cross street intersections, two street signposts shall be located diagonally across the intersection from each other. Only one street sign post shall be required at "T" street intersections. The City of Dothan will post all street signs with the developer paying the cost of material, if so requested by the developer. All temporary and permanent barricades shall be the responsibility of the developer. 
(Res. of 7-19-17) 
Sec. 90-226. - Public sites and open space. 
    It is the intent of this section to provide an opportunity for the planning commission to review each subdivision proposed as to its suitability for the inclusion of recreational open space. Therefore, each proposed subdivision will be subject to review by the planning commission, and the planning commission may, where it deems necessary, require recreational open space included within the project. Each proposed subdivision will be reviewed individually as to the need for open space, and the owners must provide a statement concerning the recreational need associated with the area in which the subdivision is proposed. 
(Res. of 7-19-17) 
Chapter 94 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; businesses, ch. 18. 
State Law reference- Property taxes generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 94-1-94-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SALES TAX AND USE TAX[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Sales and use tax generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-200 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 94-31. - Provisions of state sales tax and use tax statutes applicable to this article and taxes levied in this article. 
    This article and the taxes levied in this article shall be subject to all definitions, exceptions, exemptions, proceedings, requirements, rules, regulations, provisions, discounts, penalties, fines, punishments and deductions that are applicable to the taxes levied by the state sales tax and use tax statutes, except where inapplicable or where otherwise provided in this article, including all provisions of the state sales tax and use tax statutes for enforcement and collection of taxes. 
(Code 1977, § 5-44) 
Sec. 94-32. - Article cumulative to general license code or ordinance. 
    This article shall not be construed to repeal any of the provisions of the general license code or ordinance of the city, but shall be held to be cumulative, and the amounts of the taxes levied in this article shall be in addition to the amounts of all other license taxes imposed by the city by its general license code or ordinance. 
(Code 1977, § 5-45) 
Secs. 94-33-94-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SALES TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Sales taxes generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-23-1 et seq. 

Sec. 94-61. - Levied in city; businesses taxable defined. 
    There is hereby levied, in addition to all other taxes of every kind now imposed by law, and shall be collected as provided in this division, a privilege or license tax against the person on account of the business activities and in the amount to be determined by the application of rates against gross sales, or gross receipts, as the case may be as follows: 
(1)  Upon every person, firm or corporation (including the state, the University of Alabama, Auburn University and all other institutions of higher learning in the state, whether such institutions are denominational, state, county or municipal institutions, and any association or other agency or instrumentality of such institutions) engaged, or continuing within the city in business of selling at retail any tangible personal property whatsoever, including merchandise and commodities of every kind and character (not including, however, bonds or other evidences of debts or stocks, nor sale or sales of material and supplies to any person for use in fulfilling a contract for the painting, repair or reconditioning of vessels, barges, ships and other watercraft of over 50 tons burden), an amount equal to four percent of the gross proceeds of sales of the business except where a different amount is expressly provided in this division; provided, however, that any person engaging or continuing in business as a retailer and wholesaler or jobber shall pay the tax required on the gross proceeds of retail sales of such business at the rates specified, when his books are kept so as to show separately the gross proceeds of sales of each business, and when his books are not so kept he shall pay the tax as retailer on the gross sales of the business. 
(2)  Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged, or continuing within the city, in the business of conducting, or operating, places of amusement or entertainment, billiard and pool rooms, bowling alleys, amusement devices, musical devices, theaters, opera houses, moving picture shows, vaudevilles, amusement parks, athletic contests, including wrestling matches, prize fighters, boxing and wrestling exhibitions, football and baseball games, (including athletic contests, conducted by or under the auspices of any educational institution within the city, or any athletic association thereof, or other association whether such institution or association be a denominational, a state, or county, or a municipal institution or association or a state, county, or city school, or other institution, association or school), skating rinks, race tracks, golf courses, or any other place at which any exhibition, display, amusement or entertainment is offered to the public or places where an admission fee is charged, including public bathing places, public dancehalls of every kind and description within the city, an amount equal to four percent of the gross receipts of any such business. 
(3)  Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged or continuing within the city in the business of selling at retail machines, used in mining, quarrying, compounding, processing and manufacturing of tangible personal property, an amount equal to three-fourths of one percent of the gross proceeds of the sale of such machines; provided, however, that the term "machines," as used in this subsection, shall include machinery which is used for mining, quarrying, compounding, processing or manufacturing tangible personal property, and the parts of such machines, attachments and replacements therefor, which are made or manufactured for use on or in the operation of such machines and which are necessary to the operation of such machines and are customarily so used. 
(4)  Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged or continuing within the city in the business of selling at retail any automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semitrailer or house trailer, an amount equal to three-fourths of one percent of the gross proceeds of sale of such automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semitrailer or house trailer, an amount equal to three-fourths of one percent of the gross proceeds of sale of such automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semitrailer or house trailer; provided, however, where a person subject to the tax provided for in this subsection withdraws from his stock in trade any automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semitrailer or house trailer for use by him or by his employee or agent in the operation of such business, there shall be paid, in lieu of the lax levied in this subsection, a fee of $3.75 per year, or part of such fee, during which such automotive vehicle, truck trailer, semitrailer or house trailer shall remain the property of such person. Each such year or part thereof shall begin with the day or anniversary date, as the case may be of such withdrawal and shall run for the 12 succeeding months or part of such period during which such automotive vehicle, truck trailer, semitrailer or house trailer shall remain the property of such person. Where any used automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semitrailer or house trailer is taken in trade or in a series of trades, as a credit or part payment on the sale of a new or used vehicle, the tax levied in this subsection shall be paid on the net difference that is, the price of the new or used vehicle sold less the credit for the used vehicle taken in trade. 
(5)  Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged or continuing within the city in the business of selling at retail any machine, machinery or equipment which is used in planting, cultivation and harvesting farm products, or used in connection with the production of agricultural produce or products, livestock or poultry on farms, and the parts of such machines, machinery or equipment, attachments and replacements therefor which are made or manufactured for use on or in the operation of such machine, machinery or equipment, and which are necessary to and customarily used in the operation of such machine, machinery or equipment, an amount equal to three-fourths of one percent of the gross proceeds of the sale thereof; provided, however, that the three-fourths of one percent rate prescribed in this subsection with respect to parts, attachments and replacements shall not apply to any automotive vehicle or trailer designed primarily for public highway use, except a farm trailer used primarily in the production and harvesting of agricultural commodities. Where any used machine, machinery or equipment which is used in planting, cultivating and harvesting farm products, or used in connection with the production of agricultural produce or products, livestock and poultry on farms is taken in trade or in a series of trades as a credit or part payment on a sale of a new or used machine, machinery or equipment, the tax levied in this subsection shall be paid on the net difference, that is, the price of the new or used machine, machinery or equipment sold, less the credit for the used machine, machinery or equipment taken in trade. 
(6)  Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged or continuing within the city in the business of selling, through coin-operated dispensing machines, food and food products for human consumption not including beverages other than coffee, milk, milk products and substitutes therefor, there is hereby levied a tax equal to four percent of the cost of such food, food products and beverages sold through such machines, which cost for the purpose of the subsection shall be the gross proceeds of sales of such business. 
(Code 1977, § 5-40; Ord. No. 2006-248, § 1, 9-19-06) 
State Law reference- Municipal sales taxes excluded from state computation, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-23-21. 
Secs. 94-62-94-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - USE TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Use tax generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-23-60 et seq. 

Sec. 94-81. - Levy; rates. 
(a)  An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property (not including materials and supplies bought for use in fulfilling a contract for the painting, repairing or reconditioning of vessels, barges, ships and other watercraft of more than 50 tons burden) purchased at retail on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, for storage, use or other consumption in the city except as provided in subsections (b), (c), and (d) of this section, at the rate of four percent of the sales price of such property within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of any machines used in mining, quarrying, compounding, processing, and manufacturing of tangible personal property purchased at retail on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived at the rate of three-fourths of one percent of the sales price of any such machine within the corporate limits of the city; provided, however, that the term "machine" as used in this section, shall include machinery which is used for mining, quarrying, compounding, processing, or manufacturing tangible personal property, and the parts of such machines, attachments and replacements therefor, which are made or manufactured for use on or in the operation of such machines and which are necessary to the operation of such machines and are customarily so used. 
(c)  An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of any automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semitrailer or house trailer purchased at retail on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived for storage, use or other consumption in the city at the rate of three-fourths of one percent of the sales price of such automotive vehicle, truck trailer, semitrailer or house trailer within the corporate limits of the city. Where any used automotive vehicle, truck trailer, semitrailer or house trailer is taken in trade, or in a series of trades, as a credit or part payment on the sale of a new or used vehicle, the tax levied in the subsection shall be paid on the net difference, that is, the price of the new or used vehicle sold less the credit for the used vehicle taken in trade. 
(d)  An excise tax is hereby levied and imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of any machine, machinery, or equipment which is used in planting, cultivating and harvesting farm products, or used in connection with the production of agricultural produce or products, livestock or poultry on farms, and the parts of such machines, machinery or equipment, attachments and replacements therefor which are made or manufactured for use on or in the operation of such machine, machinery or equipment, and which are necessary to and customarily used in the operation of such machine, machinery or equipment, which is purchased at retail after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, for the storage, use or other consumption in the city at the rate of three-fourths of one percent of the sales price of such property within the corporate limits of the city, regardless of whether the retailer is or is not engaged in the business in the city; provided, however, that the three-fourths of one percent rate prescribed in this subsection with respect to parts, attachments, and replacements shall not apply to any automotive vehicle or trailer designed primarily for public highway use, except farm trailers used primarily in the production and harvesting of agricultural commodities. Where any used machine, machinery or equipment which is used in planting, cultivating, and harvesting farm products or used in connection with the production of agricultural produce or products, livestock and poultry on farms is taken in trade or in a series of trades as a credit or part payment on the sale of a new or used machine, machinery or equipment, the tax levied in this subsection shall be paid on the net difference, that is, the price of the new or used machine, machinery, or equipment sold, less the credit for the used machine, machinery or equipment taken in trade. 
(Code 1977, § 5-42; Ord. No. 2006-248, § 2, 9-19-06) 
DIVISION 4. - SALES AND USE TAX EXEMPTION 

Sec. 94-82. - Exempted from paying city sales and use tax. 
    Covered items, as defined herein, are exempted from paying the city sales and use tax during the period from 12:01 a.m. on the third Friday in July of each year and ending at 12:00 midnight the following Sunday. Items normally sold in pairs shall not be separated to qualify for the exemption provided for in this division. 
(Ord. No. 2006-123, § 1, 5-16-06; Ord. No. 2017-160, § 1, 5-16-17) 
Sec. 94-83. - Definitions. 
    As used in this section, the term "covered items" means the following: 
(1)  Articles of clothing with a sales price of $100.00, or less, per article of clothing. 
(a)  "Clothing" means all human wearing apparel suitable for general use including sandals, shoes and sneakers. Clothing shall not include: 
1.  Belt buckles sold separately. 
2.  Costume masks sold separately. 
3.  Patches and emblems sold separately. 
4.  Sewing equipment and supplies including, but not limited to, knitting needles, patterns, pins, scissors, sewing machines, sewing needles, tape measures, and thimbles. 
5.  Sewing materials that become part of "clothing" including, but not limited to, buttons, fabric, lace, thread, yarn, and zippers. 
In addition, clothing shall not include clothing accessories or equipment, protective equipment, or sport or recreational equipment as defined herein. 
(b)  "Clothing accessories or equipment" means incidental items worn on the person or in conjunction with "clothing". The following list contains examples and is not intended to be an all-inclusive list. "Clothing accessories or equipment" shall include: 
1.  Briefcases. 
2.  Cosmetics. 
3.  Hair notions, including, but not limited to, barrettes, hair bows, and hair nets. 
4.  Handbags. 
5.  Handkerchiefs. 
6.  Jewelry. 
7.  Sunglasses, non-prescription. 
8.  Umbrellas. 
9.  Wallets. 
10.  Watches. 
11.  Wigs and hair pieces. 
(c)  "Protective equipment" means items for human wear and designed as protection of the wearer against injury or disease or as protection against damage or injury of other persons or property but not suitable for general use. The following list contains examples and is not intended to be an all-inclusive list. "Protective equipment shall include: 
1.  Breathing masks. 
2.  Clean room apparel and equipment. 
3.  Ear and hearing protectors. 
4.  Face shields. 
5.  Hard hats. 
6.  Helmets. 
7.  Paint or dust respirators'. 
8.  Protective gloves. 
9.  Safety glasses and goggles. 
10.  Safety belts. 
11.  Tool belts. 
12.  Welders' gloves and masks. 
(d)  "Sport or recreational equipment" means items designed for human use and worn in conjunction with an athletic or recreational activity that are not suitable for general use. The following list contains examples and is not intended to be an all-inclusive list. "Sport or recreational equipment" shall include: 
1.  Ballet and tap shoes. 
2.  Cleated or spiked athletic shoes. 
3.  Gloves, including, but not limited to, baseball, bowling, boxing, hockey, and golf. 
4.  Goggles. 
5.  Hand and elbow guards. 
6.  Life preservers and vests. 
7.  Mouth guards. 
8.  Shoulder pads. 
9.  Ski boots. 
10.  Waders. 
11.  Wetsuits and fins. 
(2)  A single purchase, with a sales price of $750.00, or less, of computers, computer software, and school computer supplies. 
(a)  A "computer" means an electronic device that accepts information in digital or similar form and manipulates it for a result based on a sequence of instructions. 
(b)  "Computer software" means a set of coded instructions designed to cause a "computer" or automatic data processing equipment to perform a task. 
(c)  A "school computer supply" means an item commonly used by a student in a course of study in which a computer is used. The following is an all-inclusive list of school computer supplies; 
1.  Computer storage media; diskettes, compact disks. 
2.  Handheld electronic schedulers, except devices that are cellular phones. 
3.  Personal digital assistants, except devices that are cellular phones. 
4.  Computer printers. 
5.  Printer supplies for computers; printer paper, printer ink. 
"Computer", "computer software", and "school computer supplies" shall not include furniture and any systems, devices, software, peripherals designed or intended primarily for recreational use, or video games of a non-educational nature. 
(3)  Noncommercial purchases of school supplies, school art supplies, and school instructional material, up to a sales price of $50.00 per item. 
(a)  "School supply" is an item commonly used by a student in a course of study. The following is an all-inclusive list: 
1.  Binders. 
2.  Book bags. 
3.  Calculators. 
4.  Cellophane tape. 
5.  Blackboard chalk. 
6.  Compasses. 
7.  Composition books. 
8.  Crayons. 
9.  Erasers. 
10.  Folders; expandable, pocket, plastic, and manila. 
11.  Glue, paste, and paste sticks. 
12.  Highlighters. 
13.  Index cards. 
14.  Index card boxes. 
15.  Legal pads. 
16.  Lunch boxes. 
17.  Markers. 
18.  Notebooks. 
19.  Paper; loose leaf ruled notebook paper, copy paper, graph paper, tracing paper, manila paper, colored paper, poster board, and construction paper. 
20.  Pencil boxes and other school supply boxes. 
21.  Pencil sharpeners. 
22.  Pencils. 
23.  Pens. 
24.  Protractors. 
25.  Rulers. 
26.  Scissors. 
27.  Writing tablets. 
(b)  "School art supply" is an item commonly used by a student in a course of study for artwork. The following is an all-inclusive list: 
1.  Clay and glazes. 
2.  Paints; acrylic, tempora, and oil. 
3.  Paintbrushes for artwork. 
4.  Sketch and drawing pads. 
5.  Watercolors. 
(c)  "School instructional material" is written material commonly used by a student in a course of study as a reference and to learn the subject being taught. The following is an all-inclusive list: 
1.  Reference maps and globes. 
2.  Required textbooks on an official school book list with a sales price of more than $30.00 and less than $50.00. 
(4)  Noncommercial purchases of books with a sales price of not more than $30.00 per book. The term book shall mean a set of printed sheets bound together and published in a volume with an ISBN number, but does not include magazines, newspapers, periodicals, or any other document printed or offered for sale in a non-bound form. 
(Ord. No. 2006-123, § 1, 5-16-06) 
DIVISION 5. - SALES AND USE TAX RESERVED FOR CAPITAL EXPENDITURES 

Sec. 94-84. - Reserved for capital improvement. 
    Six million dollars of sales and use tax receipts shall be reserved annually by the finance director for capital expenditures, as designated by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 2006-248, § 3, 9-19-06) 
Secs. 94-85-94-87. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - FIXED OR ROTARY WING MILITARY AIRCRAFT AND TRANSPORT CATEGORY AIRCRAFT SALES AND USE TAX EXEMPTION. 

Sec. 94-88. - Exempted from city sales tax. 
    The gross receipts from the sale of parts, components, and systems that become a part of a fixed or rotary wing military aircraft or certified transport category aircraft which undergoes conversion, reconfiguration, or general maintenance so long as the address of the aircraft for FAA registration is not in the State of Alabama are exempt from the city sales tax effectively immediately and ending May 30, 2022 unless extended by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-94, § 1, 4-5-13) 
Sec. 94-89. - Exempted from city use tax. 
    Upon the passage of an Act by the Legislature of the State of Alabama providing for an exemption from state use tax of the gross receipts from the sale of parts, components, and systems that become a part of a fixed or rotary wing military aircraft or certified transport category aircraft which undergoes conversion, reconfiguration, or general maintenance so long as the address of the aircraft for FAA registration is not in the State of Alabama, such gross receipts shall be exempt from the city use tax for the period beginning with the effective date of the act enacted by the Legislature of the State of Alabama and ending May 30, 2022 unless extended by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-94, § 1, 4-5-13) 
Secs. 94-90-94-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CIGARETTE LICENSE TAX[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Tobacco tax generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-25-1 et seq. 

Sec. 94-106. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Container means the individual packages in which cigarettes are customarily sold at retail. 
    Retail dealer means every person, firm or corporation, other than a wholesale dealer, who shall sell or offer for sale any one or more of the articles taxed in this article, irrespective of quantity or amount, or the number of sales; and all persons operating under a retail dealer's license. 
    Retail price means the retail selling price of the cigarettes before adding the amount of the tax assessed in this article or any other tobacco tax imposed under the laws of the state. 
    Sale means any transfer of title or possession, or both, exchange or barter, conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any means whatsoever for consideration or any agreement therefor, including rewards, prizes or premiums of cigarettes given as a result of operation of punchboards, shooting galleries or other activities. 
    Stamps means the stamps by the use of which the tax levied under this article is paid and shall be designated state revenue stamps. 
    Wholesale dealer and jobber means persons, firms or corporations who sell at wholesale only, any one or more of the articles taxed in this article to licensed retail dealers for the purpose of resale only. 
(Code 1977, § 5-80) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-25-1. 
Sec. 94-107. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00, and may be sentenced to hard labor, for the city for a period not to exceed 90 days; provided, however, that upon conviction for a second or subsequent offense, the minimum fine imposed shall be $25.00. 
(Code 1977, § 5-89) 
Sec. 94-108. - Levy; additional to other license taxes; amount. 
    In addition to all other taxes of every kind now imposed by law, every person who is engaged in the business of selling, distributing to the public or delivering cigarettes within the corporate limits of the city shall pay a license tax to the city. A license tax is hereby fixed and levied for engaging in such business within the corporate limits of the city, which license tax shall be in the amount of $0.05 for each pack of cigarettes or fraction of a pack sold or delivered within the corporate limits of the city (which amount shall be in addition to all amounts of any license taxes levied with respect to such business in any general license code of the city). 
(Code 1977, § 5-81) 
State Law reference- Basis for levy of cigarette tax, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-25-29. 
Sec. 94-109. - Payment of taxes; method and time. 
(a)  The license tax imposed by this article shall be paid by affixing stamps in the manner and at the times set forth in this article. 
(b)  The license tax imposed by this article shall be paid from time to time as stamps are purchased from the city clerk and affixed as provided in this article. 
(Code 1977, § 5-82) 
Sec. 94-110. - Stamps-Adequate quantity maintained; inscription; price. 
    The city clerk shall keep on hand for sale an adequate quantity of stamps to be affixed to each container of cigarettes in denominations as required under this article. Each stamp shall have inscribed thereon the words "City of Dothan Tobacco Tax," but such words need not be arranged in such order and may be abbreviated. The stamps may be sold to wholesale dealers only by the city clerk at a price equal to 90 percent of the full amount thereof, the remaining ten percent of such full amount representing compensation to the wholesale dealer for the labor of affixing such stamps to the containers of cigarettes. All other persons except such wholesale dealers must pay the full amount of the stamps, but no person shall be entitled to purchase any number of stamps as shall cause the purchase price to include a fraction of a cent. 
(Code 1977, § 5-83) 
Sec. 94-111. - Same-Affixing requirements. 
(a)  Before any cigarettes shall be sold or delivered within the corporate limits of the city by any dealer, such dealer shall affix to each container of cigarettes, stamps obtained from the city clerk in the amount set out in this article in payment of the license taxes imposed by this article. Every dealer shall, within one hour after receipt of any cigarettes within the corporate limits of the city, unless sooner offered for sale, cause stamps to the requisite amount of the tax to be affixed as provided in this section. After such stamping has been begun, it shall be continued with reasonable diligence by such dealer until all unstamped containers shall have been stamped, but no stamp required to be affixed to any container shall, after the stamp has been affixed as provided in this section, be again used in payment of any part of the tax levied under this article. Stamps in denominations equal to the amount of the tax shall be affixed to the container from or in which the cigarettes with respect to which the stamps are affixed are normally sold at retail. The stamps shall be affixed to each individual package in such a way that such stamps shall be torn in two or mutilated when such package is opened. 
(b)  In lieu of the stamps and method of affixing them provided in subsection (a) of this section, by agreement, and at the city's discretion, the wholesale dealer may print the tax stamp on cigarette containers in indelible ink by use of a Pitney-Bowes cigarette tax machine having a locked type meter for registering the tax when paid to the city clerk. The tax on such machine may be sold to wholesale dealers only by the city clerk at a price equal to 90 percent of the full amount thereof, the remaining ten percent of such full amount representing compensation to the wholesale dealer for the labor of printing such stamp on the containers of the cigarettes. 
(Code 1977, § 5-84) 
Sec. 94-112. - Records; inspection and retention. 
    Every wholesale dealer shall, at the time of selling or delivering cigarettes into the city, make a true duplicate invoice of the cigarette delivery, which shall show full and complete details of the sale or delivery of such cigarettes and the prices thereof. Every wholesale dealer and every retail dealer shall keep a record of the purchase, sale, exchange or receipt of cigarettes. All such invoices and cancelled checks and other memoranda pertaining to any such purchase, sale, exchange or receipt shall be retained for a period of three years and shall be subject to inspection of the city clerk or his duly authorized deputy, who shall have the power and authority to enter upon the premises of any dealer at all reasonable times for the purpose of examining such invoices, records, cancelled checks and other memoranda. Any person who purchases or receives in any manner whatsoever cigarettes which, under the terms of this article, are required to have stamps affixed to the container thereof and which do not have stamps affixed in the manner required by this article shall, within three days after receipt of such cigarettes, report the receipt or purchase, as the case may be, of such cigarettes to the city clerk, giving the date of purchase or receipt, the name of the person (and firm, if from a firm) from whom purchased or received, and a list describing the cigarettes so purchased or received and the purchase price thereof. Such report must be made by registered mail or in person. 
(Code 1977, § 5-85) 
Sec. 94-113. - Disposition of moneys; tobacco tax fund. 
    The revenues received from the tax levied in this article are hereby appropriated exclusively for public school purposes including, but without limitation to, payment of the principal of and interest on any securities hereafter issued for the purpose of acquiring, providing and constructing public schoolhouses in the city. All revenues derived from the tax levied in this article shall be kept in a separate fund to be designated as the "Tobacco Tax Fund." 
(Code 1977, § 5-86) 
Sec. 94-114. - Construction of article provisions. 
(a)  This article shall not be construed to tax interstate commerce or any business of the United States government or any branch or agency thereof. 
(b)  Whenever the requisite amount of stamps has been affixed to any cigarettes or to the containers containing the same, in the manner and at the time required in this article, this article shall not be construed to require additional stamps to be affixed thereto in case of subsequent sales. 
(c)  This article shall not be construed to repeal any of the provisions of the general license code of the city, but shall be held to be cumulative. 
(Code 1977, § 5-87) 
Sec. 94-115. - Illegal acts. 
    Among others, the following acts and omissions shall be unlawful: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person who is required by this article to affix stamps to any container of cigarettes to fail to affix such stamps or to fail to cancel such stamps in the manner and within the time required by this article. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale or deliver within the city any cigarettes where stamps have not been affixed and cancelled as provided in this article. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession or under his control any cigarettes with respect to which stamps are by the terms of this article required to be affixed and with respect to which such stamps have not been affixed in the manner required by this article, for more than six hours after receipt of such cigarettes on the premises of such person. The possession of each container of cigarettes not having proper stamps affixed as required by this article shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful to manufacture, buy, sell, offer for sale, or possess, or attempt so to do, any reproduction or counterfeit of the stamps provided for in this article or to possess tools, implements, instruments or materials of any kind necessary or appropriate to reproduce or counterfeit such stamps, or to alter or cause to be altered any stamps provided for in this article. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful to remove from a container or otherwise prepare any stamp with intent to use or cause the stamp to be used, after it has already been used, or to buy, sell, offer for sale or give away any washed, removed, altered or restored stamp to any person, or to have in possession any such washed or removed or restored or altered stamp, or for the purpose of indicating payment of any tax under this article, to reuse any stamp which has theretofore been used for the payment of any tax provided in this article, or to sell any stamp provided for in this article, except, however, sales made by the city clerk. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful for any person who is in this article required to keep records to fail or omit to keep the records in the manner provided in this article, or to refuse to permit the city clerk or his duly authorized deputy to inspect the same at any reasonable hour, or to interfere with or obstruct the city clerk or his duly authorized deputy in the making of any such inspection. 
(7)  It shall be unlawful for any person who is required in this article to file statements with the city clerk to fail or omit to make or file any statement provided in this article within the time specified in this article, or to make any false statement therein, and such offense shall be a continuing offense against the city and each day during which such person shall sell or deliver cigarettes in the city during such default shall constitute a separate offense. 
(8)  It shall be unlawful for any person who is required to pay the license tax provided for in this article to fail or omit to pay the tax within the time specified in this article, and such offense shall be a continuing offense against the city and each day during which such person shall sell or deliver cigarettes in the city during such default shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1977, § 5-88) 
Secs. 94-116-94-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LODGINGS TAX[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Transient occupancy tax generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-26-1 et seq. 

Sec. 94-146. - Provisions of state lodging tax statutes applicable to this article and taxes levied in this article. 
    This article and the taxes levied in this article shall be subject to all definitions, exceptions, exemptions, proceedings, requirements, rules, regulations, provisions, penalties, fines, punishments and deductions that are applicable to the taxes levied by the state lodgings tax statutes, except where inapplicable or where otherwise provided in this article, including all provisions of the state lodgings tax statutes for enforcement and collection of taxes. 
(Code 1977, § 5-132) 
Sec. 94-147. - Levy; rate; exemptions. 
    For the privilege of engaging or continuing within the city in the business activities referred to in this section, there is hereby levied, in addition to all other taxes of every kind now imposed by law, and shall be collected as provided in section 94-148 a privilege or license tax against the person on account of the business activities and in the amounts to be determined by the application of rates against gross receipts as follows: There is hereby levied and imposed, in addition to all other taxes of every kind now imposed by law, a privilege or license tax upon every person, firm or corporation engaging in the business of renting or furnishing any rooms, lodgings or accommodations to transients in any hotel, motel, inn, tourist camp, tourist cabin or any other place in which rooms, lodgings or accommodations are regularly furnished to transients for a consideration in an amount to be determined by the application of the rate of nine percent of the charge for such room, rooms, lodgings or accommodations, including the charge for use or rental of personal property and service furnished in such room; provided, however, that there is exempted from the tax levied under the provision of the article any rentals or services taxed under the provisions of Ord. No. 6018, adopted March 27, 1979, levying the gross receipts privilege or license tax. The tax shall not apply to rooms, lodgings or accommodations supplied for a period of time as specified in Section 40-26-1(b), Code of Ala. 1975, as amended. 
(Code 1977, § 5-130; Ord. No. 96-276, § 1, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 2001-363, § 1, 12-4-01; Ord. No. 2004-310, § 1, 12-21-04; Ord. No. 2016-262, § 1, 9-20-16) 
Sec. 94-148. - Collection; adding amount of tax to price. 
    Any person on whom the taxes levied by this article are imposed may add the tax levied by this article to the receipts from the rental of rooms, lodgings or accommodations and may collect tax from the occupants of such rooms. This section is not mandatory. 
(Code 1977, § 5-133) 
Sec. 94-149. - Designation of use. 
(a)  Tourism and conventions. One-third of the amount of tax collected under this article shall be given to the Dothan Area Convention and Visitors Bureau, Inc., for the sole purpose of promoting tourism and conventions in the city. 
(b)  Special project allocations committee. One-ninth of the amount of tax collected under this article shall be given to the Dothan Area Convention and Visitors Bureau, Inc., and allocated solely for capital improvement projects and/or special events which directly promote tourism. These funds shall be placed in an earmarked account maintained by the Dothan Area Convention and Visitors Bureau, Inc. and will be under the direction of the special project allocation committee, which will be composed of the Dothan Area Convention and Visitors Bureau Executive Director, Dothan Area Convention and Visitors Bureau Chairperson, Dothan Area Convention and Visitors Bureau Treasurer, a hotelier not already on the Dothan Area Convention and Visitors Bureau Board and a city appointee. Non-profit organizations will have to complete an application to apply for these designated funds indicating the merits of their project. 
(c)  General fund. The remaining five-ninth of the amount of tax collected under this article shall be paid into the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 5-135; Ord. No. 96-276, § 1, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 2004-310, § 1, 12-21-04; Ord. No. 2016-262, § 1, 9-20-16) 
Sec. 94-150. - Article cumulative to general license code or ordinance. 
    This article shall not be construed to repeal any of the provisions of the general license code or ordinance of the city but shall be held to be cumulative, and the amounts of the taxes levied in this article shall be in addition to the amounts of all other license taxes imposed by the city by its general license code or ordinance. 
(Code 1977, § 5-134) 
Chapter 96 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES 

Sec. 96-1. - Purpose and legislative intent. 
(a)  The Telecommunications Act of 1996 affirmed the City of Dothan's authority concerning the placement, construction and modification of wireless telecommunications facilities. This chapter provides for the safe and efficient integration of facilities necessary for the provision of advanced wireless telecommunications services throughout the city and to ensure the ready availability of reliable wireless services to the public, government agencies and first responders, with the intention of furthering the public safety and general welfare. 
(b)  The City of Dothan finds that wireless telecommunications facilities may pose significant concerns to the health, safety, public welfare, character and environment of the city and its inhabitants. The city also recognizes that facilitating the development of wireless service technology can be an economic development asset to the city and of significant benefit to the city and its residents. In order to assure that the placement, construction or modification of a facility is consistent with the city's land use policies, the city is adopting a single, comprehensive, wireless telecommunications facility application and permitting process. The intent of this chapter is to minimize the physical impact of wireless telecommunications facilities on the community, protect the character of the community to the extent reasonably possible, establish a fair and efficient process for review and approval of applications, assure an integrated, comprehensive review of environmental impacts of such facilities, and protect the health, safety and welfare of the City of Dothan. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1, § 2, 1-3-17) 
Sec. 96-2. - Severability. 
(a)  If any word, phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection, or other portion of this chapter or any application thereof to any person or circumstance is declared void, unconstitutional, or invalid for any reason, then such word, phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection, or other portion, or the proscribed application thereof, shall be severable, and the remaining provisions of this chapter, and all applications thereof, not having been declared void, unconstitutional, or invalid, shall remain in full force and effect. 
(b)  Any development plan approval issued pursuant to this chapter shall be comprehensive and not severable. If part of a permit is deemed or ruled to be invalid or unenforceable in any material respect, by a competent authority, or is overturned by a competent authority, the permit shall be void in total, upon determination by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1, § 2, 1-3-17) 
Sec. 96-3. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this chapter, and where not inconsistent with the context of a particular section, the defined terms, phrases, words, abbreviations, and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section. When not inconsistent with the context, words in the present tense include the future tense, words used in the plural number include words in the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory, and not merely directory. 
    Accessory facility or structure means an accessory facility or structure serving or being used in conjunction with wireless telecommunications facilities, and located on the same property or lot as the wireless telecommunications facilities, including but not limited to, utility or transmission equipment storage sheds or cabinets. 
    Administrative official means the Director of The City of Dothan Planning and Development Department or his/her designee. The administrative official may appoint a representative as appropriate. 
    Amend, amendment and amended mean and shall relate to any change, addition, correction, deletion, replacement or substitution, other than typographical changes of no effect. 
    Applicant means any wireless service provider submitting an application for a development plan approval for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
    Application means all necessary and required documentation that an applicant submits in order to receive a development plan approval or a building permit for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
    Antenna means a system of electrical conductors that transmit or receive electromagnetic waves or radio frequency or other wireless signals with a single transmit and a single receive connection. It is expressly not multiple antennas, even if such are contained in a single housing or radome. 
    Board means the city commission. 
    City means the City of Dothan, Alabama. 
    Co-location means the use of an approved telecommunications structure to support antenna for the provision of wireless services. 
    Commercial impracticability or commercially impracticable means the inability to perform an act on terms that are reasonable in commerce, the cause or occurrence of which could not have been reasonably anticipated or foreseen and that jeopardizes the financial efficacy of the project. The inability to achieve a satisfactory financial return on investment or profit, standing alone and for a single site, shall not deem a situation to be "commercially impracticable" and shall not render an act or the terms of an agreement "commercially impracticable". 
    Complete application means an application that contains all necessary and required information and/or data necessary to enable an informed decision to be made with respect to an application and that all information is true, accurate and correct. 
    Concealment means a physical design or treatment that minimizes adverse aesthetic and visual impacts on the view from land, property, buildings, and other facilities adjacent to, surrounding, and in generally the same area as the requested location of a wireless telecommunications facility, which shall mean the least visually and physically intrusive facility, so as to make it substantially invisible, and that is not technologically or commercially impracticable under the facts and circumstances. 
    DAS or distributive access system means a technology using antenna combining technology allowing for multiple carriers or wireless service providers to use the same set of antennas, cabling or fiber optics. 
    Drive test means measuring and assessing the coverage, capacity and signal strength or quality of service of a wireless service provider(s) using a mobile vehicle outfitted with drive testing measurement equipment. 
    Eligible facility means an existing wireless tower or base station that involves collocation of new transmission equipment or the replacement of transmission equipment that does not constitute a substantial modification. 
    FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration, or its duly designated and authorized successor agency. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Council, or its duly designated and authorized successor agency. 
    Height means, when referring to a tower or wireless support structure, the distance measured from the pre-existing grade level to the highest point on the Tower or structure, even if said highest point is an antenna or lightening protection device. 
    Maintenance means plumbing, electrical or mechanical work that may require a building permit, but that does not constitute a modification of the facility. 
    Modification or modify means, the addition, removal or change of any of the physical and/or visually discernable components or aspects of a wireless facility with effectively identical components of the same weight and size or less, including but not limited to antennas, cabling, equipment shelters, landscaping, fencing, utility feeds, the color or materials of any visually discernable components, vehicular access, parking, and/or an upgrade or change-out of equipment for better or more modern equipment. Modification and the type of modification shall be defined as set forth in FCC Report and Order 14-153. 
    Necessary or necessity or need means what is technologically required for the equipment to function as designed by the manufacturer and that anything less will result in prohibiting or acting in a manner that prohibits the provision of service as intended and described in the narrative of the application. Necessary does not mean what may be desired, preferred or to comply with voluntary chosen company policies, preferences or standards. 
    NIER means non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation. 
    Person means any individual, corporation, estate, trust, partnership, joint stock company, association of two or more persons having a joint common interest, or any other entity. 
    Facility. See definition for "wireless telecommunications facilities". 
    Personal wireless services or PWS or personal telecommunications service or PTS shall have the same meaning as defined and used in the 1996 Telecommunications Act. 
    Repairs and maintenance means the replacement or repair of any components of a wireless facility when the replacement is effectively identical to the component being replaced or for any matters that involve a change without the addition, removal or change of any of the physical or visually discernable components or aspects of a wireless facility that will change the visible appearance of the facility from that originally permitted. 
    Small cell means a low-powered RF node, the antennas of which are significantly smaller than tradition "macro site" antennas and have a significantly smaller service area, typically anywhere from ten meters to one-half mile. 
    Development plan approval means the official document or permit by which an applicant is allowed to file for a building permit to construct and use a facility as granted or issued by the city, including for a substantial modification. 
    State means the State of Alabama. 
    Structural capability or structural capacity, notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any other standard, code, regulation or law, means up to and not exceeding a literal 100 percent of the designed loading and stress capability of the support structure. 
    Substantial modification means a change or modification that: 
(1)  For towers outside of public rights-of-way, it increases the height of the tower by more than ten percent, or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed twenty feet, whichever is greater; for those towers in the rights-of-way and for all base stations, it increases the height of the tower or base station by more than ten percent or ten feet, whichever is greater; or 
(2)  For towers outside of public rights-of-way, it protrudes from the edge of the tower more than 20 feet, or more than the width of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater; for those towers in the rights-of-way and for all base stations, it protrudes from the edge of the structure more than six feet; or 
(3)  It involves installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four cabinets; or 
(4)  It entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site of the tower or base station; or 
(5)  It would defeat the existing concealment elements of the tower or base station; or 
(6)  It does not comply with conditions associated with the prior approval of construction or modification of the tower or base station unless the noncompliance is due to an increase in height, increase in width, addition of cabinets, or new excavation that does not exceed the corresponding "substantial change" thresholds identified above. 
    Telecommunications means the transmission and/or reception of audio, video, data, and other information by wire, radio frequency, light, and other electronic or electromagnetic systems. 
    Telecommunications site. See definition for "wireless telecommunications facilities". 
    Telecommunications structure means a structure used to support equipment used to provide wireless communications. 
    Temporary means not permanent in relation to all aspects and components of this chapter, something intended to, and that does, exist for fewer than 90 days. 
    Tower means any structure designed primarily to support an antenna(s) for receiving and/or transmitting a wireless signal. 
    Wireless telecommunications facility or facilities (WTF or WTFs) means and includes a "telecommunications site" and "personal wireless facility". It means a structure, facility or location designed, or intended to be used as, or used to support antennas or other transmitting or receiving devices. This includes without limit, towers of all types and kinds, and structures, including but not limited to buildings, church steeples, silos, water towers, signs or any other structure that is used or is proposed to be used as a support structure for antennas or the functional equivalent of such. It further includes all related facilities and equipment such as cabling, equipment shelters and enclosures, cabinets and other structures associated with the facility. It is a structure and facility, including a compound, intended for transmitting and/or receiving wireless communications, including but not limited to radio, television, cellular, SMR, paging, 911, Personal Communications Services (PCS), commercial satellite services, microwave services and any commercial wireless service, permitted by the FCC. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1, § 2, 1-3-17) 
Sec. 96-4. - General policies and procedures for applications under this chapter. 
    In order to ensure that the placement, construction and modification of a facility does not endanger or jeopardize the health, safety, public welfare, environmental features, or change the nature and character of the community and neighborhood and other aspects of the quality of life specifically listed elsewhere in this chapter, the City hereby adopts an overall policy and related procedures with respect to the submittal, review, approval and issuance of permits or administratively granted authority for wireless facilities for the express purpose of achieving the following outcomes. The following are general policies intended to accomplish this: 
(a)  Requiring a development plan approval for: 
(1)  The construction of any new wireless telecommunications facility including a new tower or other support structure; or 
(2)  The substantial co-location/modification of wireless telecommunication equipment on existing tower or support structure that is not an eligible facility pursuant to the FCC's Report and Order 14-153 dated October 17, 2014; or 
(3)  The co-location or modification of wireless telecommunication equipment on existing tower or support structure that is defined as an eligible facility pursuant to the FCC's Report and Order 14-153 dated October 17, 2014; or 
(4)  The modification of any complex, facility or support structure that is deemed by the City of Dothan not to be general maintenance. 
(b)  Implementing an application process and requirements; 
(c)  Establishing procedures for examining an application and issuing a development plan approval or administrative authority that is both fair and consistent; 
(d)  Promoting, and requiring wherever possible, the sharing and/or co-location of support structures among service providers; 
(e)  There shall be no towers or other support structures permitted or built on speculation, such meaning without a carrier or other wireless provider proving the need for such as required in this section and committing in writing to attach to and provide service from the tower or other new structure immediately upon construction. 
(f)  Minimizing the visual impact: For reasons of concealment, requiring, promoting and encouraging wherever possible, the placement, height and profile of a facility in such a manner as to minimize the physical and visual impact on the community, including but not limited to the use of stealth or camouflaging techniques, so as to make the facility substantially invisible. 
(g)  Least intrusive option: As a matter of concealment, requiring that the facility shall be the least visually intrusive among those options available, given the facts and circumstances. 
(h)  The planning director is the administrative official designated by the city to whom applications for modifications or construction of a facility must be made. The planning director is authorized to make decisions with respect to granting, not granting, or revoking permits for the construction of a facility applied for under this chapter. The planning director may at his discretion delegate or designate the city planning commission or other official agencies or officials of the city or outside consultants to accept, review, analyze, evaluate and make recommendations with respect to the granting, not granting, or revoking permits for wireless telecommunications facilities. The planning director shall possess the authority to grant administrative authorization for all request or applications that comply with the terms of this chapter, unless relief, exception or wavier from this chapter is requested. If relief, exception or wavier is requested by the applicant for any requirement set forth by this chapter, the application will be presented to the planning commission. The planning commission has the authority to grant relief, modifications. Decisions of the planning commission may be appealed to city commission. 
(i)  Pre-application meeting: There shall be a pre-application meeting for all intended applications. The pre-application meeting may be held either on site or telephonically as deemed appropriate. The purpose of the pre-application meeting will be to address i) issues that will help to expedite the application review and permitting process; and ii) identify and address certain issues or concerns the city or the applicant may have. Costs of the city's consultant to prepare for and attend the pre-application meeting will be borne by the applicant and paid for out of a fee set forth in the city's schedule of fees, which shall have been paid to the city prior to any site visit or pre-application meeting. If a site visit has been completed within the previous six months for the specific applicant and location, a site visit will not be required. 
(j)  Number of applications: An applicant shall submit to the city the number of completed applications determined to be needed at the pre-application meeting. If planning commission or board action is required, applications will not be transmitted to the planning commission or board for consideration until the application is deemed complete by city staff. 
(k)  Applicant(s) of record: The owner(s) of the support structure to which antennas or related equipment are to be attached must be an official applicant of record. Notwithstanding the preceding, for a new tower or other new support structure or for a substantial modification, the technical need for a new facility must be documented and substantiated by clear and convincing evidence showing a particular carrier's or other user-of-the-facility's technical need for what is requested. Notwithstanding the preceding, to avoid any conflict of interest as relates to city-owned facilities, the city is not permitted to be an applicant or a party to an application by a private commercial entity. 
(l)  Properly completed application: All applicants shall closely follow the instructions for preparing an application. Not closely following the instructions without permission to deviate from such shall result in the application being deemed incomplete and a tolling of the otherwise required 30 day notification period of an incomplete application until the receipt of a complete and properly completed application. 
(m)  Amended application: Unless expressly and boldly stated in the front of the application at the time of its submittal that the application is not complete, it shall be assumed that the applicant reviewed the application for compliance and intended the application to be complete, and therefore any subsequently submitted information intended to correct any deficiencies shall be deemed an amendment to the application. 
(n)  Denial of a non-eligible facility application: The city may, for just reason and cause, deny an application for anything other than an eligible facility application, that does not meet the requirements stated herein or which is otherwise not complete after proper notice and a reasonable opportunity to make the application complete has been afforded. 
(o)  No work of any kind on a facility shall be started until the application is reviewed and approved by the planning director or appropriate administrative entity and the development plan approval, or administrative authorization if applicable, has been issued and a building permit has been issued. 
(p)  An application shall be signed on behalf of the applicant(s) by the person(s) vested with the authority to bind and commit the applicant and attesting to the truth, completeness and accuracy of the information presented. 
(q)  The applicant must provide clear and convincing documentation to substantiate that it has the legal right to proceed as proposed on the site in the form of an executed copy of the lease with the landowner or a signed letter of agency granting authorization. If the applicant owns the site, a copy of the ownership record is required. 
(r)  All applications shall include written commitment statements that: 
(1)  The applicant's facility shall at all times without exception be maintained in a safe manner, and in compliance with all conditions of the development plan approval, as well as all applicable and permissible local codes, ordinances, and regulations and all applicable city, state and federal laws, rules, and regulations, unless specifically granted relief by the board in writing; 
(2)  The construction of the facility is legally permissible, including, but not limited to the fact that the applicant is licensed to do business in the state. 
(s)  Certification: Where a certification is called for, such certification shall bear the signature and seal of a Professional Engineer licensed in the State of Alabama. 
(t)  Concealment and harmony with surroundings: A tower or other support structure and any and all accessory or associated structures and equipment shall maximize the use of building materials, colors and textures designed to harmonize with the natural surroundings so as to make the facility substantially invisible. This shall include the utilization of stealth or camouflage techniques or other concealment methods such as but not limited to abiding by the established limited or maximum permitted height. 
(u)  Utilities: All utilities at a facility site shall be installed underground and in compliance with all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of the city, including specifically, but not limited to applicable electrical codes. 
(v)  Vehicular access: At a facility needing vehicular access, an access road, parking and turn around space for emergency vehicles shall be provided to assure adequate emergency and service access. The access road shall include a paved apron from the point of entry, from the existing right-of-way. The apron must be a minimum of 20 feet in length or the extent of the public right-of-way, whichever is greater. Maximum use of existing roads, whether public or private, shall be made to the extent practicable. Road construction shall at all times minimize ground disturbance, grade change and the cutting of vegetation. Road grades shall closely follow natural contours to assure minimal visual disturbance and reduce soil erosion. If the current access road or turn around space is deemed in disrepair or in need of remedial work to make it serviceable and safe and in compliance with any applicable regulations as determined at a site visit, the application shall contain a commitment to remedy or restore the road or turn around space so that it is serviceable and safe and in compliance with applicable regulations. 
(w)  It shall be unlawful for the placement of a standby generator to make, create or maintain any unreasonable, loud, disturbing or unnecessary noise within the city or police jurisdiction thereof. Noise of such character, intensity or duration as to be detrimental to life, health, comfort or repose of any individual is prohibited. 
(x)  Compliance with applicable codes: All work at a facility shall be done in strict compliance with all versions or editions of the latest applicable building, technical, safety and safety-related codes adopted by the city, state, or United States, including but not limited to the most recent edition of the TIA ANSI Code, National Electrical Safety Code, the National Electrical Code and the Occupational and Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) regulations, recommended practices of the National Association of Tower Erectors and accepted and responsible workmanlike industry practices. The codes referred to are codes that include, but are not limited to, construction, building, electrical, fire, safety, health, and land use. In the event of a conflict between or among any of the preceding, the more stringent shall apply. 
(y)  Permits and licenses: A holder of a development plan approval or administratively granted authority granted under this chapter shall obtain, at its own expense, all permits and licenses required by applicable law, ordinance, rule, regulation or code, and must maintain the same, in full force and effect, for as long as required by the city or other governmental entity or agency having jurisdiction over the applicant. 
(z)  Required use of existing structures: Unless such is proven to be technologically impracticable, the city requires the co-location of new antenna arrays on existing structures, as opposed to the construction of a new support structure, or for applications submitted subsequent to the adoption of this chapter to increase the height, footprint or profile of a facility beyond the maximum permitted height, width or overall profile. In instances involving a substantial modification or for a new facility subsequent to the adoption of this chapter, the applicant shall submit a comprehensive report inventorying all existing structures 50 feet or more in height within one-half mile of the location of any proposed new facility. 
(aa)  Modifications of a tower: So as not to defeat the concealment intent of the maximum permitted height of towers or other support structures, modifications, singly or cumulatively, shall not exceed the requirements for a substantial modification or any other requirement of this chapter. 
(bb)  Compliance: All facilities, must at all times comply with all applicable local, state and federal laws, rules and regulations, including but not limited to applicable safety rules, regulations and standards. 
(cc)  Owner permission: An applicant intending to co-locate on an existing facility shall be required to provide written documentation of the intent of the existing owner to allow the intended use by the applicant. 
(dd)  Co-located equipment shall consist only of the minimum antenna array technologically needed to provide service primarily and essentially within the city, to the extent practicable, unless good cause is shown in the form of clear and convincing evidence. 
(ee)  DAS and small cell nodes that are owned or operated by a commercial carrier and are part of a commercial wireless system, or when activated are capable of being used for commercial purposes by the general public, are expressly included in the context of this chapter, regardless of the location or whether the facility is located inside or outside a structure or building. DAS and small cell node placement on existing electrical utility infrastructure shall be prohibited. 
(ff)  The existence of a lease or an option to lease shall not be deemed justification for not complying with the siting priorities set forth in this chapter. An applicant may not by-pass sites of higher priority because the site proposed is under lease or an option to lease. If a site other than the number 1 priority is proposed, the applicant must provide clear and convincing technical evidence as to why co-location is technically impracticable or clear and convincing relevant information as to why it would be commercially impracticable. Build-to-suit agreements between carriers and a proposed tower owner shall not be a valid basis for any claim of exemption, exception or waiver from compliance with this chapter. 
(gg)  To provide an opportunity for those reasonably expected to be affected to understand what is proposed and its impact, and to have input to the applicant, at the city's option given the facts and circumstances involved, for any request for relief from the requirements set forth by this chapter, a public hearing may be required to be held between the applicant, the residents in the area of the proposed site or work and the city. At least two weeks prior to the date of the meeting written notice of the meeting and its purpose shall be provided to all residents located within 1,000 feet of the site. The meeting shall be scheduled by the city. The administrative official shall cause the preparation of the notice for submission to a newspaper of general circulation for publication. No additional payment or fee will be required by the applicant for the publication of legal notice(s). 
(Ord. No. 2017-1, § 2, 1-3-17) 
Sec. 96-5. - Application fee. 
(a)  At the time that a person submits an application for a development plan approval for a new telecommunications tower, such person shall pay a non-refundable application fee of $5,000.00 to the city. If the application is for a development plan approval for modifying or collocating on an existing telecommunications tower or high structure, where no increase in height of the tower or structure is required, the fee shall be $2,500.00. 
(b)  No application fee is required in order to recertify a development plan approval for wireless telecommunications facilities, unless there has been a modification of the wireless telecommunications facilities since the date of the issuance of the existing development plan approval for which the conditions of the development plan approval have not previously been modified. In the case of any modification, the fees provided in subsection (a) shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1, § 2, 1-3-17) 
Sec. 96-6. - Exceptions and existing facilities prior to the adoption of this chapter. 
(a)  If constructed as required by the original permit, any properly permitted facility that exists on the effective date of this chapter shall be allowed to continue as it presently exists, provided that i) it exists and is operating as originally permitted; and ii) that any modification of the facility has been properly permitted. 
(b)  Any modification not properly previously permitted prior to the adoption of this chapter must be permitted under this chapter. 
(c)  Any new modification of a facility and any modification of equipment associated with the facility, must be permitted under this chapter and will require the entire facility and any new or modified installation to comply with this chapter, except that any tower or other support structure properly permitted prior to the adoption of this chapter shall have the height grandfathered and may remain at the originally permitted height. 
(d)  Any repair and maintenance of a wireless facility that does not i) increase the height of the structure, ii) alter the profile, iii) change the RF emissions levels, iv) increase the footprint of the facility or v) otherwise exceed the conditions of the development plan approval, does not require an application for a development plan approval, but may require a building permit. In no instance shall any additional construction or modification be considered to be repair or maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1, § 2, 1-3-17) 
Sec. 96-7. - Exclusions. 
    The following shall be exempt from this chapter: 
(a)  Any facilities expressly exempt from the city's siting, building and permitting authority. 
(b)  Any wireless reception or transmission devises expressly exempted under the Telecommunications Act of 1996. 
(c)  Facilities, except towers, used exclusively for private, non-commercial radio and television reception and private citizen's bands, licensed amateur radio and other similar non-commercial telecommunications. 
(d)  Non-commercial facilities used exclusively for providing unlicensed spread spectrum technologies where; i) there is no charge for the use of the wireless service; ii) the facility does not require a new tower or increase the height of the structure being attached to; and iii) the service is not intended to be useable more than 100 feet from the antenna(s). 
(Ord. No. 2017-1, § 2, 1-3-17) 
Sec. 96-8. - Application requirements for a development plan approval. 
(a)  All applicants for a development plan approval for a wireless facility, including; i) for a new tower or other support structure; or ii) for a substantial co-location/modification or subsequent to the adoption of this chapter any modification that; iii) increases the height, width, profile, structural loading on the support structure; or iv) increases the size of the compound beyond the maximum allowed under this chapter; or iv) increases the cumulative RF emissions of an existing permitted facility, shall comply with the requirements set forth in this chapter. In addition to all other required information set forth in this chapter, all applications for the construction or installation of a new facility shall contain the information hereinafter set forth in this subsection prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(1)  Ownership and management. 
a.  The name, address, phone number and e-mail address of the person preparing the application; 
b.  The name, address, and phone number of the property owner and the applicant, including the legal name of the applicant. If the owner of the structure is different than the applicant, the name and all necessary contact information shall be provided; 
c.  The postal address and tax map parcel number of the property; 
d.  A copy of the FCC license applicable for the intended use(s) of the wireless telecommunications facilities, including all FCC licensed frequency bands for the location; 
e.  The applicant shall disclose in writing any agreement in existence prior to submission of the application that would limit or preclude the ability of the applicant to share space on the new tower; 
(2)  Zoning and planning. 
a.  The zoning district or designation in which the property is situated; 
b.  Certified development plan, one copy per application on 24-inch by 36-inch paper and PDF form on a CD shall be submitted, showing the following; 
c.  A site plan, drawn to scale, showing property lines, lease lot lines, adjoining rights-of-way, easements, water and sewer lines, electrical lines, utility rights-of-way, utility substations, layout and location of all existing and proposed improvements, antenna support structures, telecommunication facilities, structures, mechanical and electrical equipment, setbacks, parking, access roads, security installations, signs, landscaping, buffers, fencing, illumination, camouflage and tower height; 
d.  The size of the property footprint on which the structure to be built or attached to is located, stated both in square feet and lot line dimensions, and a survey showing the location of all lot lines; 
e.  Elevation drawings showing the profile or the vertical rendition of the facility and identifying all existing and proposed attachments and all related fixtures, structures, appurtenances and apparatus, including the height above the existing grade, materials, colors and lighting; 
f.  The azimuth, size and center line height location of all proposed and existing antennas on the supporting structure; 
(3)  Safety. 
a.  The type and design of the facility, the number of antennas arrays proposed to be accommodated and the basis for the calculations of the facility's capacity to accommodate the required number of antenna arrays for which the structure must be designed; 
b.  The age of the facility in years, including the date of the grant of the original permit; 
c.  A description of the type of tower, e.g. guyed, self-supporting lattice or monopole; 
d.  The make, model, type and manufacturer of the tower and the structural design analysis and report, including the calculations, certified by a professional engineer licensed in the state and proving the facility's capability to safely accommodate the facilities of the applicant without change or modification; 
e.  If a modification of a facility is needed whereby the height, profile or size of the facility is increased, or construction is needed outside the compound or property, a detailed narrative explaining what changes are needed and why they are needed; 
f.  A copy of the foundation design, including a geotechnical sub-surface soils investigation report and foundation design recommendation for the tower or other structure; 
g.  If modifying an existing tower or other support structure, an ANSI TIA 222 report regarding the physical condition of the facility and its components done within the previous six months. If such report has not been done within the previous six months, one shall be done and submitted as part of the application. No building permit shall be issued for any wireless facility or related equipment where the structure being attached to is in need of remediation to comply with the requirements of this chapter and other adopted standards of the city, unless and until all remediation work that is deemed needed has been completed or a schedule for the remediation work has been approved by the city planning department; 
h.  In certain instances the city may deem it appropriate to have an on-site RF survey of the facility done after the construction or modification and activation of the facility. Such survey shall be done under the observation and direction of the city or its designee, and an un-redacted copy of the survey results provided, along with all calculations, prior to issuance of a certificate of compliance; 
i.  A signed statement that the applicant will expeditiously remedy any physical or RF interference with other wireless devices or services. 
j.  A written copy of an analysis completed by a qualified individual or organization to determine if the proposed wireless telecommunications facility is in compliance with Federal Aviation Administration Regulation Part 77 and if it requires lighting. Unless already lighted, this requirement shall also be for any facility where the application proposes to increase the height of the facility. If this analysis determines that an FAA determination is required, then all filings with the FAA, all responses from the FAA and any related correspondence shall be provided with the application. 
(b)  New tower or support structure versus co-location. 
(1)  New towers or other support structures shall be prohibited in the following districts: R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-A, MH-1, MH-2, O-2, O-3, historic districts and areas officially deemed to be visual or scenic sensitive areas unless the applicant provides clear and convincing evidence demonstrating that, i) a new tower as proposed is necessary to the exclusions of any alternative or reasonable combination of alternatives; ii) that the intended area cannot be served from outside the district without a new tower or other support structure; iii) that no existing or previously approved facility can reasonably be used for antenna placement; and iv) that not to permit a new tower or other support structure would result in a significant gap in service. 
(2)  As a matter of concealment, all applications for a proposed facility applicable to this chapter shall contain clear and convincing evidence that the facility is sited and designed so as to create the least visual intrusiveness reasonably possible given the facts and circumstances involved, and thereby will have the least adverse visual effect on the environment and its character, on existing vegetation, and be substantially invisible to the community in the area of the facility. The city expressly reserves the right to require the use of stealth or camouflage techniques, including but not limited to DAS (distributive antenna system) and small cell nodes or the functional equivalent of such to achieve this goal and such shall be subject to approval by the board. 
(3)  For a new tower or other support structure the applicant shall be required to submit clear and convincing evidence that a new tower or support structure is the only type of structure within one-half mile of the proposed tower or support structure that will enable the provision of wireless services primarily within the city. 
(4)  In order to better inform the public, in the case of a new tower, the applicant shall hold a "balloon test" or erect a story pole prior to the initial public hearing on the application. The use of a balloon test or story pole, i.e. a temporary mast, shall be that of the city based upon the fact and circumstances involved. The applicant shall arrange to fly, or raise upon story pole, a minimum of a four-foot in diameter brightly colored balloon at the maximum height of the proposed new tower. 
(5)  At least 14 days prior to the conduct of the balloon test, a sign shall be erected so as to be clearly visible from the road nearest the proposed site and shall be removed no later than 14 days after the conduct of the balloon test. The sign shall be at least four feet by eight feet in size and shall be readable from the road by a person with 20/20 vision. 
(6)  Such sign shall be placed off, but as near to, the public right-of-way as is possible. 
(7)  Such sign shall contain the times and date(s) of the balloon test and contact information. 
(8)  The dates, (including a second date, in case of poor visibility or wind in excess of 15 mph on the initial date) times and location of this balloon test shall be advertised by the applicant seven and 14 days in advance of the first test date in a newspaper with a general circulation in the city and as agreed to by the city. The applicant shall inform the city in writing of the dates and times of the test, at least 14 days in advance. The balloon shall be flown for at least four consecutive hours between 10:00 am and 2:00 p.m. on the dates chosen. The primary date shall be on a week-end, but the second date, in case of poor visibility on the initial date, may be on a week day. A report with photos from various locations of the balloon and to-scale superimposed photo simulations of the facility when completed shall be provided with the application. 
(9)  The applicant shall notify all property owners and residents located within 1,000 of the nearest property line of the subject property of the proposed construction of the tower and wireless facility and of the date(s) and time(s) of the balloon test. Such notice shall be provided at least 14 days prior to the conduct of the balloon test and shall be delivered by first-class mail. The applicant shall bear all costs associated with said notification. 
(10)  Any comments or concerns as a result of the balloon test shall be recorded and made part of the application for the development plan approval. 
(11)  The owner of a tower or other support structure, and his/her successors in interest, shall negotiate in good faith for the shared use of the facility by other wireless service providers, and shall: 
a.  Respond within 60 days to a request for information from a potential shared-use applicant; 
b.  Negotiate in good faith concerning future requests for shared use of the new wireless telecommunications facility by other telecommunications providers; 
c.  Allow shared use of the new wireless telecommunications facility if another telecommunications provider agrees in writing to pay reasonable charges. 
d.  Understand that failure to abide by the conditions outlined above may be grounds for revocation of the development plan approval. 
(c)  The applicant shall provide certified documentation in the form of a structural analysis, including any assumptions and calculations and, proving that the facility will meet all local, state and federal structural requirements for loads, including wind and ice loads and including, but not limited to all applicable ANSI (American National Standards Institute) TIA 222 guidelines. In the event of a conflict the more stringent shall apply. 
(d)  The applicant shall furnish a visual impact assessment, which shall include pictorial representations (photo simulations) of "before and after" views from key viewpoints inside of the city as may be appropriate and required, including but not limited to state highways and other major roads, state and local parks, other public lands, historic districts, preserves and historic sites normally open to the public, and from any other location where the site is visible to a large number of visitors, travelers or residents. Guidance will be provided concerning the appropriate key viewpoints at the pre-application meeting. In addition to photographic simulations to scale showing the visual impact, the applicant shall provide a map showing the locations of where the pictures were taken and the distance(s) of each location from the proposed structure; 
(e)  The applicant shall provide a description in writing and a visual rendering demonstrating how it shall effectively screen from view the bottom 15 feet of the facility and all related equipment and structures associated with the facility. All compounds must be surrounded by a landscaped buffer which shall, to a height of eight feet, effectively screen the view of the compound from adjacent public ways and property. The buffer, which may be located within the required setback area, shall consist of a landscape strip, at least eight feet in depth, located outside the security fence. The landscape strip should be planted with a combination of trees, shrubs, vines and/or ground covers which are capable of attaining, at maturity, a height as high as the security fence and which will enhance and, at minimum, partially screen the outward appearance of the security fence. For towers located within 1,000 feet of a residential area, the city may require wider landscape buffers and other items such as decay resistant, solid wood fences, earth berms, and brick or masonry walls in addition to the security fence. 
(f)  A building permit shall not be issued for construction of a new tower until there is an application filed for or by a specific carrier that document that the facility is necessary for that carrier to provide service in the community and that co-location on an existing structure is not feasible. 
(g)  Co-location on an existing structure is not reasonably feasible if co-location is technically or commercially impracticable or the owner of the structure is unwilling to enter into a contract for such use. Sufficient documentation in the form of clear and convincing evidence to support such claims shall be submitted with an application for the first carrier attaching to a tower in order to determine whether co-location on existing structures is reasonably feasible and to document the need for a specific stated height, and that less height will serve to prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of service. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1, § 2, 1-3-17) 
Sec. 96-9. - Streamlined process-Requirements for an application to modify or co-locate on an existing conforming telecommunications facility within the parameters of an approved development plan approval. 
(a)  The process for permitting and the information required under this chapter shall be the same as in the preceding section, except that there shall be no "proof-of-technical-need" required for an application qualifying for the streamlined process. Any application items that are deemed not applicable will be identified prior to the submission of the application for development plan approval by the city or the city's consultants. 
(b)  An application for a substantial modification/co-location or new tower shall not qualify for streamlined treatment under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1, § 2, 1-3-17) 
Sec. 96-10. - Location of wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(a)  Applicants shall locate, site and erect all facilities and associated equipment in accordance with the following priorities, in the following order: 
(1)  On city-owned properties or facilities without increasing the height of the tower or support structure. 
(2)  On other existing structures without increasing the height of the tower or support structure. 
(3)  On city-owned properties or facilities. 
(4)  On properties in areas zoned B-1, B-2, L-1 or H-1. These areas are zoned in the business and manufacturing districts. 
(5)  On properties in areas zoned AC, B-3 or O-1. These areas are zoned in the residential, business and office/institutional districts. 
(6)  On properties in designated historic districts. 
(7)  On properties in areas zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-A, MH-1, MH-2, O-2, O-3. These areas are zoned in the residential, multi-family, manufactured home and office/institutional districts. 
(b)  If the proposed site is not proposed for the highest priority listed above, a detailed narrative and technical explanation consisting of clear and convincing technical evidence must be provided to document the need to use any lower siting priority. 
(c)  The person seeking such an exception must satisfactorily demonstrate the reason(s) why a development plan approval or administrative authorization should be granted for the proposed site as opposed to a site(s) higher in the priority list. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the priorities set forth in the preceding subsection (a), the city may approve any site located within an area in the above list of priorities, provided that the city finds that the proposed site is in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the city and its inhabitants and will not have a deleterious effect on the nature and character of the community and neighborhood. Conversely, the city may direct that the proposed location be changed to another location that is more in keeping with the goals of this chapter and the public interest as determined by the city and that serves the intent of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1, § 2, 1-3-17) 
Sec. 96-11. - Type and height of towers. 
(a)  All new towers shall be of the monopole type. No new towers of a lattice or guyed type shall be permitted, unless relief is otherwise expressly requested and granted based on the provision of clear and convincing technical evidence. 
(b)  The applicant for a new tower shall submit clear and convincing technical evidence by a carrier or wireless service provider justifying the total height of the proposed facility and the need for such to the exclusion of all reasonable alternatives. Evidence in the form of propagation studies must include all modeling data and assumptions used to produce the studies at the requested height and at a height ten feet lower to show that any lower height would have the effect of prohibiting the provision of service. 
(c)  The city reserves the right to require a drive test to be conducted under the supervision of the city or its designee as evidence of the technical need for what is requested. 
(d)  The maximum permitted total height of a new tower or support structure in nonresidential zoned areas shall be 100 feet above pre-construction ground level, unless it can be shown by clear and convincing technical evidence that such height would prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of service in the intended service area within the city. The maximum permitted total height of a new tower or support structure in districts zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-A, MH-1, MH-2, O-2, O-3 shall be 60 feet above pre-construction ground level, unless it can be shown by clear and convincing technical evidence that such height would prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of service in the intended service area within the city. The maximum permitted height is expressly not an as-of-right height, but rather the maximum permitted height absent clear and convincing technical evidence of the technological need for a greater height. 
(e)  As the city has made the policy decision that more facilities of a shorter height is in the public interest, as opposed to fewer taller facilities, spacing or the distance between facilities shall be such that the service may be provided without exceeding the maximum permitted height. 
(f)  With respect to the overall designed strength of a tower, but not with respect to height, towers shall be structurally designed to accommodate a minimum of four carriers using substantially similar equipment to that used by the first carrier attaching to a tower and that can be increased in height if needed for technical reasons. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1, § 2, 1-3-17) 
Sec. 96-12. - Visibility and aesthetics. 
(a)  No tower or support structure constructed after the effective date of this chapter shall be tall enough to require lighting. 
(b)  In the event lighting is legally required, the applicant shall provide a detailed plan for sufficient lighting of as unobtrusive and inoffensive an effect as is permissible under state and federal regulations. For any facility for which lighting is required under the FAA's regulations, or that for any reason has lights attached, all such lighting shall be affixed with technology that enables the light to be seen as intended from the air, but that prevents the ground scatter effect so that it is not able to be seen from the ground to a height of at least 12 degrees vertical for a distance of at least one mile in a level terrain situation. Such device must be compliant with or not in conflict with FAA regulations. A physical shield may be used, as long as the light is able to be seen from the air, as intended by the FAA. 
(c)  As of the effective date of this chapter, in the event a tower that is lighted is modified, at the time of the modification, for purposes of concealment the city may require that the tower be retrofitted so as to comply with the lighting requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  After the adoption of this chapter, the maximum permitted width or profile of a new tower, including any attachments, shall not exceed ten feet, absent clear and convincing technical evidence documenting the need for a larger profile. 
(e)  Concealment: To make new facilities as substantially invisible as possible to the greatest number of people, all new facilities, including but not limited to towers, shall utilize stealth or camouflage siting techniques, unless such can be shown to be either commercially or technologically impracticable. 
(f)  Facility finish/color: Towers shall be galvanized and/or painted with a rust-preventive paint of an appropriate color to harmonize with the surroundings and shall be maintained in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(g)  Flush mounting: All new or replacement antennas, shall be flush-mounted or as close to flush-mounted on the support structure as possible, unless it can be demonstrated by clear and convincing technical evidence that such has the effect of prohibiting the provision of service to the intended service area, alone or in combination with another site(s), or unless the applicant can prove that it is technologically impracticable. 
(h)  Attachments to buildings: To preserve and protect the nature and character of the area and enable the site to be substantially invisible, for any attachment to a building or other structure with a facie, the antennas shall be mounted on the facie without increasing the height of the building or other structure, unless it can be proven that such will prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of service, and all such attachments and exteriorly encased or exposed cabling shall match as closely as possible the color and texture of the structure. 
(i)  Small cell sites: An application proposing the use of small cell technology in the public rights-of-way that does not increase the height of an existing structure being attached to by more than four feet shall be entitled to the streamlined process. If increasing the height of a building by between four feet and eight feet the application may also be reviewed under the streamlined process, provided the applicant will install an RF translucent false facie or parapet that matches the style, color and texture of the building. 
(j)  Attachments to water tanks: If attaching to a water tank, in order to maintain the current profile and height, mounting on the top of the tank or the use of a corral shall only be permitted if the applicant can prove that to locate elsewhere on the tank with less visual effect will prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of service or will create a safety hazard. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1, § 2, 1-3-17) 
Sec. 96-13. - Reasons for denial. 
(a)  Notwithstanding that a potential site may be situated in an area of highest priority or highest available priority, the city may disapprove an application for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Conflict with safety and safety-related codes and requirements; 
(2)  The facility would not conform to the city's policy of concealment; 
(3)  Conflict with the historic nature or character of a neighborhood or district; 
(4)  The use or construction of facilities contrary to an already stated purpose of a specific zoning or land use designation; 
(5)  The placement and location of facilities which would create an unacceptable safety or financial risk to residents or the safety of the general public, employees and agents of the city or employees of the service provider or other service providers, or the reasonable probability of such; 
(6)  The placement and location of a facility would result in a conflict with, compromise in or change in the nature or character of the adjacent surrounding area; 
(7)  Conflicts with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1, § 2, 1-3-17) 
Sec. 96-14. - Security. 
    All wireless telecommunications facilities and antennas shall be secured around the perimeter of the compound that prevents unauthorized access. Specifically: 
(a)  All fences require a permit and shall comply with the building code; 
(b)  No fence shall generally exceed six feet in height; however, fences may be approved by the building official of a maximum of eight feet in height if designed to withstand the current wind-load; 
(c)  No fence shall be constructed or installed in such a manner as to interfere with drainage on the site; 
(d)  Any fence located adjacent to a public right-of-way or private road shall be placed with the finished side facing that right-of-way or private road; 
(e)  A fence required for safety and protection of hazards by another public agency may not be subject to the height limitations above. Approval to exceed maximum height standards may be given by the administrative official upon receipt of satisfactory evidence of the need to exceed height standards; 
(f)  Fences must be constructed of a permanent weatherproof dark colored vinyl-coated steel chain link material. Fabric, plastic sheeting or metal attached to a fence constructed of approved materials (unless specially designed and created as a fence) is not permitted; 
(g)  Fences in residential, office or commercial districts may not contain barbed wire or a similar product; 
(h)  All facilities, including antennas, towers and other supporting structures, such as guy anchor points and guy wires, shall be made inaccessible to unauthorized individuals and shall be constructed or shielded in such a manner that they cannot be climbed or collided with; and 
(i)  Transmitters and telecommunications control points shall be installed so that they are readily accessible only to persons authorized to operate or service them. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1, § 2, 1-3-17) 
Sec. 96-15. - Signage. 
    Facilities shall contain a sign no larger than four square feet and no smaller than two square feet in order to provide adequate warning to persons in the immediate area of the presence of RF radiation. A sign of the same size is also to be installed bearing the name(s) of the owner(s) and operator(s) of the antenna(s) as well as emergency phone number(s). The sign shall be on the equipment shelter or cabinet of the applicant and must be visible from the access point of the facility and must identify the equipment owner of the shelter or cabinet. On tower sites, an FCC registration sign, as applicable, is also to be present. The signs shall not be lighted, unless applicable law, rule or regulation requires lighting. No other signage, including advertising, shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1, § 2, 1-3-17) 
Sec. 96-16. - Setback and fall zone. 
(a)  All proposed towers and any new proposed support structures shall be set back from abutting parcels, recorded rights-of-way and road and street lines by the greater of the following distances: i) a distance equal to the height of the proposed tower or support structure plus ten percent of the height of the tower or other structure, otherwise known as the fall zone; or the existing setback requirement of the underlying zoning district, whichever is greater. Any accessory structure shall be located within the fenced compound area as approved in the development plan approval and so as to comply with the applicable minimum setback requirements for the property on which it is situated. The fall zone shall be measured from the nearest edge of the tower to the nearest portion of the right-of-way of any public road or thoroughfare and any occupied building or domicile, as well as any property boundary lines. At the discretion of the planning director, the preceding may not apply to facilities located in the public rights-of-way. 
(b)  The nearest portion of any access road leading to a facility shall be no less than ten feet from the nearest property line. 
(c)  There shall be no development or human occupation of habitable buildings within the setback area or fall zone. 
(d)  Regardless of the zoning district in which a tower is located, no tower shall be located within 400 feet of any residential structure. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1, § 2, 1-3-17) 
Sec. 96-17. - Retention of expert assistance cost to be borne by applicant. 
(a)  The city may hire a consultant to assist the city in reviewing and evaluating applications. 
(b)  The total amount of the funds needed as set forth in the city's fee schedule may vary with the scope and complexity of the application, the completeness of the application and other information as may be needed to complete the necessary review, analysis and inspection of any construction or modification. 
(c)  To prevent the taxpayers from having to bear the cost related to the issue of permitting and regulating wireless telecommunications facilities, an applicant shall place with the city a deposit of $8,500.00, which shall be maintained in an escrow account for that application. The deposit is intended to cover all reasonable costs of the consultant in connection with the review of any application or the permitting, inspection, construction or modification requested and an application pre-submittal review or evaluation requested by the applicant and any lease negotiations. The placement of the expert assistance or consultant deposit with the city shall precede the pre-application meeting, site visit and any work being done that is related to the intended application or lease. 
(d)  If at any time during the review process this escrow account has a balance less than $2,500.00, applicant shall immediately, upon notification by the city, replenish said escrow account so that it has a balance of at least $2,500.00 or such other amount as determined to be needed given the anticipated amount of work remaining on the application. Such additional funds must be deposited with the city before any further action or consideration is taken on the application. In the event that the amount held in the escrow account is more than the amount of the actual billing or invoicing at the time of the grant of the certificate of completion, the remaining balance shall be promptly refunded to the applicant upon request. 
(e)  If an application is amended at any time prior to the grant of the permit or authorization required under this chapter, the city reserves the right to require a separate and additional payment for review and analysis equal to, but not exceeding, the cost created for the city by the amendment of the application. Such amount shall be paid to the city prior to the issuance of the development plan approval or administrative authorization. 
(f)  The city will maintain an accounting for the expenditure of all such funds. The city's consultant/expert shall invoice the city for all time expended for its services in reviewing the application including the on-site inspections of the construction and modification once permitted, plus out-of-pocket expenses. 
(g)  The total amount of the funds needed as set forth in the city's fee schedule may vary with the scope and complexity and/or the completeness of the application or the amount of time spent responding to an applicant's arguments as regards the requirements of this chapter or other applicable law, rule or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1, § 2, 1-3-17) 
Sec. 96-18. - Procedural requirements for granting a development plan approval. 
(a)  The following procedures shall apply where authorization for modification or construction of a wireless telecommunication facility is requested. 
(b)  The city shall schedule any required public hearing(s) once it finds the application is complete and there are no issues of non-compliance with applicable law, rule or regulation. The city is not required to set a date if the application is not complete or if there are unresolved issues of non-compliance. The city may, at any stage prior to issuing a development plan approval or administrative authority, require such additional information as it deems necessary and is not prohibited from requiring as relates to the issue of the siting, construction or modification of or at a wireless facility. 
(c)  Upon the city's review and approval, a development plan approval shall be issued. Notwithstanding the preceding, the building permit for a new tower or other support structure shall not be issued until an applicant has provided clear and convincing documentation substantiating the needed height of the first antenna array. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1, § 2, 1-3-17) 
Sec. 96-19. - Action on an application. 
(a)  The city will undertake a review of an application pursuant to this article in a timely fashion, consistent with its responsibilities and applicable law, and shall act within the time required by applicable law. 
(b)  The city may refer any application or part thereof to any advisory committee or consultant for a non-binding recommendation. 
(c)  Either after the public hearing if a hearing is required, or after administrative review as applicable, and after formally considering the application, the city may i) approve; ii) approve with conditions; or iii) deny a permit or administrative authorization. The decision shall be in writing and shall be supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. Throughout the application and permitting process, the burden of proof for compliance with this chapter or the need for something not allowed, shall always be upon the applicant. 
(d)  If the city approves the development plan or administrative authority for the facility, then the applicant shall be notified of such approval within 30 calendar days of the city's action. The development plan approval or administrative authorization shall be issued within 30 days after such approval. 
(e)  If the city denies the development plan or administrative authority for the facility or the modification, then the applicant shall be notified of such denial in writing within 30 calendar days of the city's action, and shall set forth in writing the reason or reasons for the denial. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1, § 2, 1-3-17) 
Sec. 96-20. - Extent and parameters of development plan approval or administrative authority for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
    The extent and parameters of a development plan approval or administrative authorization for a facility shall be as follows: 
(a)  A development plan approval or administrative authorization shall not be assigned, transferred or conveyed without the express prior written notification to the city, such notice to be not fewer than 30 business days prior to the intended assignment, transfer or conveyance. 
(b)  A transfer, assignment or other conveyance of the development plan approval or administrative authorization shall require the written commitment of the new holder of the development plan approval or administrative authorization to abide by all applicable laws, rules and regulations, including but not limited to this chapter. 
(c)  Following notice and an opportunity to cure and if not cured, a development plan approval or administrative authorization granted under this chapter may be revoked, canceled, or terminated for a violation of the conditions and provisions of the development plan approval or other applicable law, rule or regulation, and if warranted the payment of a fine(s) as is permissible. 
(d)  If not cured within the time frame set forth in the notice of violation, a hearing shall be held upon due prior notice to the applicant citing the violation(s) and the date, time and place of the hearing, which shall be provided by registered mail to the last known address of the holder of the development plan approval. 
(e)  Following the original notice and an opportunity to cure as relates to a given facility, subsequent or repeated violations of a substantially similar nature shall not require an opportunity to cure prior to the imposition of fines. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1, § 2, 1-3-17) 
Sec. 96-21. - Removal and performance security. 
    Support structure removal and performance: The applicant and the owner of record of any proposed new tower or support structure shall, at its sole cost and expense, be required to execute and file with the city a bond or other form of security that is acceptable to the city as to the type of security and the form and manner of execution, in an amount of at least $75,000.00 for a tower or other support structure and with such sureties as are deemed adequate by the city to assure the faithful performance of the terms and conditions of this chapter and conditions of any development plan approval issued pursuant to this chapter. The full amount of the bond or security shall remain in full force and effect throughout the term of the development plan approval and/or until any necessary site restoration is completed to restore the site to a condition comparable to that which existed prior to the issuance of the original development plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1, § 2, 1-3-17) 
Sec. 96-22. - Reservation of authority to inspect wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(a)  In order to verify that the holder of a development plan approval for facility and any and all lessees, renters, and/or licensees of wireless telecommunications facilities, place and construct and operate such facilities in accordance with all applicable technical, safety, fire, building codes, zoning codes, laws, ordinances and regulations and conditions of any permit granted under this chapter, the city may inspect, or cause to have inspected by a third party, all facets of said permit holder's, renter's, lessee's or licensee's placement, construction, modification and maintenance of such facilities, including, but not limited to, towers, antennas and buildings or other structures constructed or located on the permitted site, including but not limited to electrical service, wiring and components. 
(b)  Refusal to allow or grant access to a city representative upon reasonable notice shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1, § 2, 1-3-17) 
Sec. 96-23. - Liability insurance. 
(a)  A holder of a development plan approval for a wireless telecommunications support structure shall secure and at all times maintain public liability insurance for personal injuries, death and property damage, and umbrella insurance coverage, for the duration of the development plan approval in amounts as set forth below: 
(1)  Commercial general liability covering personal injuries, death and property damage: $1,000,000.00 per occurrence/$2,000,000.00 aggregate; and 
(2)  Automobile coverage: $1,000,000.00 per occurrence/$2,000,000.00 aggregate; and 
(3)  A $3,000,000.00 umbrella coverage; and 
(4)  Workers compensation and disability: Statutory amounts. 
(b)  For a facility located on city property, the commercial general liability insurance policy shall specifically name the city and its officers, boards, employees, committee members, attorneys, agents and consultants as additional insureds. 
(c)  The insurance policies shall contain an endorsement obligating the insurance company to furnish the city with at least 30 days prior written notice in advance of the cancellation of the insurance. 
(d)  Renewal or replacement policies or certificates shall be delivered to the city at least 15 days prior to the expiration of the insurance that such policies are to renew or replace. 
(e)  Before construction of a permitted wireless telecommunications facility is initiated, but in no case later than 15 days prior to the grant of the building permit, the holder of the development plan approval or administrative authorization shall deliver to the city a copy of each of the policies or certificates representing the insurance in the required amounts. 
(f)  A certificate of insurance that states that it is for informational purposes only and does not confer rights upon the city shall not be deemed to comply with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1, § 2, 1-3-17) 
Sec. 96-24. - Indemnification. 
(a)  Any application for wireless telecommunication facilities that is proposed to be located on city property shall contain a provision with respect to indemnification of the city. Such provision shall require the applicant, to the extent permitted by applicable law, to at all times defend, indemnify, protect, save, hold harmless and exempt the city and its officers, commissions, committees, employees, attorneys, agents, and consultants from any and all penalties, damages, costs, or charges arising out of any and all claims, suits, demands, causes of action, or award of damages, whether compensatory or punitive, or expenses arising therefrom, either at law or in equity, which might arise out of, or are caused by, the placement, construction, erection, modification , location, products performance, use, operation, maintenance, repair, installation, replacement, removal, or restoration of said facility, excepting, however, any portion of such claims, suits, demands, causes of action or award of damages as may be attributable to the negligent or intentional acts or omissions of the city, or its servants or agents. With respect to the penalties, damages or charges referenced herein, reasonable attorneys' fees, consultants' fees, and expert witness fees are included in those costs that are recoverable by the city. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the requirements noted in subsection (a) of this section, an indemnification provision will not be required in those instances where the city itself applies for and secures a development plan approval for a wireless telecommunications facility. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1, § 2, 1-3-17) 
Sec. 96-25. - Fines. 
(a)  In the event of a violation of this chapter, or any development plan approval or administrative authorization or building permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the city may impose and collect, and the holder of the development plan approval or administrative authorization shall pay to the city fines or penalties as established by the city and as allowed by state law. 
(b)  Notwithstanding anything in this chapter, the holder of the development plan approval or administrative authorization for a facility may not use the payment of fines, liquidated damages or other penalties, to evade or avoid compliance with this chapter or any section of this chapter. An attempt to do so shall subject the holder of the development plan approval, to termination and revocation of the development plan approval or administrative authorization. Without limiting other remedies available to the city, the city may also seek injunctive relief to prevent the continued violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1, § 2, 1-3-17) 
Sec. 96-26. - Responsible party(s). 
    The owner(s) of a facility, including any support structure used to accommodate wireless facilities and equipment, and the owner of the land upon which a facility or support structure is located, shall at all times be jointly and severally responsible for: (1) the physical and safe condition of the facility and all components on the site related to the facility; (2) assuring that all activities of owners, users, or lessees occurring on the site, and all components on the site related to the facility, are at all times in compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules, regulations, orders, and permits related to the facility; and (3) assuring the proper permitting as required by this article and other city regulations by all owners of equipment, lessees and users of the facility, including but not limited to any upgrades and/or modifications of equipment. Said owner(s) shall monitor activities at the site to assure that the facility is operated in compliance with this chapter, other city regulations, and any special or conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1, § 2, 1-3-17) 
Sec. 96-27. - Default and/or revocation. 
    If a support structure or facility is repaired, rebuilt, placed, moved, re-located, modified or maintained in a way that is inconsistent or not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter or of the development plan approval or administrative authorization, then the city shall notify the holder of the development plan approval or administrative authorization in writing of such violation. A permit or administrative authorization holder found to be in violation may be considered in default and subject to fines as permitted under applicable state law, and if a violation is not corrected to the satisfaction of the city in a reasonable period of time the development plan approval or administrative authorization shall be subject to revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1, § 2, 1-3-17) 
Sec. 96-28. - Removal or moving of wireless telecommunications structures and facilities. 
(a)  If attached to an existing structure, unless the planning director deems doing so to be in the public interest, it shall be impermissible for a wireless service provider's or carrier's facilities and equipment to be moved or relocated from one structure to another, or replaced by the construction of a new facility, without proof that not to be relocated to or replaced by a facility at another location would for technical reasons prohibit or serve to prohibit the provision of service in the service area served by the existing wireless facility. 
(b)  If the lease for the existing co-location expires and is not renewed, thereby forcing the facility to be moved, such move shall be allowed only upon i) the provision of convincing evidence satisfactory to the city of the need to move or relocate the facility; and ii) convincing evidence satisfactory to the city of the lack of impact on the neighborhood or area of intended new location. Cancellation or abandonment of a lease by a wireless service provider or carrier or other lessee, shall not be deemed a permissible reason for relocating. 
(c)  The owner of any facility shall be required to provide a minimum of 90 days written notice to the city clerk prior to abandoning any facility. 
(d)  Under the following circumstances, the city may determine that the health, safety, and welfare interests of the city warrant and require the removal of facilities. 
(1)  A facility has been abandoned (i.e. not used as a wireless telecommunications facility) for a period exceeding 90 consecutive days or a total of 180 non-consecutive days in any 365-day period, except for periods caused by force majeure or Acts of God, in which case, repair or removal shall be completed within 90 days of abandonment; 
(2)  A support structure or facility falls into such a state of disrepair that it creates a health or safety hazard or is deemed an attractive nuisance or a visual blight; 
(3)  A support structure or facility has been located, constructed, or modified without first obtaining, or in a manner not authorized by the required development plan approval or administrative authorization, and the special permit or administrative authorization may be revoked. 
(4)  If the city makes a determination as noted in subsection (2) or (3) of this section, then the city shall notify the holder of the permit or administrative authorization for the facility within 48 hours that said facility is to be brought into compliance and conformity or removed. 
a.  The holder of the development plan approval or administrative authorization, or its successors or assigns, shall dismantle and remove such facility and all associated structures and equipment from the site and restore the site to as close to its original condition as is possible, such restoration being limited only by physical or commercial impracticability. Restoration shall be completed within 90 days of receipt of written notice from the city. However, if the owner of the property upon which the facility is located wishes to retain any access roadway to the facility, the owner may do so with the approval of the city. 
b.  If a facility has not been removed, or substantial progress has not been made to remove the facility, within 90 days after the permit holder has received notice, then the city may order officials or representatives of the city to remove the facility at the sole expense of the owner or development plan approval holder. 
c.  If the city removes, or causes facilities to be removed, and the owner of the facility does not claim and remove the material from the site to a lawful location within ten days, then the city may take steps to declare the facility a nuisance. 
d.  Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, the city may approve a temporary use permit/agreement for the facility for no more than 90 days duration, during which time a suitable plan for removal, conversion, or re-location of the affected facility shall be developed by the holder of the development plan approval, subject to the approval of the city, and an agreement to such plan shall be executed by the holder of the development plan approval or administrative authorization and the city. If such a plan is not developed, approved and executed within the 90-day time period, then the city may take possession of and dispose of the affected facility in the manner provided in this chapter and utilize the performance and removal bond. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1, § 2, 1-3-17) 
Sec. 96-29. - RF emissions. 
(a)  To assure the protection of the public health and safety, the city expressly reserves the right to require that an applicant, a user of a facility or the owner of the facility verify compliance with the FCC's regulations regarding RF emissions, either for individually-owned equipment or cumulatively for all equipment at the site, as may be deemed appropriate from time to time, and that all users of the facility cooperate with the party responsible for such verification. 
(b)  With respect to support structures other than towers, if any section or portion of the structure or the entire site or within 100 feet of the boundaries of the site, is not in compliance with the FCC's regulations regarding RF radiation, that section or portion must be barricaded with a suitable barrier to discourage approaching into the area in excess of the FCC's regulations, and be marked off with brightly colored plastic chain or striped warning tape as appropriate, as well as placing RF Radiation warning signs as needed and appropriate to warn individuals of the potential danger. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1, § 2, 1-3-17) 
Sec. 96-30. - Relief. 
(a)  Any applicant desiring relief, waiver or exemption from any aspect or requirement of this chapter shall address and identify such at the pre-application meeting. The relief or exemption must be contained in the submitted application for either a development plan approval or administrative authorization, or in the case of an existing or previously granted development plan approval or administrative authorization, a request for modification of the facility and/or equipment. Such relief may be temporary or permanent, partial or complete. 
(b)  If relief waiver or exemption for any item or issue is not requested at the pre-application meeting and is requested after the submittal of the application, the city reserves the right to require a formal amendment of the application, including the payment of all fees and charges. 
(c)  The burden of proving the need for the requested relief, waiver or exemption shall be solely on the applicant. 
(d)  The applicant shall bear all costs of the city in considering the request and the relief, waiver or exemption. 
(e)  No relief, waiver or exemption shall be approved unless the applicant demonstrates by clear and convincing evidence that, if granted, the relief, waiver or exemption will have no significant effect on the health, safety and welfare of the city, its residents and other service providers. 
(f)  Relief, waiver or exemption may not be granted by administrative authority. All requests for relief, waiver or exemption will be presented to the planning commission for approval and will require a public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1, § 2, 1-3-17) 
Sec. 96-31. - Adherence to state and/or federal rules and regulations. 
(a)  To the extent that the holder of a development plan approval or administrative authorization for a wireless telecommunications facility has not received relief, or is otherwise exempt, from appropriate state and/or federal agency rules or regulations, then the holder of such a development plan approval shall adhere to, and comply with, all applicable rules, regulations, standards, and provisions of any state or federal agency, including, but not limited to, the FAA and the FCC. Specifically included in this requirement are any rules and regulations regarding height, lighting, security, electrical and RF emission standards. 
(b)  To the extent that applicable rules, regulations, standards, and provisions of any state or federal agency, including but not limited to, the FAA and the FCC, and specifically including any rules and regulations regarding height, lighting, and security are changed and/or are modified during the duration of a development plan approval or administrative authorization for wireless telecommunications facilities, then the holder of such a development plan approval or administrative authorization shall conform the permitted facility to the applicable changed and/or modified rule, regulation, standard, or provision within a maximum of 24 months of the effective date of the applicable changed and/or modified rule, regulation, standard, or provision, or sooner as may be required by the issuing entity. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1, § 2, 1-3-17) 
Sec. 96-32. - Conflict with other laws. 
    Where this chapter differs or conflicts with other laws, rules and regulations, unless the right to do so is preempted or prohibited by the city, state or federal government, this chapter shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1, § 2, 1-3-17) 
Sec. 96-33. - Effective date. 
    This chapter shall be effective immediately upon passage, pursuant to applicable legal and procedural requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1, § 2, 1-3-17) 
Sec. 96-34. - Authority. 
    This chapter is enacted pursuant to applicable authority granted by the state and federal government. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1, § 2, 1-3-17) 
Chapter 98 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Moving buildings, § 14-1; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86. 
State Law reference- Operation of vehicles generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 98-1. - Misdemeanors under state law adopted by reference. 
    All provisions of law relating to the speed and operation of motor vehicles in the city are hereby adopted by the city, including all rules of the state and all rules and regulations of the state highway department pertaining to the control of traffic and motor vehicles on highways that are misdemeanors under the state laws. A violation of such laws, rules and regulations in the city or in the police jurisdiction of the city shall be violations of this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 19-31.1) 
State Law reference- Rules of the road generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-1 et seq. 
Sec. 98-2. - Fines for violation. 
    Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be fined in accordance with the Alabama Uniform Traffic Citation Law schedule of fines, per section 98-52 or section 1-4, as applicable, unless otherwise noted. 
(Code 1977, § 19-31.2) 
Sec. 98-3. - Speed limits. 
(a)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a greater speed than 30 miles per hour on any street or alley, unless otherwise indicated by proper signs or markings. 
(b)  Speed limits on city streets, other than state or federal roads, shall be determined and posted by the city traffic engineer. 
(Code 1977, § 19-31) 
Sec. 98-3.1. - Establishment of state speed zone. 
(a)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater than 55 miles per hour in the following listed zones of the city: 
(1)  On Alabama Highway No. 53 (US 231), from the north Dothan city limits, mile post No. 27.81, thence southerly for a distance of 1.25 miles to John D. Odom Road, mile post No. 26.56. 
(2)  On Alabama Highway No. 12 (US 84), from the west Dothan city limits, mile post No. 203.06, thence easterly for a distance of 1.48 miles to Brannon Stand Road, mile post No. 204.54. 
(b)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater than 50 miles per hour in the following listed zones of the city: 
(1)  On Alabama Highway No. 53 (US 231), from John D. Odom Road, mile post No. 26.56, thence southerly for a distance of 0.52 miles to Napier Field Road, mile post No. 26.04. 
(2)  On Alabama Highway No. 12 (US 84), from Brannon Stand Road, mile post No. 204.54, thence easterly for a distance of 0.96 miles to Grove Park Road, mile post No. 205.50. 
(c)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater than 45 miles per hour in the following listed zones of the city: 
(1)  On Alabama Highway No. 53 (US 231), from Napier Field Road, mile post No. 26.04, thence southerly for a distance of 1.2 miles to Westgate Parkway, mile post No. 24.84. 
(2)  On Alabama Highway No. 12 (US 84), from Grove Park Road, mile post No. 205.50, thence easterly for a distance of 1.63 miles to Flowers Chapel Road, mile post No. 207.13. 
(d)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater than 40 miles per hour in the following listed zones of the city: 
(1)  On Alabama Highway No. 53 (US 231), from Westgate Parkway, mile post No. 24.84, thence southerly for a distance of 0.73 miles to Ross Clark Circle (SR 210), mile post No. 24.11. 
(2)  On Alabama Highway No. 12 (US 84), from Flowers Chapel Road, mile post No. 207.13, thence easterly for a distance of 0.46 miles to Ross Clark Circle (SR 210), mile post No. 207.59. 
(Ord. No. 2007-384, § 1, 11-6-07) 
Sec. 98-4. - U-turns. 
    The driver of a vehicle shall not make a U-turn or turn such a vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any public street, except as provided in the state traffic laws. 
(Code 1977, § 19-26) 
Sec. 98-5. - One-way streets. 
    When appropriate signs are erected giving notice thereof, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction of travel upon public streets or parts of such streets within the city. 
(Code 1977, § 19-28) 
Sec. 98-6. - Evading traffic regulations by crossing premises of another. 
    Unless specifically directed by someone with authority to do so for the purpose of alleviating the congestion of traffic, it shall be unlawful to drive a vehicle across the premises of another, even though such premises may be a service station or similar business, for the purpose of or which results in evading traffic signs, signals, markings or other traffic regulations and control devices. 
(Code 1977, § 19-27) 
Sec. 98-7. - Manner of driving vehicles in certain parking lots. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any automobile, truck, motor scooter or other self-propelled vehicle upon any parking lot, for which no charge is made for parking thereon, in excess of 20 miles per hour or in willful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property. 
(Code 1977, § 19-29) 
Sec. 98-8. - Interfering with traffic for the purpose of soliciting or distributing material. 
(a)  No person shall solicit contributions or pass out material on behalf of any person or organization on any public street by setting up a roadblock or otherwise interfering with traffic. 
(b)  Any person guilty of soliciting contributions or passing out any material in violation of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-4. Each offense and each day's continuance of the offense shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1977, § 19-30) 
Sec. 98-9. - Funeral processions; identification. 
    A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified in a manner designated by the police department. 
(Code 1977, § 19-19) 
Sec. 98-10. - Sight distance triangles; visual obstructions. 
(a)  At any intersection of two public roads, a 55-foot sight distance triangle must provide for an unobstructed view across the triangle formed by joining points measured 55 feet distant along the property line from the intersection of the two streets. 
(b)  Within the area of the triangle there must be no sight obscuring wall, fence, sign, foliage or berming higher than 24 inches above the curb grade or, in the case of trees, foliage lower than eight feet. 
(c)  Vertical measurement must be made from the flowlines of the two streets forming the triangle or if no gutter exists from the edge of the nearest traveled way. 
(d)  Objects that may be located in the triangular area are items such as hydrants, utility poles, utility junction boxes and traffic control devices. These must be located to minimize visual obstruction. For rounded property corners, the triangular area must be between the property lines extended and diagonal line joining the points on the property lines, 55 feet from the point of their intersection. 
(e)  Subsections (a)-(d) also apply to intersections of public roads and railroad rights-of-way at railroad crossings not controlled by gates or flashing lights. 
(Code 1977, § 19-20) 
Sec. 98-11. - Failure to remove visual obstructions. 
(a)  Should the owner or person in charge of any premises fail or refuse to remove any obstruction prohibited by section 98-10 within ten days after written notice by the city engineer or his duly authorized representative, such owner or person shall be guilty of an offense against the city. A notice shall be sent by certified mail or by personal service. 
(b)  If such owner or person in possession of such premises shall fail or refuse to remove any such obstruction within ten days after such written notice, such obstruction shall be removed by the city under the supervision of the city engineering department. The cost of such removal shall constitute a charge and lien on the property and be due by such owner or person in possession, or both. 
(Code 1977, § 19-21) 
Secs. 98-12-98-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 98-41. - Enforcement of chapter generally. 
(a)  In addition to any specific duties of this chapter, it shall be the duty of the police department to investigate traffic accidents and to arrest and to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of this chapter. 
(b)  In addition to any specific duties of this chapter, the engineering department shall be generally responsible for all traffic control devices, markings, signs and other physical methods of traffic control as related to traffic engineering, except county, state and federal routes other than by agreement. 
(Code 1977, § 19-2) 
Sec. 98-42. - Official traffic control devices-Compliance; authority to install. 
    All traffic along the streets wherein official traffic control signs, signals, devices or markings are installed shall comply therewith. The failure of any driver or pedestrian to do so shall constitute an offense against the city. Except as provided in section 98-41(b), the city traffic engineer is authorized to install and maintain and to remove such signs, signals, devices and markings as may be deemed appropriate to regulate traffic on the streets. All such acts are hereby approved and confirmed by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1977, § 19-3) 
Sec. 98-43. - Same-Duty as to installation and timing; analysis of traffic accidents, conditions and operation; remedial measures. 
    Except as provided in section 98-41(b), it shall be the general duty of the traffic engineer to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic control devices, signs, signals and markings; to conduct the analysis of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures; to conduct the investigation of traffic conditions; and to plan the operation of traffic on the streets in the city. 
(Code 1977, § 19-4) 
Sec. 98-44. - Restrictions upon use of streets by certain vehicles and pedestrians. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate those heavily traveled streets upon which shall be prohibited the use of the roadway by motor-driven cycles, bicycles, horse-drawn vehicles or other nonmotorized traffic and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(b)  When signs are so erected, giving notice thereof, no person shall disobey the restrictions stated on the signs. 
(c)  When appropriate official signs are so erected, giving notice thereof, no person shall: 
(1)  As a pedestrian, occupy any space within the limits of the roadway of a controlled access highway except in the performance of public works or official duties, as a result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown of a motor vehicle, or to obtain assistance. 
(2)  Occupy any space within the limits of the roadway of a controlled access highway with an animal-drawn vehicle, a ridden or led animal, herded animals, a pushcart, a bicycle with a motor attached, parades, a motor-driven cycle with a motor which produces less than five brake horsepower, funeral processions, an agricultural tractor or farm machinery, except in the performance of public works or official duties. 
(Code 1977, § 19-22) 
Sec. 98-45. - Records of traffic infractions. 
    The municipal court shall keep a record of all violations of the traffic ordinances of this city or vehicle laws of the state that occur within the corporate limits of this city or the police jurisdiction of the city, together with a record of the final disposition of all such alleged offenses. Such record shall be maintained in accordance with state law or rule and as required by the municipal court. 
(Code 1977, § 19-5) 
Sec. 98-46. - Accident files to be maintained. 
    The police department shall maintain a suitable record of all traffic accidents reported for each driver. 
(Code 1977, § 19-6) 
Sec. 98-47. - Records of accidents. 
    The police department shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Such reports shall be available for the use and information of the public. 
(Code 1977, § 19-7) 
Sec. 98-48. - Studies of concentrated traffic accident locations. 
    Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the traffic engineer shall conduct studies of such accidents and determine remedial measures. 
(Code 1977, § 19-8) 
Sec. 98-49. - Traffic report. 
    The police department shall prepare a traffic report, with regard to traffic accident data, annually or at the request of the commission. 
(Code 1977, § 19-9) 
Sec. 98-50. - Emergency regulations. 
    The chief of police and the city engineer are empowered and directed to make effective the provisions of this chapter and to make and enforce temporary regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions as allowed by state law. Such temporary regulations shall remain in effect until the emergency no longer exists. The city manager will be informed immediately of any action under this section. 
(Code 1977, § 19-10) 
Sec. 98-51. - Citation on illegally parked vehicle; attaching; contents. 
    Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by this chapter, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration number and may identify its user, as well as any other facts, and shall conspicuously affix a citation to such vehicle on a form provided by the city, notifying the driver to answer to the charge against him within 14 days at a place specified in the citation. Proof that the vehicle was registered to a person on the date of the citation shall be prima facie evidence that such registered owner is responsible for such act. 
(Code 1977, § 19-12) 
Sec. 98-52. - Fines and forfeitures-Schedule; disposition. 
(a)  Schedule of fines for traffic infractions. If a defendant in a municipal court case elects to plead guilty before a magistrate to one of the traffic offenses listed in the following schedule, the fine established in the schedule shall apply: 
Offenses      Fines 
Driving on wrong side of road ..... $ 30.00 
Failure to dim headlights ..... 10.00 
Failure to stop at railroad crossing ..... 10.00 
Failure to use child restraint ..... 10.00 
Failure to wear safety belt ..... 10.00 
Failure to yield right-of-way ..... 20.00 
Following too closely ..... 20.00 
Improper backing ..... 20.00 
Improper brakes ..... 20.00 
Improper lights ..... 20.00 
Improper muffler ..... 10.00 
Improper or no rearview mirror ..... 20.00 
Improper passing ..... 20.00 
Improper signal ..... 10.00 
Improper tag ..... 25.00 
Improper tires ..... 20.00 
Improper turn ..... 20.00 
No helmet (motorcycle rider) ..... 10.00 
Running red light ..... 20.00 
Running stop sign ..... 20.00 
Speeding: 
Less than 25 mph over posted speed limit ..... 20.00 
25 mph or more over posted speed limit ..... 40.00 
Stopping on highway ..... 30.00 
Violating driver's license restriction or endorsement ..... 10.00 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.J.A. Rule 20. 
(b)  The fine schedule for moving violations not covered by the Alabama Uniform Traffic Citation Law is as follows, plus court costs, as applicable: 
(1)  Cutting corner to avoid traffic sign or signal ..... $ 20.00 
(2)  Disobeying lane marker ..... 20.00 
(3)  Failure to yield to emergency vehicle ..... 50.00 
(4)  Failure to stop for school bus ..... 50.00 
(5)  Following emergency vehicle ..... 25.00 
(6)  Speeding in school zone ..... 50.00 
(7)  Running over fire hose ..... 20.00 
(8)  Failing to display slow moving vehicle sign ..... 10.00 
(9)  Littering ..... 100.00 
(10)  Improper lane change ..... 20.00 
(11)  Violating D.L. restriction code ..... 20.00 
(12)  Violation of truck route ordinance ..... 100.00 
(13)  One-way street violation ..... 20.00 
(c)  The fine schedule for nonmoving violations is as follows, plus court costs, as applicable: 
(1)  Overtime parking ..... $ 10.00 
(2)  Double parking ..... 10.00 
(3)  Improper parking ..... 10.00 
(4)  Prohibited parking ..... 10.00 
(5)  Blocking traffic ..... 10.00 
(6)  Parking in loading zone ..... 10.00 
(7)  Blocking sidewalk ..... 10.00 
(8)  Blocking driveway ..... 20.00 
(9)  Parking in restricted parking areas ..... 10.00 
(10)  Parking in reserved parking areas ..... 10.00 
(11)  Wrong direction violation ..... 10.00 
(12)  Fire lane violation ..... 20.00 
(13)  Parking in handicapped-reserved spaces ..... 50.00 
(14)  Miscellaneous violation ..... 10.00 
(d)  All fines or forfeitures collected upon conviction or upon the forfeiture of bail of any person shall be deposited in accordance with city policy and with the state law. 
(Code 1977, § 19-16; Ord. No. 2003-304, § 1, 10-21-03) 
Sec. 98-53. - Same-Noncompliance constitutes official misconduct. 
    Failure, refusal or neglect on the part of any judicial or other officer or employee receiving or having custody of any such fine or forfeiture to comply with the provisions of section 90-52(d), shall constitute misconduct in office and shall be grounds for removal therefrom. 
(Code 1977, § 19-17) 
Sec. 98-54. - Audit of record and reports. 
    The records of state uniform traffic citations, other forms of traffic charges and warrants issued therefor required in this chapter shall be audited at least annually by a person designated by the commission to make annual financial audits. That person shall submit a report of such audit, together with a summary thereof to the commission. Such reports shall be public records. 
(Code 1977, § 19-18) 
Secs. 98-55-98-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARKING, STANDING AND STOPPING 

Sec. 98-86. - Parallel parking required unless otherwise indicated. 
(a)  No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon a public street in a business district or other heavily traveled street, whether marked to designate parking or not, other than parallel, with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within 18 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway, except as otherwise provided in this article. Vehicles may be parked on the shoulder of the roadway, if they are at least two feet from the edge of the roadway, unless otherwise prohibited. 
(b)  Where signs are placed or erected or spaces are clearly marked off in a block, giving notice of parallel or angle parking, as the case may be, no person shall park a vehicle to the contrary or allow such vehicle to obstruct others from parking as directed. 
(Code 1977, § 19-32) 
Sec. 98-87. - Use of street and right-of-way. 
(a)  Except for public service signs, motorist information signs and public conveniences specifically approved by the board of commissioners or the state highway department, it shall be unlawful for any person to park or place any vehicle, equipment or object, including automobiles, trailers, mobile homes, signs and other vehicles, equipment or objects on any street or public right-of-way for the purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying such vehicles, equipment or objects for sale, lease or hire; storing such vehicles, equipment or objects; or using such vehicles, equipment or objects for advertising purposes, except advertising which is incidental to the normal operation of such vehicle, equipment or object. 
(2)  Working on, greasing or repairing such vehicles, equipment or objects, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to stand, sit or walk on any street or public right-of-way for the purpose of advertising any product or service. 
(c)  Violation of this section shall be punishable as provided for in section 1-4. 
(Code 1977, § 19-33) 
Sec. 98-88. - Parking on city premises. 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle on the premises of the city where such space has been reserved, and notice of such reservation is given, by placing notice thereof at such space. 
(b)  Persons shall park vehicles only in an area designated for parking and for a time not exceeding the posted time limit as applicable. 
(Code 1977, § 19-34) 
Sec. 98-89. - Violations of article. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or operated by such person to be parked overtime or beyond the period of the maximum legal parking time established; 
(2)  Permit any vehicle to remain or be placed in any parking space when the vehicle occupying such parking space has already been parked beyond the period of the maximum legal parking time established; or 
(3)  Park any vehicle across any line or markings of a parking space or in such position that the vehicle shall not be entirely within the area designated by such lines or markings. 
(Code 1977, § 19-35) 
Sec. 98-90. - Parking in violation of yellow-painted curb or of signs. 
    No persons shall park a motor vehicle in any prohibited area when such area is properly marked by curbs painted yellow or notice is given by installed signs to persons engaged in maintenance or construction of streets, drainage or utilities, properly authorized or permitted by the city engineer, nor to the driver of any ambulance while picking up or discharging any ill, injured or deceased person. 
(Code 1977, § 19-36) 
Sec. 98-91. - Vehicles heavier than one ton; prohibited and permitted parking. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to stop, stand or park a trailer, tractor, truck or other motor-operated vehicle heavier than a one-ton pickup truck at any time on the public streets in residential sections of the city, except while the operator of such vehicle is actually engaged in loading or unloading lawful contents to or from such vehicle, and except during an emergency or in compliance with the law or the directions of a police officer or other traffic control device or markings. 
(Code 1977, § 19-37) 
Sec. 98-92. - Parking spaces designated for physically handicapped persons. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to designate marked parking spaces within any private parking lot in the city limits, serving the general public and having 25 spaces or more, within any city block or upon any city property for the exclusive parking of motor vehicles driven by or in use by physically handicapped persons. 
(b)  Parking spaces for the handicapped will be designated by the international parking sign for the handicapped. 
(c)  Permits for the parking of vehicles operated by physically handicapped persons in parking spaces designated for such purpose are those permits issued by the judge of probate or license commissioner, as set out and regulated by Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-6-231. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for: 
(1)  Any person to park any vehicle not displaying the permit in an area designated for handicapped parking; or 
(2)  For the registered owner of a vehicle to allow his vehicle to be so parked. 
(e)  Proof that the vehicle was registered to such person on the day of the violation shall be prima facie evidence that such registered owner is responsible for such act. 
(Code 1977, § 19-38) 
Secs. 98-93-98-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TRUCKS AND COMMERCIAL VEHICLES 

Sec. 98-126. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial vehicle means those vehicles which have three or more axles and/or are 33 feet or more in length, including those vehicles with enclosed or open bodies attached to the chassis and trailers when attached to power-driven units, but shall not include city vehicles, school buses, recreational vehicles, vehicles housing mobile health clinic units and equipment providing physical screening processes in or on such units. 
(Code 1977, § 19-25(c)) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 98-127. - Authority of traffic engineer to designate load restrictions on certain streets. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized, on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, to impose gross weight limits and to erect and maintain official traffic-control devices on any streets or parts of streets to prohibit the operation of vehicles exceeding such posted weights at any time on any of the streets or parts of streets designated by the city traffic engineer; provided, however, that such devices shall not prohibit necessary local operation on such streets for the purpose of making a pickup or delivery. 
(b)  The city traffic engineer shall maintain a current copy of a schedule, designating such streets and parts of streets so regulated, on file in the office of the city clerk and in the office of the city traffic engineer. 
(c)  When signs are erected giving notice, no person shall operate any vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the amounts designated by the city traffic engineer at any time upon any of the streets or parts of streets specified by the city traffic engineer, unless such person shall have first obtained a special written permit from the city traffic engineer. 
(Code 1977, § 19-23) 
State Law reference- Size and weight of vehicles, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-9-20 et seq. 
Sec. 98-128. - Operation of oversize vehicles and loads; scope of permit requirements. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or move on any public street within the city, or the police jurisdiction of the city, any motor vehicle or load thereon which exceeds the maximum width, height and length prescribed by state law or city ordinance, unless such person shall have obtained a special written permit approved by the police department and traffic engineer, except for the moving of buildings, which requirements are in sections 14-1, 14-27 and subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Application for such special permit must be made not less than 24 hours before such motor vehicle or load is to be driven or moved upon such streets. The applicant shall pay the cost of any city services required for the move, such as police escort, utility relocation, etc. For police escort, the application for the permit shall be accompanied by minimum fee of $100.00 which shall cover the costs of up to two hours for two officers to provide police escort. If the moving time exceeds two hours, the applicant shall be billed for the additional time at $40.00 per hour for each officer assigned to the escort. Building moving requires additional costs as prescribed in sections 14-1 and 14-27. The minimum escort service fee for building moving shall be paid in conjunction with the building permit and in addition to the fees required in chapter 14. 
(c)  Such permits shall be issued and may be renewed upon such terms and conditions in the interest of public safety and the preservation of the public streets as the city traffic engineer may, in his discretion, require. He may designate the route over which such vehicle may be moved and the hours of movement of the vehicle in coordination with the police department. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall apply to the movement of any such motor vehicle on any state highway where the driver of such motor vehicle has first obtained a special permit from the director of the state highway department for such movement over such state highways within the city limits as provided by law. 
(Code 1977, § 19-24) 
State Law reference- Size and weight of vehicles, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-9-20 et seq. 
Sec. 98-129. - Authority of traffic engineer to restrict operation of commercial vehicles to designated truck routes. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized, on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, to designate truck routes, in addition to those designated in this section, upon which commercial vehicles are restricted and to erect and maintain official traffic control devices on any streets or parts of streets restricting the operation of commercial vehicles to the streets or parts of streets designated by the city traffic engineer; provided, however, that such devices shall not prohibit necessary local operation on such streets for the purpose of making a pickup or delivery. 
(b)  The city traffic engineer shall maintain a current copy of a schedule, designating such streets and parts of streets so regulated, on file in the office of the city clerk and in the office of the city traffic engineer. 
(c)  No person shall operate any commercial vehicle on any street or part of a street, except a street designated as a truck route by the city traffic engineer; provided, however, that a driver may operate such a vehicle on a street not designated as a truck route for the purpose of making a delivery, loading or servicing by leaving a street designated as a truck route at an intersection which is nearest the place of delivery, loading or servicing, proceeding by the most direct route and then returning to the nearest street designated as a truck route by the most direct route; and provided further that a driver of such a vehicle may enter the city from a street or road outside of the city and operate such a vehicle on a street not designated as a truck route for the purpose of making a delivery, loading or servicing at a location nearer by the most direct route to the point of entry than from any street designated as a truck route; provided that such driver proceeds to such location by the most direct route from the point of entry and, after making such delivery, loading or servicing, returns by the most direct route to the point of entry. 
(d)  The following city streets are hereby designated as truck routes: 
Murray Road, from the intersection of Zenith Road eastwardly to U.S. Hwy. 431 North; Zenith Road, Rogers Road, Loftin Road, Speigner Road, Twitchell Road; Wilson Street, from the intersection of U.S. Hwy. 431 North to Twitchell Road; Bic Road, Jeffcoat Industrial Drive, Miskell Drive, Sinnett Avenue, Merrill Road; Wilson Street, from the intersection of North Range to Kinsey Road; Old Kinsey Road, from the intersection of Wilson Street to Sinnett Avenue; Wiregrass Way, Circle Drive, Wedgewood Drive, Phil Forrester Road, Kelley Drive; North Beverlye Road, from the intersection of Kelley Drive northerly to AL Highway 52; Woodburn Drive, from the intersection of Edgefield Drive to the intersection of U.S. Hwy. 84 West; West Carroll Street, between Ross Clark Circle and U.S. Hwy. 231 South; South Park, between West Carroll and Ross Clark Circle; Southgate Road, Inez Road; Westgate Parkway, from 2,000 feet west of Seaboard Coastline Railroad to the intersection with U.S. Highway 431; Headland Avenue, from the intersection of Westgate Parkway to Ross Clark Circle; Harrison Road from the intersection of Technology Drive to Mance Newton Road; Mance Newton Road, from the intersection of Harrison Road to the Dothan City Limits; Technology Drive, from the intersection of Headland Avenue to Harrison Road; Range Street, from the intersection of Wilson Street to the Ross Clark Circle; and Hodgesville Road from the Ross Clark Circle to the Flying J. truck access. 
(e)  Ross Clark Circle is designated as the through commercial vehicle route, thereby no through commercial vehicle shall be permitted on any city route inside the Ross Clark Circle. Signs shall be erected and maintained by the state department of transportation directing through commercial vehicles to the Ross Clark Circle. Commercial vehicles needing to access areas for pickup, delivery, or providing services inside the Ross Clark Circle shall enter on the intersecting street that provides the nearest access point to the destination. The city can place no restrictions on commercial vehicle traffic on federal and state highways, except where approved by the state department of transportation. 
(Code 1977, § 19-25; Ord. No. 2005-224, § 1, 8-9-05) 
Secs. 98-130-98-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ABANDONED VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Abandoned motor vehicles generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-13-1 et seq. 

Sec. 98-161. - Abandoning vehicles or property on streets. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any vehicle or other property to be abandoned, unclaimed or unattended upon any street or city premises within the city or within its police jurisdiction for a period of over seven calendar days. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any partially dismantled or nonoperating or wrecked or junked or discarded vehicle or any vehicle without a current tag or any combination thereof to be kept on private real property for more than seven consecutive calendar days. This shall not prevent a person from working on one private vehicle for the purpose of restoration, provided the vehicle is kept within a completely screened enclosure, nor shall this subsection apply to vehicles being repaired on the premises of licensed automobile repair shops or body repair shops, provided that such vehicles are kept within a completely screened enclosure, or to automobiles on the premises of licensed junkyards, auto wrecking yards or auto salvage yards, provided that such vehicles are kept within a completely screened enclosure which will limit or otherwise obstruct the public's view of such vehicles. Any vehicle remaining on the premises of an automobile repair shop or a body repair shop for more than 90 days shall be deemed to be in violation of this section. 
(Code 1977, § 19-50) 
Sec. 98-162. - Impounding authorized; procedures. 
(a)  Conditions warranting impoundment. Members of the police department are hereby authorized to remove a vehicle or other property from a public street or city premises to the nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage or place designated or maintained by the police department, under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Violation of section 98-161; 
(2)  When a vehicle stopped or parked upon a public street constitutes an obstruction to traffic, and the person in charge of the vehicle refuses to move it or, by reasons of physical injury, is incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal; or 
(3)  When a vehicle constitutes a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic and is left unattended upon a public street. 
(b)  Notice to owner upon removal. Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street or city premises, and the officer knows or is able to ascertain from the registration records in the vehicle the name and address of the owner thereof, such officer shall immediately give, or cause to be given, notice in writing to such owner of the fact of such removal and the reasons therefor and of the place to which such vehicle has been removed. Such officer shall, within five days, notify the state as required by Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-13-2(c). If any such vehicle is stored in a public garage, a copy of such notice shall be given to the proprietor of such garage. 
(c)  Notification by mail, delivery or publication; citation for violation. Whenever it is determined that a violation of subsection 98-161(b) exists, the owner, occupant or user of the private real property shall be notified in writing of the violation by certified mail or delivery by a uniformed police officer or, if the owner, occupant or user cannot be determined or located, by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. If the violation is not corrected within seven calendar days after the delivery or publishing of such notice, members of the police department are hereby authorized to issue a citation for any violation of subsection 98-161(b) which shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. The owner, occupant or user of private real property shall be responsible for such property. Each day's violation is a separate offense. 
(d)  Removal authority. Whenever an officer removes or causes a vehicle or property to be removed from a public street, such officer or those ordered by him to remove such vehicle or property, whether by hand, wrecker or otherwise, shall be deemed and considered as performing a duty of the police department and acting in a governmental capacity. 
(Code 1977, § 19-51) 
State Law reference- Related provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-47-116 and 32-13-1 et seq. 
Sec. 98-163. - Records; storage; immediate sale of perishables. 
(a)  A permanent record shall be kept by the chief of police, giving the date of the taking of each piece of such property, the place where it was found and taken and the description of the property. The property so taken shall be stored in a suitable place to protect it from deterioration; provided, however, that if the property is perishable, the property may be sold at once, without notice; in which case, the proceeds shall be held for a period of six months for the account of the owner and, if not called for within that time, shall be converted into the general fund. 
(b)  This section is not applicable to some items governed by state law, such as firearms and liquor. 
(Code 1977, § 19-52) 
Sec. 98-164. - Redemption costs; release. 
    In addition to fines and costs imposed by the municipal judge for violation of traffic regulations, those found guilty of such violation shall be required to pay the cost of removing illegally parked vehicles or property and the storage costs. No vehicle or property shall be released from storage, except upon the written order of the chief of police or his duly authorized representative. 
(Code 1977, § 19-53) 
Sec. 98-165. - When redemption authorized; rejection of bids; disposition of proceeds. 
(a)  The owner of the property taken up and stored may redeem the same at any time prior to its sale by paying the reasonable expense of taking the property in charge, its storage and maintenance and the pro rata cost of publication. 
(b)  Each article shall be sold separately and a notation recorded of the sale, which shall be kept by the chief of police, of the amount received for each article. 
(c)  The person making the sale shall have the right to reject any or all bids, if the amount bid is unreasonably low, and shall have the right to continue the sales from time to time, if no bidders are present or the amount bid is unreasonably low. 
(d)  All expenses incurred in taking up, storing, maintaining and selling the property shall be paid from the general fund of the city upon the approval of the chief of police and the commission. The gross amount of sales shall be deposited in accordance with city policy immediately after each sale. 
(Code 1977, § 19-54) 
Sec. 98-166. - Sale at public auction. 
    At least every six months, the chief of police shall sell, at public auction to the highest bidder for cash in front of the county courthouse, the property which shall have been taken up and stored for a period of three months or more. Such sales shall be made after notice of the time and place thereof is made by publication once a week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The first publication shall be at least 20 days before the sale. 
(Code 1977, § 19-55) 
State Law reference- Taking up, storing, etc., of personal property, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-116. 
Secs. 98-167-98-195. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BICYCLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Bicycles generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-260 et seq. 

Sec. 98-196. - Application of article. 
(a)  The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  This article shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any public street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated in this article. 
(Code 1977, § 19-59) 
Sec. 98-197. - Riding and carrying passengers. 
(a)  A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto. 
(b)  No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. 
(Code 1977, § 19-60) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-261. 
Sec. 98-198. - Clinging to motorized vehicles while on bicycles, coasters, rollerskates, skateboards, sleds or other toy vehicles. 
    No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, skateboard, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any motorized vehicle upon a public street. 
(Code 1977, § 19-61) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-262. 
Sec. 98-199. - Riding on public streets and bicycle paths. 
(a)  Every person operating a bicycle upon a public street shall follow all traffic signs and signals and obey the rules of the road and shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction. 
(b)  Persons riding bicycles upon a public street shall not ride more than two abreast, except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. 
(c)  Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway. 
(Code 1977, § 19-62) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-263. 
Sec. 98-200. - Carrying articles. 
    No person operating a bicycle on a public street shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars. 
(Code 1977, § 19-63) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-264. 
Sec. 98-201. - Lamps and other equipment. 
(a)  Every bicycle, when in use at nighttime, shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type which shall be visible from all distances from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. 
(b)  Every bicycle shall be equipped with an adequate brake. 
(Code 1977, § 19-64) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-265. 
Sec. 98-202. - Riding on sidewalks. 
    Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. 
(Code 1977, § 19-65) 
Sec. 98-203. - Speed. 
    No person shall operate a bicycle on public streets at a speed greater than that allowed for motorized vehicles. 
(Code 1977, § 19-66) 
Sec. 98-204. - Parking. 
    Bicycles parked upon a street shall only be parked against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or at the curb in such a manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. 
(Code 1977, § 19-67) 
Secs. 98-205-98-235. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PARADES AND PROCESSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 98-236. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Chief of police means the chief of police of the city. 
    Downtown area means that section of the city lying aside the area of the Ross Clark Circle. 
    Footrace means an athletic event involving two or more persons for the purpose of competition, recreation or for the purpose of promotional publicity. 
    Parade means any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, footrace or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, park or other public place in the city. 
    Parade permit means a permit as required by this article. 
    Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
    Public assembly means any gathering of persons on public streets or other public places for the purposes of conducting social, recreational or residential functions. 
    Public assembly permit means a permit as required by this article. 
    Traffic means both vehicles and pedestrians. 
(Code 1977, § 19-70) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 98-237. - Public conduct during parades or public assemblies. 
(a)  Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or interfere with any parade or public assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade or public assembly. 
(b)  Driving through parades. No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade, unless specifically authorized to do so by law enforcement officers. 
(c)  Parking on parade route. The chief of police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The chief of police shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this article. 
(Code 1977, § 19-79) 
Sec. 98-238. - Climbing, standing, sitting on buildings, poles, trees in business district to view parades, exhibitions or displays. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to climb, stand or sit upon the side or top of any building, pole or structure or in any tree, within any business district of the city in order to view any parade, exhibition or display, if such climbing, standing or sitting may endanger the safety of persons or property below, or if prohibited on such occasion by any officer of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 9-9) 
Sec. 98-239. - Obstructing streets by assembling. 
    Any person who shall assemble a crowd or hold a public meeting in any street without a permit from the police department, as provided in section 98-266, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-4. 
(Code 1977, § 19-81) 
Secs. 98-240-98-265. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 98-266. - Required; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade or public assembly, unless a parade or public assembly permit shall have been obtained from the chief of police or other appropriate official or body. 
(b)  This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Funeral processions; or 
(2)  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. 
(Code 1977, § 19-71) 
Sec. 98-267. - Application. 
    A person seeking issuance of a parade or public assembly permit shall file an application with the chief of police on forms provided by such officers as follows: 
(1)  Filing period. An application for a parade or public assembly permit shall be filed with the chief of police not less than ten days nor more than 20 days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade. 
(2)  Contents. The application for a parade or public assembly permit shall set forth the following information: 
a.  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade or public assembly. 
b.  If the parade or public assembly is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by any organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization. 
c.  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade or public assembly chairman who will be responsible for its conduct. 
d.  The date when the parade or public assembly is to be conducted. 
e.  The hours when such parade or public assembly will start and terminate. 
f.  A statement as to whether the parade or public assembly will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed. 
g.  The location by street address of any assembly areas for such parade or public assembly. 
h.  The time at which units of the parade or public assembly will begin to assemble at any such assembly area. 
i.  The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade. 
j.  If the parade or public assembly is designed to be held by and on behalf of or for any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the chief of police a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade or public assembly authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf. 
k.  The approximate number of units and participants in the parade. 
(3)  Late applications. The chief of police, where good cause is shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application under this article which is filed less than one day before the date such parade or public assembly is proposed to be conducted. 
(Code 1977, § 19-72) 
Sec. 98-268. - Standards for issuance. 
(a)  The chief of police shall issue a permit, as provided for under this article, when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade or public assembly will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route or location. 
(2)  The conduct of the parade or public assembly will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city. 
(3)  The conduct of such parade or public assembly will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto. 
(4)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas. 
(5)  The conduct of such parade or public assembly will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire. 
(6)  The conduct of the parade or public assembly is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or to create a disturbance. 
(7)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route. 
(8)  The parade or public assembly is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, goods or event and is not designed to be held purely for private profit. 
(9)  If he deems necessary, he may require the applicant to designate a certain number of parade marshals who shall be responsible for conducting the parade or assembly in an orderly manner. 
(b)  Restrictions on the issuance of permits are as follows: 
(1)  The only parades authorized to utilize Main Street are the annual National Peanut Festival Parade, the Azalea-Dogwood Parade, the Christmas Parade and the Veteran's Day Parade. Others may utilize Main Street as a parade route only upon prior approval of the board of commissioners and upon acquiring a permit from the chief of police. 
(2)  Assembly permits for neighborhood gatherings must be cleared by the police and fire department prior to approval by the chief of police. Petitioners will be required to engage security and traffic control personnel if deemed necessary by either the police chief or the fire chief. 
(Code 1977, § 19-72.1) 
Sec. 98-269. - Contents. 
    Each parade or public assembly permit shall state the following information: 
(1)  The starting or beginning time. 
(2)  The minimum speed, if applicable. 
(3)  The maximum speed, if applicable. 
(4)  The maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade or public assembly, if applicable. 
(5)  The portions of the streets to be traversed or utilized. 
(6)  The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof, if applicable. 
(7)  Such other information as the chief of police shall find necessary to the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1977, § 19-77) 
Sec. 98-270. - Notice of rejection. 
    The chief of police shall act upon the application for a parade permit within five working days after the filing of such application. If the chief of police disapproves the application, he shall mail to the applicant, within five working days after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of his action, stating the reasons for his denial of the permit. 
(Code 1977, § 19-73) 
Sec. 98-271. - Appeal procedure. 
    Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade or public assembly permit to the board of commissioners. The appeal shall be taken within five working days after denial. The board of commissioners shall act upon the appeal at the next regularly scheduled commission meeting. 
(Code 1977, § 19-74) 
Sec. 98-272. - Alternative permit. 
    The chief of police, in denying an application for a parade or public assembly permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of a parade or public assembly on a date, at a time or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within seven days after notice of the action of the chief of police, file a written notice of acceptance with the chief of police. An alternate parade or public assembly permit shall conform to the requirements of and shall have the effect of a parade or public assembly permit under this article. 
(Code 1977, § 19-75) 
Sec. 98-273. - Notice by police chief to city and other officials. 
    Immediately upon the issuance of a parade or public assembly permit, the chief of police shall send a copy thereof to the following: 
(1)  The mayor. 
(2)  The chief operating officer. 
(3)  The city attorney. 
(4)  The fire chief. 
(5)  The city engineer. 
(6)  The board of commissioners. 
(7)  The city manager. 
(Code 1977, § 19-76) 
Sec. 98-274. - Duties of permittee. 
(a)  Compliance with laws. A permittee under this article shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(b)  Possession of permit. The parade or public assembly chairman or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade or public assembly. 
(Code 1977, § 19-78) 
Sec. 98-275. - Revocation. 
    The chief of police shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued under this article upon application of the standards for issuance as set forth in this division. 
(Code 1977, § 19-80) 
Secs. 98-276-98-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - NEIGHBORHOOD TRAFFIC CALMING 

Sec. 98-300. - Purpose of article. 
    Vehicle speeding in residential neighborhoods is one of the most common traffic complaints reported to the traffic engineering services division and the city's police department. 
    Residents express their concerns about speeding in a number of ways which include: the danger to children playing outdoors, depressed property values, increased noise, and hazards to pedestrians and bicycle riders. However manifested, the concerns often lead to an effort to convince elected officials to take action to alleviate the problem with unwarranted traffic calming devices. 
    The purpose of this article is to present a criteria for reasonable and consistent evaluations as well as the applications of appropriate measures to control excessive speeding in residential areas. 
(Ord. No. 2007-48, § 1, 2-6-07; Ord. No. 2008-102, § 1, 4-22-08) 
Sec. 98-301. - Implementation. 
    The primary goal of implementing the proposed traffic calming measures is to reduce the impact of vehicles speeding in a residential neighborhood. In order to do this, the following procedure is recommended: 
(1)  Initiation: Speed studies for locations can be proposed by any of the following individuals: 
a.  Mayors office, city commissioners, and the city manager. 
b.  Public works department head and traffic engineering staff. 
c.  Dothan Police Department. 
d.  Citizen request. 
(2)  Data collection: Traffic engineering staff will conduct a speed study (85th percentile speed) and volume study, use existing traffic data, or make field observations for the requested street. The 85th percentile speed is the speed at, or below which 85 percent of the observed free flowing vehicles are traveling, and will be used as a measurement to determine if excessive speeding is occurring. 
(3)  Classification: The speed data will be analyzed to make sure that the data is correct and then will be classified into one of the following categories: 
a.  Class I (Minor): Measured 85th percentile speed is one to seven miles per hour above the posted speed limit. 
b.  Class II (Major): Measured 85th percentile speed is eight miles per hour or greater above the posted spped limit. 
(4)  Measures: Based on the classification of the vehicle speeds the following measures will be implemented: 
a.  Class I (Minor): Since the excessive speed is within the range of error of our equipment, a traffic calming petition will not be issued. 
b.  Class II (Major): If Class II speeding exists then the traffic engineering services division may consider the following traffic calming devices: 
1.  Multi-way stop: A sign stop at each approach of an intersection to slow down vehicles along the main street. It is the city's policy not to install multi-way stops at T-intersections. 
2.  Chokers: The installation of devices to narrow the lanes to slow vehicles down. 
3.  Speed humps: Raised areas, typically 2.5 inches by 22 feet by 12 feet, made of asphalt that are placed in a series at mid-block locations. 
4.  Traffic circles: Small islands in the center of an intersection. Edges are typically slope paved to accommodate larger vehicles and the center can be landscaped to be more aesthetically pleasing. 
(Ord. No. 2008-102, § 1, 4-22-08) 
Sec. 98-302. - Conditions for installing neighborhood traffic calming devices. 
(a)  Specifications. All traffic calming devices shall adhere to city specifications this includes, but not limited to speed humps, traffic circles, and chokers. 
(b)  Streets. Traffic calming devices will be considered for installation only on residential streets. The length of the street must be 1/4 mile or longer. 
(c)  Traffic volumes. Vehicle volumes must be at least 200 vehicles per day and not exceed 1,500 vehicles per day. Streets listed on the MPO Network Map or Supplement List in subsection (g) will not be considered for installation of traffic calming devices. These include all arterials and collectors (both major and minor) within the city. 
(d)  Speed. The speed limit for the requested location must be 25 or 30 miles per hour. 
(e)  Location of chokers and speed humps. Traffic engineering staff will determine the location and spacing of the speed humps or chokers. Factors such as lengths of the block, driveways, and storm drainage structures can affect the placement of these traffic calming measures. 
(f)  Traffic calming study. Once completed, there shall be a minimum of one year before another study will be conducted in the same area. 
(g)  Supplemental list of streets ineligible fro traffic calming. 
Adams Street Lingo Road Airport Drive Loftin Road Alice Street Lonsdale Drive Appletree Street Loraine Road Baggett Road Lucy Grade Road Barrington Road McCallister Road Bic Road Mimosa drive Blackman Toad Miskell Drive Bob Hall Road Moffet Road Briarcliff Road Moore Road Bruner Road Museum Avenue Burdeshaw Street (east and west) National Road Burkett Road Newton Street Carroll Street Oppert Road Catalpa Avenue Parramore Road Cherokee Avenue (north and south) Piney Road Grove Cherry Street Plum Road Chickasaw Street Powell Street Coe Dairy Road Race Track Road Crawford Street Redmond Road Dale County Road 25 Rollins Avenue Dale County Road 79 Rowland Road Drew Road Royal Parkway Dunn Road Sanitary Dairy Road Dusy Street Second Avenue Earline Road Selma Street (east and west) Edgewood Drive Shady Lane (north and south) Ennis Road Simms Road Fairview Avenue Smith Road Faulkner Street Southgate Road Festival Drive Speigner Street First Avenue Stadium Street Foster Street Starling Road Franklin Street Stephanie Lane Fuller Road Technology Drive Geiger Road Timbers Drive Green Valley Road Troy Street Grey Hodges Road Twitchell Road Haisten Drive Vulcan Way Hedstrom Drive Wallace Drive Hicks Road Washington Street Horace Shepard Road Wayne Road Hostdale Drive Wedgewood Drive Huskey Road W.G. Bond Road Industrial Road Whitaker Road Inez Road Wiggins Road J. Steele Road Wilson Street (east and west) Jeffcoat Industrial Drive Wiregrass Drive Kelley Drive Wise Drive Kelly Springs Road Woodburn Drive Kraft Road Woodham Road Lena Street Zenith Road  
(Ord. No. 2007-48, § 1, 2-6-07; Ord. No. 2008-103, § 1, 4-22-08) 
Sec. 98-303. - Notification and petition. 
(a)  After determination of proposed residential traffic calming measures, a petition form to obtain neighborhood approval will be issued by the traffic engineering services division, to the person initiating the request (contact person). City staff will determine a petition area and review the petition to determine support for traffic calming installation. 
(b)  The contact person will obtain all the homeowners' signatures in the affected area, both those in favor of or against the proposed traffic calming measures. The contact person has 90 days to return the completed petition form(s). Seventy-five percent of the residents' signatures in the affected area must be in favor of the proposed traffic calming measures. Each property is entitled to one signature. Valid signatures include those from (1) property owner or spouse, (2) an adult head of household, (3) an adult renting the property. If the property is an apartment complex then the manager of the complex will be the only valid signature. All signatures to "agree" or "disagree" with the petition are final. 
If the necessary signatures for the installation of traffic calming device(s) are not obtained, then no further action will be taken and nothing will be installed. 
(c)  If a location fails to achieve the necessary petition majority within the signature period, the location shall not be reconsidered for a period of one year from the date the signature period expires. 
(Ord. No. 2007-48, § 1, 2-6-07; Ord. No. 2008-103, § 1, 4-22-08) 
Sec. 98-304. - Removal of neighborhood traffic calming devices. 
    The city shall not consider the removal of traffic calming devices until two years after the initial installation in the affected area. After this period, should the residents desire to remove the traffic calming devices, a petition with 75 percent of the residents in favor of the removal must be obtained. This petition must include all of the properties of the original traffic calming study. 
(Ord. No. 2007-48, § 1, 2-6-07; Ord. No. 2008-103, § 1, 4-22-08) 
Secs. 98-305-98-399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDIES (TIS) 

Sec. 98-400. - In general. 
    In order for the city to operate and maintain the roadway network as safely and efficiently as possible, it is necessary to evaluate the impact of development-generated traffic. Such impact can be identified by conducting a traffic impact study (TIS). The objectives of this section are two-fold: 
(1)  To establish the conditions that determine the need for a TIS. 
(2)  To establish the minimum requirements for a TIS in terms of study area, study horizon and study contents. 
(Ord. No. 2007-49, § 1, 2-6-07) 
Sec. 98-401. - Determining the need for a TIS. 
    A TIS prepared by a registered professional engineer is required for any subdivision or commercial development which generates 100 or more gross trips during the morning or afternoon peak hour of the generator. Table 1 shows the thresholds that would trigger the need for a TIS for some of the most common uses. For uses not included in the table, the number of trips generated shall be calculated using the latest edition of Trip Generation, from the Institute of Transportation Engineers. 
Table 1. Thresholds for requiring Traffic Impact Studies 
ITE Code Land Use Unit PEAK HR TRIP/UNIT THRESHOLD RESIDENTIAL 210 Single-family DU 1.02 100 DU 230 Condominium/townhomes DU 0.54 185 DU 220 Apartments DU 0.67 150 DU 240 Mobile home DU 0.58 175 DU 416 RV park SPACE 0.48 210 SPACES 250 Retirement community DU 0.34 295 DU COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL 911 Walk-in bank 1,000 SF 42.02 2,500 SF 912 Drive-in bank 1,000 SF 51.23 2,000 SF 820 Shopping center 1,000 SF 4.97 21,000 SF 850 Supermarket (grocery store) 1,000 SF 12.25 8,000 SF 851 24-hour convenience store 1,000 SF 65.24 1,500 SF 861 Discount club 1,000 SF 6.46 16,000 SF 890 Furniture store 1,000 SF 0.92 109,000 SF 812 Lumber store 1,000 SF 8.38 12,000 SF 816 Hardware/paint store 1,000 SF 11.18 9,000 SF 841 New car sales 1,000 SF 2.97 34,000 SF 840 Vehicle repair (automobile care center) 1,000 SF 4.01 25,000 SF 844 Gas station PUMP 16.18 7 PUMPS 430 Golf course HOLES 4.59 22 HOLES 492 Racquet club COURT 4.66 22 COURTS 493 Health club 1,000 SF 4.30 24,000 SF 831 Quality restaurant 1,000 SF 10.82 10,000 SF 832 Sit-down high turnover restaurant 1,000 SF 19.38 5,000 SF 834 Fast food (with drive-thru) 1,000 SF 72.74 1,500 SF 110 General light industrial 1,000 SF 1.08 93,000 SF 120 General heavy industrial 1,000 SF 0.68 147,000 SF 130 Industrial park 1,000 SF 0.92 109,000 SF 150 Warehousing 1,000 SF 0.61 164,000 SF OFFICES 710 General office building 1,000 SF 1.56 65,000 SF 750 Office park 1,000 SF 1.74 58,000 SF 770 Business parks 1,000 SF 1.43 70,000 SF 760 Research & development Center 1,000 SF 1.24 81,000 SF 730 Government office 1,000 SF 11.03 10,000 SF 720 Medical-dental office buildings 1,000 SF 4.36 23,000 SF INSTITUTIONAL 520 Elementary school STUDENTS 0.30 335 STUDENTS 522 Middle/Junior High school STUDENTS 0.46 220 STUDENTS 530 High school STUDENTS 0.46 220 STUDENTS 565 Day care center STUDENTS 0.86 120 STUDENTS 560 Church 1,000 SF 9.49 11,000 SF  
DU: Dwelling Units SF: Square Feet Gross Floor/Leasable Area 
Example: Medical office building, 15,000 SF 
Peak hour trip rate: 4.36 trips/1,000 SF 
Trip Generation: 15,000 SF × (4.36 trips/1,000 SF) = 65 trips in the peak hour 
    A TIS can also be required by the city even if the proposed development generates less than 100 trips in the peak hour, if there are any current traffic concerns in the local area (such as an offset intersection, or high accident rates), or if there are other traffic specific problems that may be aggravated by the proposed development. 
(Ord. No. 2007-49, § 1, 2-6-07) 
Sec. 98-402. - Categories for TIS. 
    Based on the size and phasing of the proposed development, the following categories of TIS have been established: 
(1)  CATEGORY I. Small developments which generate 100 or more peak hour trips but less than 500 trips during the morning or afternoon peak hour. 
(2)  CATEGORY II. Moderate size developments which generate 500 or more peak hour trips but less than 1,000 trips during the morning or afternoon peak hour. 
(3)  CATEGORY III. Large single-phase developments which generate 1,000 or more trips during the morning or afternoon peak hour. 
(4)  CATEGORY IV. Large multi-phase developments which generate 1,000 or more trips during the morning or afternoon peak hour. 
(Ord. No. 2007-49, § 1, 2-6-07) 
Sec. 98-403. - Scope. 
    The level of detail needed for a TIS depends on the size of the development and its phasing. However, every TIS must address elements such as the study area, the study horizon, data collection requirements, capacity analysis, among others. Those elements are discussed here. 
(1)  Study area. The minimum study area shall be determined by project type and size in accordance with the criteria in Table 2. The study area for the proposed development shall include traffic signal controlled intersections, site access drives and major unsignalized intersections to ensure their operation and level of service are adequately assessed. Unsignalized intersections where at least one of the intersecting streets is a collector or arterial are considered major unsignalized intersections. The extent of the study area may be either enlarged or decreased depending on special conditions as determined by the city traffic engineer. 
(2)  Study horizon. The study horizon years shall be determined by project type and size in accordance with the criteria in Table 2. 
Table 2. Summary of design attributes by functional class 
Study Category Development/Subdivision Characteristics Study Horizons (a) Minimum Study Area (b) I Small development 100-499 peak hour trips 1. Opening year 1. Site access drives 
2. All signalized intersections and/or major unsignalized intersections within 1/4 mile II Moderate development 500-999 peak hour trips 1. Opening year 
2. 5 years after opening 1. Site access drives 
2. All signalized intersections and/or major unsignalized intersections within 1/2 mile III Large single-phase development=1000 peak hour trips 1. Opening year 
2. 5 years after opening 
3. 20 years after opening 1. Site access drives 
2. All signalized intersections and/or major unsignalized intersections within 1 mile IV Large multi-phase development=1000 peak hour trips 1. Opening year of each phase 
2. 5 years after built-out 
3. 20 years after build-out 1. Site access drives 
2. All signalized intersections and/or major unsignalized intersections within 1 mile  
a. Assume full occupancy and built-out for single phase developments. 
b. An enlarged study area may be required. 
(3)  Analysis time period. Both the morning and afternoon weekday peak hours need to be analyzed. If the proposed project is expected to generate no trips or a very low number of trips during either the morning or evening peak period the requirement to analyze such period may be waived by the city traffic engineer. If the peak traffic hour in the study area occurs during a time period other than the normal peak travel periods, these peak hours must also be analyzed. 
(4)  Data collection requirements. All data is to be collected in accordance with the latest edition of the ITE Manual of Transportation Engineering Studies or as directed by the city traffic engineer, if not specifically covered in the ITE manual. 
Turning movement counts shall be obtained for all existing cross-street intersections to be analyzed during the morning and afternoon peak periods. Available turning movement counts may be extrapolated at a maximum of three years with concurrence of the city traffic engineer. 
The current and projected daily traffic volumes shall be presented in the report. Available daily count data may be obtained from the city traffic engineering division and extrapolated a maximum of three years with the concurrence of the city traffic engineer. Where daily count data are not available, mechanical counts may be required at the city traffic engineer's discretion. 
Roadway geometric information shall be obtained for all streets in the study area. This includes: roadway width, number of lanes, turning lanes, vertical grade, location of nearby driveways, and lane configuration at intersections. The location and type of traffic controls shall also be identified. If appropriate, traffic volumes should be adjusted to account for seasonal variations. The use of seasonal adjustment factors should be approved by the city traffic engineer. 
(5)  Trip generation. The latest edition of ITE's Trip Generation shall be used for selecting trip generation rates. The guidelines contained in Trip Generation shall be used to determine whether the average trip generation rate or equation should be used. Other rates may be used with the approval of the city traffic engineer in cases where Trip Generation does not include trip rates for a specific land use category, or includes only limited data, or where local trip rates have been shown to differ from the ITE rates. 
(6)  Trip distribution and assignment. Projected trips shall be distributed and added to the projected non-site traffic on the roadway network. The projected traffic volume must be shown for all roadways internal to the subdivision and for all other roadways within the study area. The specific assumptions and data sources used in deriving trip distribution and assignment shall be documented in the study. 
(7)  Capacity analysis. Level of service (LOS) shall be computed for signalized and major unsignalized intersections as identified in Table 1, in accordance with the latest edition of the Highway Capacity Manual. For rural highways where the signalized intersections are more than one mile apart, the level of service on the highway shall be estimatedin accordance with the latest edition of the Highway Capacity Manual. 
While the use of the operational methodologies presented in the Highway Capacity Manual is always desirable, analyses using the planning method are acceptable for dimensioning of new facilities. 
(8)  Traffic signal needs. An analysis of traffic signal needs shall be conducted for all arterial/arterial, arterial/major collector and major collector/major collector intersections within the study area for the opening year. Signal need evaluations must determine if an intersection meets the signal warrants included in the latest edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD). If the warrants are not met for the opening year, they should be evaluated five years after opening for categories II, III and IV traffic impact studies. 
(9)  Accident analysis. An analysis of three-year accident data within the study area shall be conducted to determine if the level of safety (in terms of accident rates and severity index) needs improvement due to the addition of site traffic. 
(10)  Queuing analysis. A queuing analysis shall be conducted for all turn lanes under stop or signal control within the study area to ensure that the expected queues can be accommodated in the storage length provided. Although there are several methods for estimating queue length, the following equations may be used.: 
For signalized intersections (for every cycle): 
Queue length (ft) = 2  (25 ft/veh)  (Volume [veh/hr]/Cycles per hour) 
For unsignalized intersections (for a 2 minute period): 
Queue length (ft) = (25 ft/veh)  (Volume [veh/hr]/30) 
(11)  Important analysis. The roadways and intersections within the study area shall be analyzed with and without the proposed development to identify only projected impacts in regard to level of service and safety. 
The minimum design requirements for all intersections and roadway segments shall be LOS D with no intersection through lane movement falling below LOS D and no intersection turning movement falling below LOS E. If the TIS shows that the impact of a development will bring the LOS below these thresholds during the study horizon, mitigation alternatives to improve the LOS to at least those thresholds must be analyzed as part of the study. Common mitigation alternatives include capacity improvements, travel demand management and provision of alternative modes. 
If the performance of the existing intersection or roadway is already below those thresholds (e.g. below LOS D for through movements) the study must find alternatives to at least maintain the existing performance. The TIS must also evaluate the need for turning lanes on all major unsignalized intersections using the criteria presented in the auxiliary lanes section. 
(12)  Alternative modes. In cases where pedestrian, transit, bicycle, or golf cart activity should be expected, the TIS must identify any conflict points between vehicles and any other mode. In those cases the study must also make recommendations to facilitate the operation of alternative modes and ensure the safety of their users, especially at the interface with the vehicular network. Recommendations related to alternate modes should be in harmony with the goals of the plans, especially in relation to the planning, design, construction and maintenance of bicycle and pedestrian facilities. Particular attention should be paid to: 
 Ensuring connectivity of pedestrian and bicycle systems. 
 Providing safe non-motorized access to school for school children. 
(13)  Responsibility. The traffic impact study shall describe the location, nature and extent of all transportation improvements required to achieve the required post development levels of service within the study area. The responsibility for implementation of the post development mitigation measures shall rest entirely with the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2007-49, § 1, 2-6-07) 
Sec. 98-404. - Sample table of contents for TIS. 
    The following table of contents can be used as a template for most traffic impact studies. The table of contents may be modified to better fit the needs of the particular study, but the TIS should at least address the points presented in the auxiliary lanes section. 
(1)  Introduction and summary. 
a.  Purpose of report and study objectives 
b.  Executive summary 
 Site location and study area 
 Development description 
 Principal findings 
 Conclusions/recommendations 
(2)  Proposed development (site and nearby). 
a.  Site location. 
b.  Land use and intensity. 
c.  Site plan (must be legible). 
 Access geometrics 
d.  Development phasing and timing. 
(3)  Study area conditions. 
a.  Study area. 
 Area of significant traffic impact 
 Influence area 
b.  Land use. 
 Existing land use 
 Anticipated future development 
c.  Site accessibility. 
 Existing and future area roadway system 
 Site circulation 
(4)  Analysis of existing conditions. 
a.  Physical characteristics. 
 Roadway characteristics 
 Traffic control devices 
 Transit service 
 Pedestrian/bicycle facilities 
 Existing transportation demand management 
b.  Traffic volumes. 
 Daily, morning and afternoon peak period, and others as required 
c.  Level of service. 
 Morning peak hour, afternoon peak hour, and others as required 
d.  Safety related deficiencies. 
e.  Data sources. 
(5)  Projected traffic. 
a.  Site traffic forecasting (each horizon year). 
 Trip generation 
 Mode split (if applicable) 
 Pass-by traffic (if applicable) 
 Trip distribution 
 Trip assignment 
b.  Non-site traffic forecasting (each horizon year). 
 Projections of non-site traffic 
c.  Total traffic (each horizon year). 
(6)  Traffic and improvement analysis. 
a.  Site access. 
b.  Level of service analysis. 
 Without project including programmed improvements (each horizon year) 
 With project including programmed improvements (each horizon year) 
c.  Roadway improvements. 
 Improvements by ALDOT or others to accommodate non-site traffic 
 Additional alternative improvements to accommodate site traffic 
d.  Traffic safety. 
 Sight distance 
 Acceleration/deceleration lanes, auxiliary lanes 
 Adequacy of location and design of driveway access 
e.  Alternative modes considerations. 
 Vehicle/pedestrian conflict points 
 Vehicle/bicycle conflict points 
 Vehicle/golf cart 
f.  Traffic control needs. 
g.  Traffic signal needs (base plus five-year horizon). 
h.  Transportation demand management. 
(7)  Conclusions. 
(8)  Recommendations. 
a.  Roadway improvements. 
 Phasing 
b.  Site access. 
c.  Internal site circulation. 
d.  Transportation demand management actions (if appropriate). 
e.  Other. 
(9)  Appendices. 
a.  Traffic counts. 
b.  Capacity analyses worksheets. 
c.  Traffic signal needs studies. 
d.  Queuing analysis. 
e.  Accident data summaries. 
(10)  Figures and tables. 
a.  Site location. 
b.  Site plan. 
c.  Existing transportation system. 
d.  Existing daily volumes. 
e.  Existing peak hour turning volumes. 
f.  Future transportation system. 
g.  Estimated site traffic generation (daily and peak period). 
h.  Directional distribution of site traffic (daily and peak period). 
i.  Site traffic (peak period). 
j.  Non-site traffic (peak period). 
k.  Total future traffic (daily and peak period). 
l.  Projected levels of service. 
m.  Recommended improvements. 
(Ord. No. 2007-49, § 1, 2-6-07) 
Chapter 102 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, adopted Feb. 13, 2007, amended Ch. 102 in its entirety, in effect deleting Ch. 102 as being superseded and enacting a new Ch. 102 to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 102 pertained to similar subject matter. For a complete history of former Ch. 102 see the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference- Solid waste, ch. 82; communication towers and telecommunication facilities, § 114-601 et seq. 
State Law reference- Public utilities generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-50-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 102-1. - Identification of utility meters. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the developer and contractor or builder to ensure that all utility meters installed in trailer parks, multifamily dwellings and business or commercial buildings be properly identified by lot, apartment or address in accordance with the following and as required by the utilities director (The Land Management and E-911 addresses should coincide with the meter.): 
(1)  Electric meters. Letters and/or numbers are to be stenciled in red on the base of the electric meter lid. The minimum size shall be one inch in height. 
(2)  Water meters. Letters and/or numbers are to be stenciled in red on the lid of the meter box cover. The minimum size shall be one inch in height. 
(b)  Connections of permanent service for these utilities shall not be made until such time as proper connection has been verified by a qualified individual as determined by the City and identification has been made pursuant to this section. (This includes properties outside city limits serviced by the City of Dothan.) 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07; Ord. No. 2017-112, § 1, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 102-2. - Altering or damaging equipment; city ownership of equipment. 
(a)  The city may suspend utility service or designee to a customer without notice and without terminating any agreement for service if the meters, pipes, wires, switches or cutoffs used in conducting, supplying, measuring or registering water and electricity and other city utility services serving the customer's premises are altered, damaged or changed in any way, except by natural causes, so as to cause such meters, pipes, wires, switches or cutoffs to destroy, alter or prevent the registration of the service received. The city shall not be required to restore service after suspension in accordance with this subsection until the customer has complied with all reasonable requirements of the city designed to prevent a recurrence and the city has been reimbursed the full payment amount for service rendered and has been paid the cost of repairing or replacing such altered, changed or damaged meters, pipes, wires, switches or cutoffs. 
(1)  The utility service supervisor will investigate all theft of service (TOS) with the Dothan Police Department and/or the Houston County Sheriff's Department. The customer will be billed for the amount of usage since the final bill read date or cut off for non-payment work orders. These charges will be calculated by the billing division. The individual(s), as identified by law enforcement, will be charged with Theft of Service and given a deadline to have all calculated TOS amounts paid in full. If the TOS amount is not paid by said date, the utility service supervisor will sign a warrant for individual(s). In order to initiate service, an initial deposit or deposit increase will be required to be paid by any/all occupants. This deposit shall be set as the maximum for highest risk and may include any outstanding/written off monies owed the City of Dothan. 
(2)  Individuals with a sewer only account are required to initiate the service as of the date of occupancy. Failure to initiate service may be considered TOS. The occupant will be notified of the calculated amount due for service usage and will be allowed two weeks from date of notification to initiate the service. Upon notification, if the service is not initiated and/or the amount due is not paid within the allowed time period, a warrant may be issued for the occupant. 
(3)  Individuals with a garbage only account are required to initiate the service within 30 days of occupancy. Failure to initiate service within this time frame may be considered TOS. The occupant will be notified of the calculated amount due for service usage and will be allowed two weeks from date of notification to initiate the service. Upon notification, if the service is not initiated and/or the amount due is not paid within the allowed time period, a warrant may be issued for the occupant. 
(4)  Individuals with a water only account are required to initiate the service as of the date of occupancy. Failure to initiate service may be considered TOS. The occupant will be notified of the calculated amount due for service usage and will be allowed two weeks from date of notification to initiate the service. Upon notification, if the service is not initiated and/or the amount due is not paid within the allowed time period, a warrant may be issued for the occupant. 
(5)  Garbage, sewer or water only customers, or any combination of the three services, who have a past due balance 60 days old or older will be considered TOS. The occupant will be notified of the calculated amount due for service usage and will be allowed two weeks from date of notification to make payment in full. If the amount due per the notification is not paid within the allowed time period, a warrant may be issued for the occupant. 
(b)  All utility facilities and appurtenances, other than plumbing, when constructed or accepted by the city for maintenance, shall become and remain the property of the city, and no person shall, by payment of any charge provided for in this chapter or by causing any construction of facilities accepted by the city for maintenance, acquire any interest or right in any of these facilities or any portion thereof, other than the privilege to have his property connected thereto for service in accordance with the city's procedures and regulations. 
(c)  Altering by disconnecting or reconnecting city electrical wiring or electrical metering by anyone other than Dothan utility employees or assigned agents is prohibited, and any violation thereof shall be considered a Class B misdemeanor and a warrant may be issued. 
(d)  Altering by disconnecting or reconnecting city water piping or metering by anyone other than Dothan utility employees or assigned agents is prohibited, and any violation thereof shall be considered a Class B misdemeanor and a warrant may be issued. 
(e)  This section is cumulative with respect to Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-7-26. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07; Ord. No. 2017-112, § 1, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 102-3. - Location of meters, access to premises; violations. 
(a)  All utility meters shall be located in places accessible to meter readers and repairmen, such location and type of metering to be approved by the utilities director prior to installation or connection. 
(b)  Authorized representatives of the city utilities department shall have access to all premises where meters, switches and other equipment are installed for purposes of reading meters, determining load and capacity requirements and making inspections to determine proper and safe installation. 
(c)  If a violation occurs: 
(1)  The customer will be notified via certified mail of the problem associated with the last reading. The customer will be given until the next reading date to correct the violation. Until corrected, the meter reading will be based on an average of the representative usage for the same month and two preceding months of the prior year, or, if such information is not available, by any other reasonable measure. Such average or determination will be increased by 15 percent to ensure that service has been adequately covered. 
(2)  Service will be discontinued after three reported violations within a 12-month time period. This time period is transferable with the customer. 
(3)  After notification has been given, a reread charge of $20.00 shall be paid by the customer for each extra trip made to the premises to read the meter. 
(4)  The customer shall pay all costs associated with the service being cut off under this section. Such costs shall be $65.00 to discontinue the service by a bucket truck. If a service can be discontinued without the use of special equipment, standard cutoff fees will apply. 
(5)  The city shall not be required to restore service after suspension under this section until the customer has complied with all reasonable requirements of the city designed to prevent a recurrence of the violation and the city has been reimbursed for the full amount of service rendered and the cost incurred. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07; Ord. No. 2017-112, § 1, 4-18-17) 
Secs. 102-4-102-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ELECTRIC SERVICE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 102-31. - Availability of electric service. 
    Electric service is available in any and all areas served by the city-owned electric system. 
    Each prospective customer desiring utility services will be required to sign the Dothan utility standard form of application for service and/or contract before service is supplied by the utility. At the time of making application for connection of service, the applicant must make payment of any fees or deposits as required. The applicant must present satisfactory identification prior to services being connected. 
    Any exceptions to the utility service code will be approved in writing by the majority of the Dothan City Commission. 
    Payments for utility services can be made in the following manner: 
(1)  Cash. 
(2)  Check (Excluding counter or starter checks). 
(3)  Credit card (MasterCard and Visa only) with the conditions listed below: 
a.  Presented with a valid photo identification such as state driver's license, state non-driver identification, military identification, or passport. 
b.  Any card without a cardholder's name must be processed as a debit with a valid PIN used to process transaction. 
c.  Cards may not be damaged or broken. 
(4)  Cashier's check/money order. 
(5)  Electronic draft. 
(6)  Wire transfer. 
(7)  Internet. 
    All modes of payment mentioned above are acceptable upon activation of the required software and hardware to process the payment. Any necessary authorizing documentation must be on file in the utility collection division or permits and inspections division. Other payment methods may be approved by the finance director or authorized representative. 
    To initiate service with Dothan Utilities, a customer, whether residential or commercial/industrial, must fill out an application, provide adequate identification as prescribed in section 102-32(13) below, and provide documentation indicating right to reside or occupy the property (lease, property tax records, sales contract, etc.) to which service is being requested. The responsible party of commercial accounts must also be the responsible party listed on any lease agreement or sales contract as well as the business license. 
    All parties listed on any lease, property tax record, sales contract, etc. used to initiate service, if of the legal age of contract (19), will be subjected to the same criteria as the applicant. 
    Any party listed on any lease, property tax record, sales contract, etc. used to initiate service, if of the legal age of contract (19), having any delinquent accounts may be required to satisfy those debts prior to initiation of service. 
    Any party having delinquent balances with the City of Dothan may automatically be subjected to a high-risk deposit without the requirement of a credit check. 
    Any party having an outstanding returned item with the City of Dothan for any department may automatically be subjected to a high-risk deposit without the requirement of a credit check. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07; Ord. No. 2017-112, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 102-32. - Deposit requirements and amounts. 
    Before any utility service is connected, a utility deposit may be required for each and every meter to guarantee payment for utility service subsequent to meter reading for computing monthly service bills. The deposit requirement will be based on the credit history of the customer either at the city or by other reasonable means as determined by the finance director, planning director, or authorized representative. 
(1)  If required, the domestic residential utility cash deposit shall be a minimum of $100.00 designated as follows: $80.00 for electric service, $10.00 for water service and $10.00 for sewer service. Additional minimum deposits are $10.00 for irrigation, $10.00 for vapor lights and $10.00 for a fire line. 
(2)  The transfer of a deposit between residential customers shall be permitted only as follows: 
a.  A form shall be completed to transfer deposits among two parties as long as both parties sign the appropriate form and provide proper identification with the deposit being transferred to a new service. A deposit can be transferred with the presentation of a death certificate stating a surviving spouse or with a legally binding court order requiring the transfer of a deposit. 
b.  Any customer can transfer a deposit if the requirements listed below are met: 
1.  Both parties must present proper identification to the utility collection division. 
2.  The designee will sign to give all rights to the designator to the deposit on the account. 
3.  The designator will sign to accept all responsibility for the activity on the account as of the date signed. 
4.  An account will be setup for the designator using a new or previous customer identification number. 
(3)  Additional residential deposit provisions are as follows: 
a.  Utility cash deposits for new service for residential customers with a previously charged-off account will be a minimum of the amount equivalent to a high risk deposit; i.e. $500.00. Payment of the deposit should be made in full prior to the initiation of service. Upon approval of the finance director or authorized representative, payment arrangements for any old bills or outstanding returned items (plus nine percent interest) may be made and an agreement signed by the customer before the new service is connected. Payment arrangements cannot be made on any returned items submitted for collections through the District Attorney's office. All returned items previously remitted by the City of Dothan to the District Attorney's office must have an arrangement made through that office prior to service initiation. 
b.  No deposit shall be required for an established residential Dothan utility customer in "good standing". "Good standing" is a status granted to a customer having no previous charged-off accounts, no unpaid bills, no returned items, and no delinquencies in the most recent 12 months. Any customer with a previous payment plan must have satisfied all requirements of said payment plan. Once the plan has been paid in full for a minimum of 24 months and met all the requirements listed above, the customer may be considered for "good standing" status. 
c.  Established residential Dothan utility customers in "good standing" can make application for deposit refunds in the utility collection division after April 1, 2007. The refund will be issued as a credit to their next utility bill. If the customer has a high-risk or mid-level deposit, one-half of the deposit may be refunded after "good standing" status has been established for a period of one year. After two consecutive years of "good standing" status, the remaining one-half of the deposit may be refunded to the utility account. 
d.  In the event, "good standing" status is revoked, the customer will be required to establish a deposit as specified in section 102-32 subsection (1). Upon meeting the requirements of subsection (3)(b) above, the customer - upon request - may be reconsidered for "good standing" customer status. 
e.  A deposit as required in section 102-32 subsection (1) will be established in the event the residential customer desiring temporary service does not have current utility service with the city and does not reside at the service address for which the deposit is being established. 
f.  No deposit will be required for residential temporary service if a customer with a current temporary letter on file has a minimum deposit on file, and has maintained the status of "good standing" for a minimum of two years. Failure to maintain "good standing" status may result in the temporary letter being revoked and a deposit required for any/all future temporary service. 
g.  Utilities may be cut on for a minor under the age of 19 if the person can provide proof of marriage or the parent/guardian co-signs on the account providing a Social Security number, driver's license number, telephone number and an address for the co-signer. The co-signer will be a responsible party on the account with all rights and privileges of the account. Any and all outstanding debt of the co-signer must be satisfied before he/she may be allowed to co-sign on another account. 
h.  Utilities may be cut on by a person other than the resident of the address under the following circumstances: 
1.  The person establishing the utility services has legal guardianship over the resident. 
2.  A member of the immediate family is establishing utilities for an elderly person. 
3.  A parent or guardian establishing utilities for a minor under age 19. The utilities are to be established in the name of the minor upon reaching the legal age of accountability (19). 
An acknowledgement of cosigner's responsibility form will be required to be completed and signed. Proper identification will be presented in the utility collection division of the finance department with the before mentioned form. 
In all circumstances above, the account should reflect the name for which the services are being turned on, the relationship between the two parties, Social Security numbers, driver's license numbers, phone numbers and current addresses for both parties. 
(4)  If required, utility cash deposits for entities categorized as non-profit, governmental, religious or church use (Internal Revenue Code Section 501(c)3 exemption required) shall be a minimum of $100.00. Minimum deposits are to be assessed as follows: $80.00 for electric service, $10.00 for water service and $10.00 for sewer service. Additional deposits are to be set at $10.00 for vapor lights and $10.00 for a fire line. 
(5)  If required, commercial and industrial utility deposits shall be twice the average monthly bill but not less than $150.00 for electric service, $25.00 for water service and $25.00 for sewer service. Additional minimum deposits are to be set at $25.00 for vapor lights and $25.00 for a fire line as determined by the finance director, planning director, or authorized representative. 
(6)  The existing commercial or industrial utility deposit is non-refundable, unless for discontinuance of service or for establishment of a surety bond in the amount equivalent to four times the monthly average bill. The minimum commercial surety deposit would not be less than $1,000. An existing commercial customer must be considered in "good standing" for 24 months in order to qualify for acceptance of a surety bond in lieu of a cash deposit. Any additional location acquired by the existing customer will require an additional deposit based on the requirements stated in chapter 102 of this Code. 
a.  Temporary service may be established for a commercial customer with a current good standing service account, as long as, the commercial customer meets the requirements as specified for permanent deposits under the Code of Ordinances. 
b.  The commercial customer may activate temporary residential locations if the deposit on file for their primary commercial location meets the deposit standard identified in section 102-32 subsection (5). 
c.  Commercial customers establishing temporary service may need to show that they will not be occupying the service address, whether residential or commercial. 
(7)  Temporary service can be granted to an active current customer (as specified in this section) to cut on service at an additional location and to a customer who has not previously abused the privilege of temporary service. 
(8)  Each temporary service can be obtained in person or through special provision by letter of authorization/application for fax or email. This signed authorization/application will be maintained on file in the utility collection division. It is the responsibility of the customer to verify the accuracy of the utility services requested. 
(9)  Utility cash deposits will be established on commercial signs for "bad standing" customers. This deposit shall be twice the average monthly bill but not less than $25.00. 
(10)  No utility cash deposit is required on a temporary electric pole. 
(11)  A residential customer relocating to another residential service location can transfer the current utility cash deposit, if required, as follows: 
a.  All past due balances have been satisfied. 
b.  A customer may be required to establish a cash deposit as required in section 102-32 subsection (1). Should the customer have an existing cash deposit deemed to be insufficient, a deposit increase may be required. 
c.  Customer information must be current to include forwarding address information. 
d.  Transfers will be allowed in the event the customer account has an agency hold placed on the old account with the approval of the utility collection manager or authorized representative. 
e.  Applications for transfers can be made in person, via fax transmission, or via email transmission provided the account is in good standing. 
(12)  Customers utilizing utility service for any purpose other than residential service, churches or religious groups will be considered as a commercial customer. 
(13)  Valid identification is determined as non-expired/current state ID, military ID, passport, or driver's license. In the event valid identification is not available, two forms of alternate identification are required. Alternate identification is determined as social security card, birth certificate, Medicaid/Medicare card or statement from social security office with application for replacement of Social Security card. 
(14)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use, sell or permit to be used any utility service in the name of someone other than the name in which the deposit is recorded or to whom the service is furnished with right to residence (lease, sales contract, tax record, etc.), except as follows: 
a.  A form shall be completed to designate additional responsible party information. On the designation form the customer is giving written permission or the right for the designated party to obtain information, make agreements, transfer service, etc. on the account. By signing said form the designee is eligible for receipt of deposit posted in the customer's name and accepts the responsibility of the debt on said customer's account. Valid identification is required, as previously stated. A responsible party designated by this form cannot be removed until all outstanding debts are paid in full on said accounts. 
b.  In the event the customer desires another party to act on their behalf, a power of attorney must be presented to the utility collection division of the finance department or the permit and inspections division of the planning department to obtain said right. 
c.  If the owner of the facility furnishes utilities under a lease agreement with a tenant, he shall remain responsible for such utility payment until changed with due notice. A copy of said lease is required for the utility account to be listed in the name of the lessor or owner of the facility. 
d.  Commercial and industrial utilities shall be in the name of the corporation doing business. Provided "good standing" status, the deposit is transferable to a new location but not to new ownership. New ownership requires satisfaction of requirements as stated for a new commercial customer above. Note: For a proprietorship or partnership, the responsibility remains with the owner as an individual. 
e.  More than one family may be serviced through one metered service where separate wiring circuits and water pipe installations are not provided, upon special permission of the board of commissioners, finance director or authorized representative or the utilities director. 
(15)  It shall be the responsibility of the utility collection division to verify the credit of all residential applicants for utility service when applicable. If in their opinion the credit of the applicant warrants a deposit in excess of those stated in this section, the finance director or authorized representative shall have the authority to require the applicant to provide an adequate deposit, not to exceed $500.00, to protect the city's interest and mitigate risk. 
The utility collection division reserves the right, after service has been established, to require deposits be provided by the customer and to increase the amount of any previous deposits to such amount as the finance director or authorized representative deems necessary to protect the city's interests and mitigate risk. 
(16)  Upon consent to discontinue service, deposit monies will be applied to the customer's final bill or to any other account (in a status of active, final, collection, or write off) in which a customer owes a balance or is a responsible party. If any credit balance remains, said balance will be refunded to the customer. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07; Ord. No. 2017-112, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 102-33. - Deposit for reconnection. 
    After processing of the final bill for utility services, any subsequent reconnection shall be considered as a new service and subject to section 102-32, unless otherwise justified. If this occurs the residential deposit amount may be increased by the finance director or authorized representative to an amount deemed necessary to protect the city's interest and mitigate risk. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07; Ord. No. 2017-112, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 102-34. - Bills; billing date, delinquent date and penalties. 
(a)  All utility bills shall be due and payable at the utilities collections division of the finance department following regular cycle meter readings according to the following dates in each month, unless meters are read for the purpose of disconnecting service, when bills shall become due and payable as soon as the up-to-date bill is figured: 
Area Cycle No. Billing Date* Delinquent Date* (20 days after billing date) Cutoff* for Nonpayment (28 days after billing date) 1 20 th -28 th 10 th -18 th 18 th - 26 th 2 13 th -19 th 3 rd -9 th 11 th - 17 th 3 1 st -12 th 21 st -2 nd 29 th - 10 th  
* Billing dates, delinquent/penalty dates and cutoff for nonpayment will depend on how many days are in the month and when weekends and holidays occur during each month. 
(b)  All cycle bills for service rendered under this chapter are payable on or before the delinquent date in subsection (a) of this section. Delinquent notices will be mailed to each delinquent customer approximately two days after the delinquent date. The delinquent notice will give the date of termination of service if the utility bill is not paid. If not fully paid by the delinquency date, a fee of five percent shall be assessed on the outstanding bill according to the following: 
(1)  Off-cycle bills are those bills that may be produced as needed on a date other than a cycle date listed above and will have a delinquent date 20 days after the billing date and a cut-off date 28 days after the billing date. Final bills may be produced daily and will have a delinquent date 20 days after the billing date. 
(2)  The customer's base rate for solid waste service, vapor light service or fire line service for initial bills and final bills will be prorated for the number of days service was provided. 
(3)  The delinquent fee shall be calculated by multiplying five percent times the unpaid balance. 
(4)  The delinquent fee shall not be less than $5.00. 
(5)  Fees on Dothan utility payments may be waived by the finance director or authorized representative if there is a justifiable reason for the waiver. 
(6)  Upon application in the utility collection division, the delinquent fee can be permanently waived for any senior citizen 65 years of age or older if said individual is a responsible party on the account. 
(7)  A City of Dothan utility customer may be disconnected at the present location where service is provided for any unpaid debt incurred by the customer or a member of the customer's household either for the present location or for any previous location. 
(8)  If the unpaid accounts exists and the disconnected service has a balance due the city after the deposit has been applied toward the outstanding balance and the customer is unable to be located by all efforts, the account information will be remitted to a collection agency. Any and all fees (collection fees, legal fees, etc.) associated with the collections of amounts owed the City of Dothan will be the responsibility of any/all responsible parties on the account being collected. 
(9)  Extensions will only be granted to residential customers under the following circumstances: 
a.  Extensions will only be granted to customers under legitimate hardship circumstances. 
b.  Any customers desiring an extension shall make application in writing in the utility collection division. 
c.  No extension will be granted to a customer who has either been extended two times or cut off for nonpayment two or more times in the preceding 12 months. 
d.  The city shall terminate utility service for nonpayment of utility charges for failure to adhere to an extension agreement. Termination will be made as soon as practicable without restriction as noted in (d) below. 
e.  No customer will be allowed to obtain an extension unless all charged-off or bad debts (returned items) have been satisfied or a signed agreement has been established in the utility collection division and payments on said agreement are current. 
(c)  Failure to pay delinquent bills by the cutoff date, not including current month's delinquent fees charged, shall be cause for disconnecting each and every service associated with an account. 
(d)  The city may terminate utility service for nonpayment of utility charges only during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. No termination shall be permitted on a legal holiday or the day before a legal holiday. Utilities will not be terminated when freezing temperatures are expected or when the temperature is expected to be in excess of 100 degrees (Fahrenheit). This does not apply to terminations related to returned items as this may be classified as a criminal offense. 
(e)  No utility service that has been disconnected for nonpayment of bills and delinquent fees shall be reconnected or continued until all such bills and fees have been paid up to date (i.e. all delinquent bills). (If account is disconnected for non-pay, the customer must pay with cash, money order, debit card, or credit card to reconnect). Upon a second disconnection for nonpayment, the customer may be subject to a deposit increase for each future disconnection. Deposit increase amounts will be payable at the time of reconnection. 
(f)  No after-hours connection will be permitted unless the responsible party has signed the after-hours form agreeing to pay such bills and fees by 12:00 p.m. the following business day. Failure to be present at location will constitute a connection fee to be assessed. Failure to make payment as specified will result in disconnection of service. Prior to reconnection, the following must be paid in full: after-hours fees, all unpaid bills, and connection fees. Actions which constitute abuse of this courtesy may prevent further after-hour connections for the customer. After-hours reconnect privileges will not be awarded to any customer that has been disconnected for failure to comply with an agreement or failure to pay for a returned item. 
(g)  A connection fee is defined as a fee for connecting such utility service or expense incurred by the city in making a trip to the customer's residence or business. In the event multiple connections are required at the same location, the greatest single connection fee will be assessed, unless in units of 25 or more as described in subsection (h) below. See connection fee schedule: 
Connection Fee Schedule 
Service types Normal work hours (8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.) After hours Monday - Friday (4:01 p.m. to 9:00 p.m.)* No service after 9 p.m. Weekends & holidays (8:00 a.m. - 9:00 p.m.) Residential $25.00 $35.00 $70.00 Standard commercial $25.00 $35.00 $70.00 Nonstandard commercial $65.00 $85.00 $85.00 Cut on with Bucket Truck $65.00 $85.00 $85.00  
*Orders for connection of service received in the Utility Collection Division or the Permits and Inspections Division after 12:00 p.m., that are requested to be worked on the same business day, shall be assessed at the after-hours rate. 
It is preferred that a responsible party be present upon connection of utilities. If the electric service or water service indicates unsafe circumstances, such as a burnt lug or water leak, the service will remain disconnected. If any subsequent trips are required, an additional trip fee will be assessed at the rate indicated in section 102-34(g). 
(h)  No connection fee will be assessed for commercial customers who have multiple rental properties as follows: 
(1)  The units must be rented or leased as residential units. 
(2)  The units must be owned or managed in the name of one company or responsible party. 
(3)  The units must be greater than 25 units which are connected or enclosed under the same roof or in uniform groups. 
(4)  The units are disconnected by the renter or lessee and are to be immediately transferred to the name of the managing company; thus, avoiding a second trip to connect service. 
(5)  The owner or responsible party will be charged a connection fee when a separate trip is incurred and a disconnection order for the renter or lessee is not simultaneously worked. 
(6)  The owner or responsible party must sign an agreement with conditions as follows: 
a.  Allowing immediate transfer of disconnected service to be placed in the name of the managing company. 
b.  Accepting responsibility for all bills upon disconnection of renter or lessee. 
c.  Understanding that a connection fee will be assessed unless the disconnection was authorized by the renter or lessee. 
(i)  In the event the customer's physical health is determined to be subject to a life-threatening condition, as determined by a physician, which requires the use of artificial life support, on a 24-hour a day continuous basis to avoid loss of life that deems the patient as immobile, then such customer's electrical service shall not be terminated. A certified practicing physician must confirm in writing the nature of life support and provide written confirmation that the medical condition conforms to this section of the City of Dothan Code of Ordinances. After such service has been confirmed by a physician as life threatening, a majority of the city commission or a responsible party on the account is required to terminate said service. A listing of said life support should be updated yearly and kept current by the utility collection division. It will be the responsibility of the customer to contact the respective physician and maintain current life-threatening statements. The account must be kept current or water service may be suspended. For all life-support accounts, an additional responsible party must sign with the account holder to be liable for incurred utility usage if the service remains in the patient's name. 
(j)  A fee of $20.00 shall be charged if a customer requests a reread of the utility meter. If the meter was initially read in error or found defective, this fee shall not apply and will be refunded in full to the customer. Unless a refund check is specified by the customer, this refund will be credited to the utility account. 
(k)  A fee of $25.00 shall be charged if a customer requests that a test be made of the utility meter. If the meter is found to be defective, this fee shall not apply and will be refunded in full to the customer as well as appropriate compensation for any overpayments. Unless a refund check is specified by the customer, this refund will be credited to the utility account. 
(l)  Returned items must be redeemed within 24 hours from the time of attempted notification (the next working day) by cash, credit card, cashier's check or money order. A credit card (not attached to a checking account) may be used for payment of a non-credit card returned item. 
The following rules apply to all returned items receipted: 
(1)  Failure to redeem a returned item within 24 hours after attempted notification of receipt shall result in termination of utility service. 
(2)  A collection fee of $30.00, in addition to the face amount of the returned item, will be required unless there is a bank error involved. Proof of error is the responsibility of the customer to establish. 
(3)  A customer will only be allowed three returned items in a 12-month period from the most recent returned item. Once a customer has written three bad items to include returned credit card payments, the customer will be required to pay by cash, cashier's check, or money order until the 12-month time period expires on the most recent returned item. A credit card will be accepted to satisfy any returned item except in the event of a returned credit card payment. The customer is required to pay a $50.00 deposit increase at the time of the third returned item within the 12 month period. If no deposit is on file for a utilities customer meeting section 102-32 at the time the first returned item is received, a deposit will be required meeting section 102-32 on the account provided there was no bank error. 
(4)  For utility payment returned items, notification will be delivered to the customer's residence or business stating the date and time payment in full is due to avoid cutoff. Any customer account having an online utility payment returned to Dothan Utilities as a fraudulent transaction will have the online utility bill payment option revoked. 
(5)  In the event the returned items are for a payment other than utility payment, each city department will be responsible for sending letters for collection of their respective department's returned items. 
(6)  It is the complete responsibility of the respective department that accepted the returned item from the issuer in good faith, to arrange for the collection of said returned items. A list of outstanding returned items will be sent periodically to all departments as a collection reminder. 
(7)  The utility collection division will retain the original returned items (or legal copies of said items) and upon payment of said returned item and applicable fees by the customer, the items will be returned to the customer or payee of the returned item. Any original returned item paid in full and not claimed by the customer will be destroyed. 
(8)  The utility collection division reserves the right to remit all uncollected returned items to the collection agency after one month of receipt or to the District Attorney's office after a certified letter has been sent in an effort to collect the returned item. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07; Ord. No. 2017-112, § 2, 4-17-17) 
Sec. 102-35. - Budget billing. 
(a)  Budget billing is a levelized payment plan and available to all residential utility customers. The payment amount is determined by calculating an average bill from the previous 12 months plus ten percent unless deemed otherwise by the finance director or authorized representative. When history is not available, the departments providing the services will be contacted to determine the monthly budget payment amount. 
(b)  Enrollment is not limited to one account per customer, but the applicant must meet requirements of multiple accounts per this Code. 
(c)  Reconcilement of budget billing accounts will be done in September of each year (except for discontinuance, see subsection (e), following) and a new monthly budget payment amount determined. At this time any deficit amount will be due or accumulated credit applied toward the new monthly budget payment until the credit is expended. Full settlement of the differences between actual usage amounts and budget payment amounts will be required if the customer is removed from budget billing prior to the reconcilement in September. 
(d)  Delinquency fees for budget accounts will be based upon the calculated budget payment amount or unpaid balance, as further described in subsection 102-34(b). 
(e)  Nonpayment of the monthly budget payment amount may be cause for a customer to be dropped from the budget billing program. Please refer to subsection 102-34(c) for additional criteria. Customers enrolled in this program may elect to be dropped at their convenience. However, if dropped, any balance due or credit will be reflected on the next bill. In addition, customers will not be eligible to re-enroll for six months. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07; Ord. No. 2009-310, § 1, 9-22-09; Ord. No. 2017-112, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 102-36. - Industrial development. 
    As an incentive for industrial development the city may allow the potential industrial commercial customer to pay a surety bond for a deposit in the amount equivalent to four times the monthly average bill in lieu of the required cash deposit for commercial customers. The minimum commercial surety deposit would not be less than $1,000.00. This privilege shall be afforded to only new industrial customers with the fiscal year beginning October 1, 2002. 
    Requirements of the surety bond will be as follows: 
(1)  The amount of the bond is to be equivalent to four times the average monthly bill amount. 
(2)  All fees and charges on new construction and expansion for industrial development purposes may be waived by the city manager if there is deemed to be a benefit to the city through the substantiation and/or creation of jobs thus justifying said waiver. The total waived fees and charges shall not exceed $2,500.00 for any project. 
(3)  Waivers as described in subsection (2) above are to be granted for industrial, warehousing or research activity to be described as follows: 
a.  Any sector, subsector, industry group, industry or national industry of the 2012 North American Industry Classification System, or any similar classification system developed in conjunction with the United States Department of Commerce or Office of Management and Budget. The conduct of an activity that is predominantly any one or more of the following: Described by NAICS Code 1133, 115111, 2121, 22111, 221330, 31 (other than 311811), 32, 33, 423, 424, 482, 4862,48691, 48699, 48819, 4882, 4883 (other than 48833), 493, 511, 5121 (other than 51213), 51221, 517, 518 (without regard to the premises that data processing and related services be performed in conjunction with a third party), 51913, 52232, 54133 (if predominantly in furtherance of another activity described in this article), 54134 (if predominately in furtherance of another activity described in this article), 54138, 5415, 541614, 5417, 55 (if not for the production of electricity), 561422 (other than establishments that originate telephone calls), 562213, 56291, 56292, 611512, 927 or 92811 or the production of biofuel as such term is defined in the Code of Alabama Section 2-2-90 (c) (2). 
(4)  The surety bond will be kept current by the industrial commercial customer and upon renewal will be calculated by the permits and inspections division of the planning department to ensure the bond amount covers four times the current average monthly bill, but not less than $1,000.00. 
(5)  The surety bond certificate will be retained on file in the utility collection division of the finance department. 
(6)  For any reason, should the surety company cancel the bond and on the effective date of such cancellation notice, the surety is discharged and relieved of any liability. The principal (industrial commercial customer) of said surety will be liable for immediate payment of a cash deposit equal to twice the monthly average bill. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07; Ord. No. 2017-112, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 102-37. - Utility bill adjustments. 
(a)  Responsible party understanding: 
(1)  The city is responsible for the metering device and all utility services up to the designated point of service connection. 
(2)  The customer is responsible for the working condition of all facilities and equipment (not including the meter) past the point of connection. 
(3)  Meter reading and billing and collection of utility bills is the responsibility of the finance department. 
(b)  Adjustment to the utility bill will be as follows: 
(1)  The customer's bill will be adjusted where the meter reading was incorrect or where the meter itself was found to be inaccurate by more than two percent. 
(2)  Meter rereads or meter tests may be performed when requested by the customer as the situation may require and upon collection of appropriate fees as specified in subsection 102-34 (j, k). For meter re-reads requested by city staff that result in an approved water leak adjustment, the fee will be billed to the customer account at the time that the adjustment is processed. 
(3)  Personnel of the accounting division of the finance department shall correct present meter readings whenever a re-read indicates an error has occurred. Records are to be retained until completion of the annual audit. 
(4)  An adjustment may be made to a customer's bill for abnormal consumption of electricity, water, or sewage due to the following, certain restrictions shall apply: 
a.  Natural disaster. 
b.  Malfunction of metering equipment as determined by the utility. 
c.  Water leaks (domestic services only- excludes new construction for the first year and irrigation systems) 
d.  Billing errors. 
(5)  An adjustment may be made to a residential or commercial customer's sewage bill when the water is used for the purpose of the initial annual filling of a pool. No adjustment to the water usage will be made for the filling of pools. 
a.  A meter reading may be collected by the customer both prior to and immediately after filling the pool. 
b.  The customer shall be responsible for providing either the volume (in gallons) of the pool or the dimensions of the pool when submitting their adjustment request. 
c.  A sewer bill adjustment will only be made once each year for the initial filling of a pool. 
(c)  Restrictions: 
(1)  Customer must be in good financial standing. If a customer has a past due balance that is not associated with the bill(s) in question, the past due amount must be paid in full prior to requesting a leak adjustment. 
(2)  Once a leak adjustment request is made, customers can request an extension on the billing period(s) and the dollars that exceed the customer's normal billing charges in those period(s) that may be affected by the leak adjustment request. The finance department will set a time frame for the extension and determine the billing period(s) and charges to which the extension applies. 
(3)  Billing adjustments for abnormal usage for water, sewage or electricity will only apply to three billing cycles, beginning with the receipt of the first bill showing excess usage over normal (average) consumption. Billing adjustments will only be made once consumption has returned to normal level as reflected by the first subsequent reading not including the leak. If first subsequent reading does not indicate normal consumption after reported date of repair, the billing adjustment will be denied. 
(4)  Leak adjustments are available to residential and commercial customers who suffer a domestic leak that exceeds their normal use compared to the normal (average) consumption. 
(5)  A customer may qualify for a leak adjustment only once in a five-year period. The five-year period begins the first month of the billing period following the billing period that the leak adjustment was applied. No leak adjustments will be made for irrigation systems or new construction for the first year. 
(6)  Each metered location may only have a leak adjustment approved once in a five-year period regardless of whether a previous leak adjustment request was approved for a different occupant. 
(d)  Calculations of adjustments: 
(1)  Electric, water and/or sewer usage may be adjusted by 100 percent of the cost that is determined to be incorrectly charged through fault of the city. 
(2)  Excessive water consumption may be adjusted by refunding 50 percent of the cost over normal (average) consumption for a maximum period of three billing cycles. 
(3)  Sewage may be adjusted by 50 percent of the cost over normal (average) usage when the excessive water consumption resulted in the excessive sewage usage. This includes inside leaks. One hundred percent of the cost over normal (average) usage, for a maximum period of three billing cycles, may be refunded when excess water consumption did not result in sewage usage. For example, if a leak occurs outside of the house, it does not go into the sewage system, therefore, the City will refund 100 percent of the cost over normal (average) usage. 
(4)  Vapor light charges may be adjusted at 100 percent of the cost to the extent that the deficiency is caused by city neglect. 
The utility collection division, upon the approvals as stated below, shall make physical adjustment of all billed amounts. 
(e)  Billing adjustment approvals: 
(1)  Adjustments will be made upon the recommendation of the utility collections manager and approval of the finance director and the approval of the utilities director. 
(2)  The utility collections manager has authority to approve changes up to $250.00 per occurrence. 
(3)  The finance director, utilities director, electrical operations superintendent, or water operations superintendent has authority to approve changes up to $500.00 per occurrence. 
(4)  The finance director and utilities director can approve changes up to $5,000.00. 
(5)  Any adjustment in excess of $5,000.00 requires the approval of the city manager. 
(6)  The customer must provide evidence of a leak repair by one or more of the following: 
a.  Repair bill, invoice or letter from a licensed plumber or a repair company. 
b.  Original receipts for parts and/or supplies if self-repaired. 
c.  Other documents as deemed necessary by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07; Ord. No. 2017-112, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 102-38. - Miscellaneous charges to customers. 
    For the convenience of the commercial customer, the city has the right to bill charges to the customer's account at their request. These charges will consist primarily of fees associated with establishing new utility service. The city also has the right to bill charges to other customers who have incurred fees but have failed to pay such fees. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07; Ord. No. 2017-112, § 2, 4-18-17) 
Secs. 102-39-102-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RATES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-338, § 1, adopted Dec. 1, 2015, amended Div. 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 2, §§ 102-61-102-64, 102-66, 102-69-102-73, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, adopted Feb. 13, 2007. 
State Law reference- Authority regarding electric plants generally, code of Ala. 1973, § 11-50-1 et seq. 

Sec. 102-61. - Established. 
    The classified electric rates in this division and their applications are defined and established for the sale of electric energy by the utilities department. Customer's initial electric rate shall be determined by the utilities director or director's designee and is subject to changes based upon customer rate validation request or periodic analysis of rate classification by the utilities department. 
(Ord. No. 2015-338, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 102-62. - Domestic residential electric service/rate class; designation EL/RS. 
(a)  Applicability . Domestic residential electric service rate EL/ RS is applicable to individually metered residences, mobile homes and apartments. 
(b)  Character of service . The service shall be single- or three-phase at 120/240 volts 60 hertz. 
(c)  Monthly rates . Effective with the January 2016 billing cycle, the monthly rate shall be as follows: 
Residential (EL/RS) Customer Charge $12.00 Energy Charges: All kWhs $0.08712 per kWh Plus, to this rate shall be added a power cost adjustment. (section 102-74).  
  
(d)  Rate adjustments and taxes . The retail rate in subsection (c) of this section, as charged by the city, shall be adjusted automatically and simultaneous with wholesale rate adjustments. Any additional charges levied by the state or federal authorities, such as sales taxes, will be passed on to the customer in addition to the rate schedule in subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)  Minimum charge . The minimum charge for any part of the monthly bill shall not be less than $12.00. 
(f)  Payment . For payment, see subsections 102-34(a), (b) and (c). 
(Ord. No. 2015-338, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 102-63. - Nonprofit institutions electric service/rate class; designation EL/NP. 
(a)  Applicability . Nonprofit institutions electric service rates EL/NP is applicable for lighting, power and miscellaneous electric service to churches, private schools, nursing homes, orphanages, libraries, multiunit nonprofit housing projects, mental health services, public health clinics and other similar charitable and civic institutions, all of which are operated strictly on a nonprofit basis and whose income is largely derived from contributions and donations. 
(b)  Character of service . The service shall be single- or three-phase service or a combination of both, at the nominal secondary voltage or at the available primary distribution line voltage in special cases. All service voltages, types of metering and meter locations shall be approved by the utilities director or the director's designee prior to connection. Any consumer receiving service at two different voltages will be considered as two separate customers for billing purposes. 
(c)  Monthly rate . Effective with the January 2016 billing cycle, the monthly rate shall be as follows: 
Nonprofit (EL/NP) Customer Charge $15.00 Energy Charges: All kWhs $0.08827 per kWh Plus, to this rate shall be added a power cost adjustment (section 102-74).  
  
(d)  Rate adjustments and taxes . The retail rate in subsection (c) of this section, as charged by the city, shall be adjusted automatically and simultaneously with wholesale rate adjustments. Any additional charges levied by the state or federal authorities, such as sales taxes, will be passed on to the customer in addition to the rate schedule in subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)  Minimum charge . The minimum charge for any part of the monthly bill shall not be less than $15.00. 
(Ord. No. 2015-338, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 102-64. - Commercial electric service/rate class; designation EL/E4. 
(a)  Applicability . Commercial electric service rates EL/E4 is applicable for nonresidential and power service where the maximum 15-minute integrated demand does not exceed 120 kW. Service to more than one premises is not to be combined nor shall it be shared with or resold to others. 
(b)  Character of service . The service shall be single- or three-phase service or a combination of both, at the nominal secondary voltage, or at the available primary distribution line voltage in special cases. All service voltages, types of metering and meter locations shall be approved by the utilities director or the director's designee prior to connection. Any customer receiving service at two different meter points will be considered as two separate accounts. The type of metering is to be specified by the city. 
(c)  Monthly rate . Effective with the January 2016 billing cycle, the monthly rate shall be as follows: 
Commercial (EL/E4) Customer charge $25.00 0-5,000 kWhs $0.10180 per kWh 5,001-10,000 kWhs $0.09680 per kWh All over 10,000 kWhs $0.09180 per kWh Plus, to this rate shall be added a power cost adjustment (section 102-74).  
  
(d)  Rate adjustments and taxes . The retail rate in subsection (c) of this section, as charged by the city, shall be adjusted automatically and simultaneously with wholesale rate adjustments. Any additional charges levied by the state or federal authorities, such as sales taxes, will be passed on to the customer in addition to the rate schedule in subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)  Minimum charge . The minimum charge for any part of the monthly bill shall not be less than $25.00. 
(Ord. No. 2015-338, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-338, § 1, adopted Dec. 1, 2015, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 102-64.1, 102-64.2. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 102-64, 102-64.1. 
Sec. 102-64.1. - Temporary electric service/rate class; designation ET/E4. 
(a)  Applicability . Temporary electric service rates ET/E4 is applicable for temporary electric service during construction and/or for nonresidential power service to special short-term events where the maximum 15-minute integrated demand does not exceed 120 kW. Service to more than one premises is not to be combined nor shall it be shared with or resold to others. 
(b)  Character of service . The service shall be single-phase service at the nominal secondary voltage 120/140. All service voltages, types of metering and meter locations shall be approved by the utilities director or the director's designee prior to connection. Any customer receiving service at two different points will be considered as two separate customers. The type of metering is to be specified by the city. 
(c)  Monthly rate . Effective with the January 2016 billing cycle, the monthly rate shall be as follows: 
Temporary Electrical (ET/E4) Customer charge $25.00 0-5,000 kWhs $0.10180 per kWh 5,001-10,000 kWhs $0.09680 per kWh All over 10,000 kWhs $0.09180 per kWh Plus, to this rate shall be added a power cost adjustment (section 102-74).  
  
(d)  Rate adjustments and taxes . The retail rate in subsection (c) of this section, as charged by the city, shall be adjusted automatically and simultaneously with wholesale rate adjustments. Any additional charges levied by the state or federal authorities, such as sales taxes, will be passed on to the customer in addition to the rate schedule in subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)  Minimum charge . The minimum charge for any part of the monthly bill shall not be less than $25.00. 
(f)  Installation charge . The charge for a city provided (underground or overhead) temporary electric pole will be determined by the utilities director or the director's designee. The charge for the city to inspect and tap up a customer provided temporary electric pole will be determined by the utilities director or the director's designee. 
(Ord. No. 2015-338, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Note- See editor's note to § 102-64.1. 
Sec. 102-65. - Electric factor electric service/rate class; designation EL/EF. 
(a)  Applicability . Electric factor electric service rates EL/EF is applicable for nonresidential power service where the maximum 15-minute integrated demand does not exceed 120 kW. This type of service supplies power to amplifiers or devices. Multiple devices of "like" type are directly connected to city power; non-metered. Then one such location is metered to determine kWh consumption that is then multiplied by the number of "like" devices. Service to more than one premises is not to be combined nor shall it be shared with or resold to others. Non-metered services will only be approved by the utilities director or the director's designee. 
(b)  Character of service . The service shall be single- or three-phase service or a combination of both, at the nominal secondary voltage, or at the available primary distribution line voltage in special cases. All service voltages, types of metering and meter locations shall be approved by the utilities director or the director's designee prior to connection. The type of metering is to be specified by the city. 
(c)  Monthly rate . Effective with the January 2016 billing cycle, the monthly rate shall be as follows: 
Electric Factor (EL/EF) Customer charge $15.00 0-5,000 kWhs $0.10400 per kWh 5,001-10,000 kWhs $0.09800 per kWh All over 10,000 kWhs $0.09300 per kWh Plus, to this rate shall be added a power cost adjustment (section 102-74).  
  
(d)  Rate adjustments and taxes . The retail rate in subsection (c) of this section, as charged by the city, shall be adjusted automatically and simultaneously with wholesale rate adjustments. Any additional charges levied by the state or federal authorities, such as sales taxes, will be passed on to the customer in addition to the rate schedule in subsection (c) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2015-338, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 102-66. - Commercial/industrial electric service/rate class; designation EL/E6. 
(a)  Applicability . The commercial/industrial electric service rates EL/E6 is applicable for lighting, power and miscellaneous electric service whose integrated 15-minute interval demand is greater than 120 kW and where the entire electric requirements of the customer are furnished by the city. Service to more than one premises shall not be combined nor shall it be shared with or resold to others. 
(b)  Character of service . The service shall be three-phase service or a combination of single- and three-phase, at the voltage of the available primary or secondary distribution lines of the city. All service voltages, types of metering and meter locations shall be approved by the utilities director or the director's designee prior to connection. Any customer receiving service at two different voltages will be considered as two separate accounts for billing purposes. This rate is based on ownership of one transformation facility by the city for primary voltage rating of 15 kV and below; however, ownership of other transformation facilities by the customer is permissible under this rate. Such facilities may be installed by the city and leased to the customer if he so elects. 
(c)  Terms of contract . Service under this section shall be for an initial period of two years and thereafter from month to month until terminated by a 30-day written notice to the city. 
(d)  Monthly rate . Effective with the January 2016 billing cycle, the monthly rate shall be as follows: 
[Commercial/Industrial (EL/E6)] Customer charge $250.00 Demand charge $9.00 per kW Energy charge: First 100,000 kWhs $0.06400 per kWh All over 100,000 kWhs $0.05900 per kWh Plus, to this rate shall be added a power cost adjustment (section 102-74).  
  
(e)  Rate adjustment and taxes . The retail rate in subsection (d) of this section, as charged by the city, shall be adjusted automatically and simultaneously with wholesale rate adjustments. Any additional charges levied by the state or federal authorities, such as sales taxes, will be passed on to the customer in addition to the rate schedule in subsection (d) of this section. 
(f)  Determination of billing demand . The demand for billing purposes shall be the maximum measured integrated 15-minute interval demand during each billing period of approximately 30 days, measured in kW; provided, however, that no demand shall be taken as less than 75 percent of the maximum demand established during any of the 11 months preceding or less than 90 kW. 
(g)  Transformer rental . If more than one transformer installation is required for the use of any customer who does not wish to establish a second delivery and metering point, the customer has the option of leasing such transformers from the city or of providing and installing them himself. If he elects to have the city provide them, the monthly rental shall be $0.24515 per kVa of installed transformer capacity, i.e., the transformer nameplate kVa rating times $0.24515. 
(h)  Minimum bill . The minimum bill shall not be less than that computed from 75 percent of the largest demand in kW established during the preceding 11 months or less than $810.00. 
(Ord. No. 2015-338, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Secs. 102-67, 102-68. - Reserved. 
Sec. 102-69. - Miscellaneous services. 
(a)  Private athletic fields; designation EL/10 . Electric service to lighted athletic fields where the lighting installation is financed and maintained by private ownership shall be billed on the following rate for such months as the field is in use: all kWh used $0.13800 per kWh, with no demand charge or minimum charge, and no charges to be made during months when the field is not in use, plus to the rate shall be added taxes, and power cost adjustment as described in other schedules in this division. 
(b)  Security lights; designation VL/RS or VL/CM . The monthly rates, as provided in this subsection, shall be for each security light having photoelectric control, installed by the city for private use, supplied with city energy with the light control owned and maintained by the city. Security lighting will be initially provided under a two-year contract period. If the customer desires LED security lighting, the city may provide such lighting at an additional cost to the customer as determined by the utilities director or the director's designee. The rates shall be as follows: 
(1)  Overhead installation rates are as follows: 
Watt (HPS) Monthly Rate 100 $9.00 ($5.00)* 250 $11.00 400 $18.00  
*See subsection (d)(3) of this section. 
The base monthly rate for an overhead installation is applicable to a light installed on an existing pole. This charge will be increased by $1.00 for each additional pole required, not including an existing pole. For each additional pole required, not including an existing pole, there is an initial installation charge of $150.00. The standard pole will be a wood 35-foot class 5 pole. The customer will be responsible for the cost of any deviation from this standard as determined by the utilities director or the director's designee. 
(2)  Underground installation rates with the city providing and installing up to 100 feet maximum distance of underground cable with a $1.00 per-foot charge for each additional foot shall be as follows: 
Watt (HPS) Monthly Rate Type Pole Pole 
Installa- 
tion Charge 100 $10.00 ($6.00)* Wood $250.00 100 $10.00 ($6.00)* Fiber- 
glass $350.00  
*See subsection (d)(3) of this section. 
If wattage other than that listed in the table is installed, the monthly rates for overhead fixtures shall apply with additional costs for poles and installation, as shall be determined by the utilities director or the director's designee. 
(3)  Any senior citizen 60 years of age or older, and who is a responsible party on the utility account shall pay a monthly base rate for a 100-watt HPS overhead security light of $5.00 per month instead of $9.00, and for an underground security light a monthly base rate of $6.00 instead of $10.00. 
(4)  The utilities director or the director's designee is authorized to execute a lease agreement with customers. 
(5)  The bill for a vapor light will be prorated to reflect a partial month of service. 
(Ord. No. 2015-338, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Note- Per Ord. No. 2015-338, rates effective with the January 2016 billing cycle. 
Sec. 102-70. - Commercial/industrial small electric service/rate class; designation EL/12. 
(a)  Availability . Available in all areas serviceable by the city electric system. 
(b)  Applicability . This rate is applicable for lighting, power and miscellaneous electric service whose integrated 15-interval-minute demand is 1,200 kW or greater or where the transformer for the customer is provided directly from transmission facilities, and where the entire electrical requirements are furnished by the city service to more than one premises it shall not be combined nor shall it be shared with or resold to others. 
(c)  Character of service . Service shall be three-phase service or a combination of single and three-phase, at the voltage deemed appropriate to serve the customer's electrical requirements. Any customer receiving service at two different voltages will be considered as two separate customers for billing purposes. All service voltages, types of metering and meter locations shall be approved by the utilities director or the director's designee prior to connection. This rate is based on ownership of one transformation facility by the city; however ownership of other transformation facilities by the customer is contemplated under this rate. Such facilities may be installed, operated and maintained by the city and leased to the customer if they so elect. 
(d)  Terms of contract . Service under this section shall be for an initial period of five years and thereafter from month to month until terminated by 90 days' written notice. Five-year period shall restart upon major additions and/or changes to the character of service. 
(e)  Monthly rate. Effective with the January 2016 billing cycle, the monthly rate shall be as follows: 
Commercial/Industrial Small (EL/12) Customer charge, per month $400.00 Demand change $10.00 per kW Energy charge: First 200,000 kWhs $0.05800 per kWh All over 200,000 kWhs $0.05300 per kWh Plus, to this rate shall be added a power cost adjustment. (section 102-74).  
  
(f)  Determination of billing demand . The capacity for billing purposes shall be the measured maximum integrated 15-minute capacity during each billing period of approximately 30 days, measured in kW; provided, however, that such capacity shall be taken at not less than 75 percent of the measured maximum capacity requirements established during the 11 months preceding the billing period. No billing capacity shall be for less than 900 kW. 
(g)  Transformer rental . If more than one transformer installation is required for the use of any customer who does not wish to establish a secondary delivery and metering point, the customer has the option of leasing such transformers from the city or the customer has the option to provide and install transformers. If the customer elects to have the city provide transformers, the monthly rental shall be $0.24515 per kVa of installed transformer capacity, i.e., the transformer nameplate kVa rating times $0.24515. 
(h)  Minimum bill . No monthly bill will be rendered for less than the charge for capacity as described in subsection (f) of this section. 
(i)  Payment . For payment, see subsections 102-34(a), (b) and (c). 
(j)  Rate adjustments and taxes . The retail rate in this section, as charged by the city, shall be adjusted automatically and simultaneously with wholesale rate adjustments. Any additional charges levied by the state or federal authorities, such as sales taxes, will be passed onto the customer in addition to the rate schedule. 
(k)  Power factor . Industrial small electric customers are required to maintain a power factor of no less than 0.9. If a customer cannot meet this requirement, they will be responsible for purchase, installation, and maintenance of any and all power factor correction equipment as determined by the utilities director or the director's designee. If the corrections are not made within 90 days, the utilities director or the director's designee may terminate the electric service until corrections are made by the customer. 
(Ord. No. 2015-338, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 102-70.1. - Industrial medium electric service/rate class; designation EL/14. 
(a)  Availability . Available in all areas serviceable by the city electric system. 
(b)  Applicability . Applicable for lighting, power and miscellaneous electric service whose integrated 15 interval minute demand is 4,000 KVa or greater, or where the transformer for the customer is provided directly from transmission facilities, and where the entire electrical requirements are furnished by the city. Service to more than one premises shall not be combined, nor shall it be shared with or resold to others. 
(c)  Character of service . Three-phase service, or combination of single and three-phase, at the voltage deemed appropriate to serve the customers' electrical requirements. Any customer receiving service at two different voltages will be considered as two separate customers for billing purposes. The type of metering is to be specified by the city. This rate is based on ownership of one transformation facilities by the city; however, ownership of other transformation facilities by the customer is contemplated under this rate. Such facilities may be installed by the city and leased to the customer if he so elects. 
(d)  Terms of contract . Service under this section shall be for an initial period of five years. Thereafter, either party may terminate this contract by giving to the other party at least one year prior written notice of such termination. 
(e)  Monthly rate . 
(1)  Charges for billing capacity and energy shall be determined by the following formula: 
$8.98 per kW of billing capacity; plus. 
(2)  Charge for energy: 
a.  For the first 250 kWh per kW of billing capacity: 
$0.02811 per kWh for all kWh. 
b.  For all over 250 kWh per kW of billing capacity: 
$0.01398 per kWh for all kWh. 
(3)  Plus, to the above rate shall be added the product of the monthly kWhs used times a fuel cost adder. This fuel cost adder shall be 93 percent of the retail energy cost recovery (ECR) adder billed by Alabama Power Company, also to include a rate differential (RDF) factor determined by Alabama Power Company. 
(f)  Determination of billing demand . The capacity for billing purposes shall be the measured maximum integrated 15-minute capacity during each billing period of approximately 30 days, measured in kW; provided, however, that such capacity shall be taken at not less than 90 percent of the measured maximum capacity requirements established during the billing months of June through October falling within the 11 months preceding the billing period. No billing capacity shall be for less than 3,600 kW. 
(g)  Transformer rental . Should more than one transformer installation be required for the use of any customer who does not wish to establish a secondary delivery and metering point, the customer has the option of leasing such transformers from the city or the customer has the option to provide and install transformers. If the customer elect to have the city provide transformers, the monthly rental shall be $0.24515 per kVa of installed transformer capacity, i.e., the transformer nameplate kVa rating times $0.24515. 
(h)  Minimum bill . No monthly bill will be rendered for less than the charge for capacity as described in subsection (f), above, plus the applicable fuel adder. 
(i)  Payment . A bill for the service supplied hereunder shall be rendered by the city for each month; and, if not paid at the city's office by the date requested as set forth on such bill, the city may, at any time thereafter, upon five days' written notice, suspend service; and if not paid within 15 days next succeeding suspension of service, the city may, at its option, treat this agreement as terminated by the customer without notice and at an end, whereupon all rights of the customer hereunder shall cease. 
(j)  Rate adjustments and taxes . The foregoing retail rate, as charged by the city, shall be adjusted automatically and simultaneous with, but not exceeding the proportionate wholesale rate adjustments. Any additional charges levied by the state or federal authorities, such as sales taxes, will be passed on to the customer in addition to the above rate schedule. 
(k)  Power factor . Industrial medium electric customers are required to maintain a power factor of no less than 0.9. If a customer cannot meet this requirement, they will be responsible for purchase, installation, and maintenance of any and all power factor correction equipment as determined by the utilities director or the director's designee. If the corrections are not made within 90 days, the utilities director or the director's designee may terminate the electric service until corrections are made by the customer. 
(Ord. No. 2015-338, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 102-70.2. - Industrial/time of use electrical service/rate class; designation EL/15. 
(a)  Availability . Available to industrial customer as determined by the utilities director or designee. 
(b)  Applicability . The time of use electric service rate EL/15 is applicable for lighting, power and miscellaneous electric service whose integrated 15-minute interval demand is greater than 120 kW or more and where the entire electric requirements of the customer are furnished by the city. Service to more than one premises shall not be combined nor shall it be shared with or resold to others. 
(c)  Character of service . Three-phase service, or combination of single and three-phase, at the voltage of the available primary or secondary distribution lines of the city. Any customer receiving service at two different voltages will be considered as two separate customers for billing purposes. The type and location of metering is to be specified by the city. This rate is based upon ownership of one transformation facility by the city (for primary voltage ratings of 15 kV and below), and should more than one voltage transformation be required the customer is to provide either by purchase or lease such additional transformers as may be needed. 
(d)  Monthly rate . 
Industrial/Time of Use (EL/15) Customer Charge $250.00 Energy Charges: On-Peak: 
For the Period of June 1 through September 30: 
Monday through Friday from 12:00 noon to 7:00 p.m. $0.19455 per kWh Intermediate: 
For the period of June 1 through September 30: 
Monday through Friday from 6:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon, and 
Monday through Friday from 7:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
For the period of October 1 through May 31: 
Monday through Friday from 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. $0.10236 per kWh Off-Peak: 
All time periods not defined above as On-peak or Intermediate, and Holidays-January 1, July 4, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day with the off-peak period defined as the following Monday if the holiday falls on Sunday. $0.04686 per kWh Plus, to this rate shall be added a power cost adjustment. (Section 102-74)  
(e)  Payment: For payment, see subsections 102-34(a), (b) and (c). 
(f)  Rate adjustments and taxes: The foregoing retail rate, as charged by the city, shall be adjusted automatically and simultaneously with wholesale, rate adjustments. Any additional charges levied by the state or federal authorities, such as sales taxes, will be passed on to the customer in addition to the above rate schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2015-338, § 1, 12-1-15; Ord. No. 2018-168, § 1, 7-17-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-338, § 1, adopted Dec. 1, 2015, set out provisions intended for use as § 102-70.3. To preserve the sequential numbering style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 102-70.2. 
Sec. 102-70.3. - Phone booth electric unmetered service/rate class; designation EU/19. 
    The minimum bill shall not be less than $9.91 per month. The bill shall be calculated by using a factor designated as the number of phone booths held active by the customer multiplied by $9.91 to determine the total monthly billing. Plus to this rate shall be added a power cost adjustment (section 102-74), effective with the January 2016 billing cycle. 
(Ord. No. 2015-338, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-338, § 1, adopted Dec. 1, 2015, set out provisions intended for use as § 102-70.4. To preserve the sequential numbering style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 102-70.3. 
Sec. 102-71. - City uses. 
(a)  Monthly report . All electricity used by the various departments of the city shall be accounted for monthly, and a report shall be made available to the board of commissioners, city manager of the monthly kWhs used by the city owned facilities. 
(b)  Rate adjustments and taxes . The retail rate in this section, as charged by the city, shall be adjusted automatically and simultaneously with wholesale rate adjustments. Any additional charges levied by the state or federal authorities, such as sales taxes, will be passed on to the customer in addition to the rate schedule. 
(c)  Rate . The value of all electricity used monthly by the city departments shall be assessed as determined by the most recent cost of service study, plus system losses as determined by the utilities director. 
(Ord. No. 2015-338, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Secs. 102-72, 102-73. - Reserved. 
Sec. 102-74. - Power cost adjustment. 
(a)  This adjustment rider is applicable to electric service furnished under all rate schedules of the utility where a power cost adjustment is included in the rate tariff. 
(b)  There will be added to each monthly bill for electric service a power cost adjustment based on fluctuations between actual wholesale power costs and projected wholesale power costs used to determine current retail rates. This adjustment per kWh, rounded to the nearest $0.00001, will be calculated for two six-month periods in each fiscal year (October through March and April through September). The power cost adjustment will be evaluated monthly and if abnormal or unexpected cost swings occur, the Dothan Utilities Director or authorized representative can change the power cost adjustment when determined necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2015-338, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 102-75. - Power factor adjustment. 
    All three-phase electric customers with a demand of 120 kW or more, may be required to have a power factor of 0.9 or greater as determined by the utilities director or the director's designee. The customer will be responsible for the purchase, installation and maintenance of any and all equipment necessary to meet this requirement. Once notified by the utility, the customer must make corrections within 90 days or be subject to additional fees as determined by the utilities director or the director's designee. 
(Ord. No. 2015-338, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Secs. 102-76-102-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER SERVICE[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority for waterworks generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-50-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 102-101. - Extension of mains. 
(a)  Where an extension of the main water line is required to make water available to users, the city reserves the right to determine whether the potential revenue from prospective customers would warrant such an extension. 
(b)  If the potential revenue from prospective customers is not deemed sufficient to warrant the extension, the subdivision developer or the users may pay for the costs of extending the water mains, for which no reimbursement will be made. 
(c)  When lateral connections are installed from the main water line to the owner's lot, connection fees shall be paid as required in section 102-102, which are not refundable. 
(d)  If required, deposits to guarantee payment of monthly bills shall be paid before water is turned on for use, which may be applied toward payment of any final bill. 
(e)  A written permit shall be obtained by any individual or contractor requesting to tap or connect to the Dothan Utilities water system. Such permit shall be granted only to those with experience that is acceptable to Dothan Utilities, as determined by the utilities director or the director's designee. The permit shall be obtained prior to the commencement of the actual work and after all fees are paid to the Dothan Utilities office. The permit request form and fee schedule will be available at the Dothan Utilities Water section office. Any individual or contractor violating this section shall be billed a fee of $2,000.00 in addition to the applicable permit fee, connection fees and any deposits required. The tap or connection shall not be placed in-service until Dothan Utilities approves the work and all applicable fees and deposits are received by Dothan Utilities. Dothan Utilities reserves the right to determine what taps or connections will be made by Dothan Utilities and what an individual or a contractor will make. 
(f)  Anyone utilizing a water service, tap, fire hydrant or connection to the Dothan water system without the required permits, deposits and/or approvals by Dothan Utilities, shall be in violation of this division and will be considered theft of service. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 102-102. - Water connection fees; cutoff and backflow device requirements. 
(a)  In addition to the deposit to guarantee payment of utilities consumed, the owner of any premises to which water is connected shall be required to pay the following amounts to defray the cost of installing water service lines and meters from the Dothan Utilities' water main to the owner's premises before the installations is made: 
(1)  Three quarter-inch meter set includes the 3/4-inch by 5/8 -inch water meter, brass meter couplings, customer cut-off valve, residential backflow device and meter box at a cost of $150.00. This cost includes labor and equipment to install the above set after the contractor/developer has installed the water service including the lockable, full port curbstop and meter box to Dothan Utilities standards and specifications. The customer is responsible for service lines and connection to the meter set. 
(2)  One-inch meter set includes the one inch water meter, brass meter couplings, customer cut-off valve, residential backflow device and meter box at a cost of $200.00. This cost includes labor and equipment to install the above set after the contractor/developer has installed the water service including the lockable, full port curbstop and meter box to Dothan Utilities standards and specifications. The customer is responsible for service lines and connection to the meter set. 
(3)  Three quarter-inch water service includes the wet tap and corporation, required water service line, curb stop, 3/4-inch by 5/8 -inch water meter, brass meter couplings, customer cut-off valve, residential backflow device and meter box at a cost of $450.00. This cost includes labor and equipment to install the above water service complete to Dothan Utilities standards and specifications. Customer responsible for service lines and connection to meter set. 
(4)  One-inch water service includes the wet tap and corporation, required water service line, curb stop, one inch water meter, brass meter couplings, customer cut-off valve, residential backflow device and meter box at a cost of $500.00. This cost includes labor and equipment to install the above water service complete to Dothan Utilities standards and specifications. The customer is responsible for service lines and connection to the meter set. 
(5)  Water service lines and taps larger than one inch will cost the sum of 110 percent the cost of materials and 125 percent the cost of labor and equipment as determined by the utilities director or the director's designee. 
(6)  A fee of $250.00 will be added to the amounts in subsection (a)(3) through (a)(5) for street cut repairs or street borings (pushunders) with the exception of the primary domestic water service to a residence. The fee above can be increased when a major highway crossing, a large diameter bore, or other specific conditions required an increase as determined by the water department. 
(b)  All meters and materials used in the installations of subsection (a) above shall become part of the Dothan Utilities water system and thereafter shall be maintained by Dothan Utilities with the exception of the customer's hand valve and backflow device. No credits or refunds will be allowed. The water service and meter box shall be protected by the property owner, developer, builder, contractor or whoever has ownership or control of the property. If damage occurs to the water service and/or meter box, Dothan Utilities will bill the individual in control of the property for the cost of repairs and replacements. 
(c)  A cutoff valve shall be placed in the water line on the customer's premises for use by the customer, without the necessity of using the Dothan Utilities' corporation or curb stop. The owner shall also provide a Dothan Utilities approved backflow device, as discussed in subsection (d) below, in the customer's service line to prevent damage to the water meter by steam or hot water and to protect the water system from backflows and cross connections. Repairs to meters damaged by hot water or steam or repairs to water system from backflows, where an owner has failed to install and maintain proper backflow devices, shall be charged to the customer. Failure to install the approved backflow device or pay for such repairs shall be deemed good and sufficient reason for water service to be discontinued until payment is received. When needed, the customer or owner is responsible for the installation and maintenance of thermal expansion units and/or pressure reducing valves. 
(d)  The water department will only install residential backflow devices (dual check backflow devices) for 3/4 inch and one inch water services. If the water department requires another type of backflow device or the customer desires a service larger that one-inch, the customer is responsible for installing and testing the required device in addition to the water service and tap fees above. Customers are required to maintain and repair hand valves and backflow devices on customer service lines. 
(e)  Water services installed in subdivisions, on lots, in private developments and for multi-unit complexes shall include a "tee-connection" for lawn irrigation meters with a minimum diameter of one-inch as determined by Dothan Utilities and in accordance with Dothan Utilities' standards and specifications and at the expense of the developer/owner. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 102-103. - Installation of individual water meters in new and existing private developments. 
(a)  When an owner of a new or existing private development desires to individually meter the units or desires to convert from a master water meter to individual water meters for each unit, the owner shall make application to Dothan Utilities and shall sign a private development agreement. The private development agreement shall be a standard form setting out the requirements of the utilities director in regard to the owner's responsibilities and expenses for the new installation or conversion. 
(b)  Dothan Utilities, at the expense of the owner, shall install water meter sets described in this division after the owner has installed the water lines, fire hydrants, valves, locate wire, service lines, meter boxes, curbstops and other required items in accordance with Dothan Utilities standards, specifications and requirements. Dothan Utilities will maintain, repair and replace (as needed) only the water meters. All other water facilities past the master meter or valve are the responsibility of the owner of the private development. After approval of the private complex water system by the utilities director or the director's designee and required water service fees and deposits have been received by Dothan Utilities, Dothan Utilities will be responsible for reading the water meters monthly and will bill the customers who have deposits for water in the Dothan Utilities office at current Dothan Utilities rates, including applicable sewer fees and sales taxes. Dothan Utilities reserves the right to leave a master meter in-service for the purpose of comparing readings, and if readings of the master meter is greater that the total individual reading, the difference will be paid by the owner of the complex. 
(c)  The owner shall be responsible for securing and paying for any maintenance and repair to all water lines, services and associated facilities located within the complex on the complex side of the master meter or master valve. The owner shall grant to the city the rights of ingress and egress for the purpose of reading and maintaining of water meters and cross connection inspections by city employees. Prior to conversion from the master meter to individual unit metering, the owner shall be responsible for securing the individual deposits and applications for each unit and delivering to Dothan Utilities prior to Dothan Utilities reading any of the individual meters. After completion of the system or conversion and billing arrangements as approved and accepted by the utilities director, the meter readings will be started in the next billing cycle as approved by Dothan Utilities. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Secs. 102-104-102-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RATES, CHARGES AND BILLING 

Sec. 102-131. - Water rates generally. 
(a)  The following classified water rates and applications are defined and established for the sale of water for all classes of service by the city utilities department: 
(1)  Designation. Same as sections 102-32, 102-33 and 102-34. 
(2)  Urban (inside Dothan city limits) residential water rates shall be based upon the meter size charge plus a monthly usage charge per 1,000 gallons: 
a.  Monthly residential meter size charge: 
1.  5/8 -inch by 3/4-inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... $3.50 
2.  1 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 4.50 
3.  11/2 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 10.00 
4.  2 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 16.50 
b.  Monthly residential usage charge per 1,000 gallons: 
1.  0 gallons to 3,000 gallons ..... $1.05 
2.  3,001 gallons to 10,000 gallons ..... 1.25 
3.  10,001 gallons to 60,000 gallons ..... 1.45 
4.  And all over 60,000 gallons ..... 1.95 
(3)  Irrigation (inside Dothan city limits) water rates shall be based upon the meter size charge plus a monthly usage charge per 1,000 gallons: 
a.  Monthly irrigation meter size charge: 
1.  5/8 -inch by 3/4-inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... $4.50 
2.  1 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 6.50 
3.  11/2 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 10.00 
4.  2 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 16.50 
5.  3 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 40.00 
6.  4 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 100.00 
7.  6 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 200.00 
b.  Monthly irrigation usage charge per 1,000 gallons: 
0 gallons to 50,000 gallons ..... $1.45 
And all over 50,001 gallons ..... 1.95 
(4)  Nonresidential urban (inside Dothan city limits and without irrigation) shall be based upon the meter size charge plus a monthly usage charge of $1.30 per 1,000 gallons from zero gallons to 1,000,000 gallons; and $0.95 per 1,000 gallons for all usage over 1,000,000 gallons: 
a.  Monthly nonresidential meter size charge: 
1.  5/8 -inch by 3/4-inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... $4.50 
2.  1 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 6.50 
3.  11/2 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 10.00 
4.  2 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 16.50 
5.  3 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 40.00 
6.  4 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 100.00 
7.  6 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 200.00 
8.  8 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 400.00 
b.  Monthly nonresidential usage charge per 1,000 gallons: 
1.  0 gallons to 1,000,000 gallons ..... $1.30 
2.  And all over 1,000,000 gallons ..... $0.95 
(5)  Urban (inside Dothan city limits and without irrigation) residential multi-unit customer water rates shall be based upon the meter size charge or a unit monthly charge, whichever is greater, plus a monthly usage charge of $1.30 per 1,000 gallons. 
a.  Monthly residential multi-unit meter size charge shall be based upon a $3.25 per unit monthly charge or the table below (whichever is greater): 
1.  5/8 -inch by 3/4-inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... $4.50 
2.  1 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 6.50 
3.  11/2 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 10.00 
4.  2 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 16.50 
5.  3 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 40.00 
6.  4 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 100.00 
7.  6 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 200.00 
8.  8 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 400.00 
(6)  Nonresidential urban (inside Dothan city limits and without irrigation) multi-unit customer water rates shall be based upon the meter size charge or a $4.25 per unit monthly charge, whichever is greater, plus a monthly usage charge of $1.30 per 1,000 gallons from zero gallons to 1,000,000 gallons; and $0.95 per 1,000 gallons for all usage over 1,000,000 gallons: 
a.  5/8 -inch by 3/4-inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... $4.50 
b.  1 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 6.50 
c.  11/2 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 10.00 
d.  2 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 16.50 
e.  3 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 40.00 
f.  4 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 100.00 
g.  6 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 200.00 
h.  8 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 400.00 
(7)  Rural (outside Dothan city limits) residential water rates shall be based upon the meter size charge plus a monthly usage charge per 1,000 gallons: 
a.  Monthly residential rural meter size charge: 
1.  5/8 -inch by 3/4-inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... $4.55 
2.  1 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 5.85 
3.  11/2 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 13.00 
4.  2 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 21.45 
b.  Monthly residential rural usage charge per 1,000 gallons: 
1.  0 gallons to 3,000 gallons ..... $1.36 
2.  3,001 gallons to 10,000 gallons ..... 1.62 
3.  10,001 gallons to 60,000 gallons ..... 1.88 
4.  And all over 60,000 gallons ..... 2.54 
(8)  Irrigation rural (outside Dothan city limits) water rates shall be based upon the meter size charge plus a monthly usage charge per 1,000 gallons: 
a.  Monthly irrigation rural meter size charge: 
1.  5/8 -inch by 3/4-inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... $5.85 
2.  1 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 8.45 
3.  11/2 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 13.00 
4.  2 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 21.45 
5.  3 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 52.00 
6.  4 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 130.00 
7.  6 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 260.00 
b.  Monthly irrigation rural usage charge per 1,000 gallons: 
1.  0 gallons to 50,000 gallons ..... $1.88 
2.  And all over 50,001 gallons ..... 2.54 
(9)  Nonresidential rural (outside Dothan city limits and without irrigation) shall be based upon the meter size charge plus a monthly usage charge of $1.69 per 1,000 gallons from zero gallons to 1,000,000; and $1.24 per 1,000 gallons for all usage over 1,000,000 gallons: 
a.  Monthly nonresidential rural meter size charge: 
1.  5/8 -inch by 3/4-inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... $5.85 
2.  1 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 8.45 
3.  11/2 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 13.00 
4.  2 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 21.45 
5.  3 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 52.00 
6.  4 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 130.00 
7.  6 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 260.00 
8.  8 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 520.00 
(10)  Rural (outside Dothan city limits and without irrigation) residential multi-unit customer water rates shall be based upon the meter size charge or a unit monthly charge, whichever is greater, plus a monthly usage charge of $1.69 per 1,000 gallons. 
b.  Monthly residential rural multi-unit meter size charge shall be based upon a $4.22 per unit monthly charge or the table below (whichever is greater): 
1.  5/8 -inch by 3/4-inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... $5.85 
2.  1 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 8.45 
3.  11/2 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 13.00 
4.  2 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 21.45 
5.  3 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 52.00 
6.  4 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 130.00 
7.  6 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 260.00 
8.  8 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 520.00 
(11)  Nonresidential rural (outside Dothan city limits and without irrigation) multi-unit customer water rates shall be based upon the meter size charge or a $5.52 per unit monthly charge, whichever is greater, plus a monthly usage charge of $1.69 per 1,000 gallons from zero gallons to 1,000,000; and $1.24 per 1,000 gallons for all usage over 1,000,000 gallons: 
a.  5/8 -inch by 3/4-inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... $5.85 
b.  1 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 8.45 
c.  11/2 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 13.00 
d.  2 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 21.45 
e.  3 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 52.00 
f.  4 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 130.00 
g.  6 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 260.00 
h.  8 inch (per month plus usage charge) ..... 520.00 
(12)  Wholesale water rates to another municipality shall be based upon a monthly usage charge of $0.95 per 1,000 gallons plus the nonresidential rural (outside Dothan city limits) customer water meter size charge as shown above. Minimum and maximum monthly usage requirements and charges shall be instituted at the discretion of the utilities director of Utilities. Emergency standby water service to another municipality shall only be available at the approval of Dothan Utilities Management (if adequate supplies are available for Dothan Utilities at the time of request for utilization) and the usage charge shall be based upon the $0.95 per 1,000 gallons charge. 
(13)  Where water is sold through fire hydrants as approved by the utilities director of Utilities, the cost of water shall be $2.00 per 1,000 gallons consumed. Notification of Dothan Utilities is required prior to the use of any fire hydrant. 
(14)  Failure to notify the Dothan Utilities billing office on the occupancy of an apartment, office or trailer for which an extra multi-unit monthly charge should be made shall be deemed a misdemeanor. The multi-unit charge for unoccupied apartments, offices, and house trailers shall cease only when the city is notified of such vacancy and a written order is issued by the Dothan Utilities billing office for record purposes. 
(15)  Water billing for recreational vehicle parks and similar transient facilities shall be based on actual water consumption, as metered by a master meter for the park or facility, at the appropriate rates and meter size charges as defined in this section. 
(16)  Industrial and commercial customers are required to irrigate through a separate water meter billed as an irrigation water meter, not through the nonresidential water meter. 
(17)  Private wells for lawn/landscape irrigation for private residential lots shall not produce more that 25 gpm at 50 psi. No private lawn/landscape irrigation well shall exceed 100 gpm at 50 psi. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Secs. 102-132, 102-133. - Reserved. 
Sec. 102-134. - Fire protection. 
(a)  In addition to the connection fees provided in section 102-102, where standby pressure is maintained for fire protection on any private system, the following monthly payments shall be added to each month's bill for metered water. Such payment is computed at the rate of $5.00 per diameter inch of pipe size connected to the city's water system. 
(1)  Two-inch fire service ..... $10.00 
(2)  Three-inch fire service ..... 15.00 
(3)  Four-inch fire service ..... 20.00 
(4)  Six-inch fire service ..... 30.00 
(5)  Eight-inch fire service ..... 40.00 
(6)  Ten-inch fire service ..... 50.00 
(7)  Twelve-inch fire service ..... 60.00 
(b)  Where fire hydrants and/or other fire service connections are maintained on the owner's premises through metered service, the amounts in subsection (a) of this section shall be added to the monthly minimum charges specified in section 102-131. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 102-135. - Annual rate adjustments. 
    Starting October 1, 2003 and effective each year thereafter on October 1, the water meter service fees, multiuse fees and usage charges will increase by 2.85 percent. The increased rates shall be reflected on the next billing cycle after October 1 of that year. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 102-137. - Senior citizen discount on water usage. 
    Senior citizens over the age of 65 that use 5,000 gallons of water per month or less will receive a $2.00 reduction in their monthly water bill after completion of the required documentation in the finance department, Dothan Utilities Collections Division. This applies to single unit residential dwellings with individual water meters, as well as, residential irrigation meters. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07; Ord. No. 2017-112, § 3, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 102-138. - Designation of use. 
    The funds generated by the Dothan Utilities' water system rate increase shall be designated to be used for the Dothan Utilities' water system. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 102-139. - City uses. 
(a)  Monthly report. All water used by the various departments of the city shall be accounted for monthly, and a report shall be made available to the board of commissioners-and city manager of the monthly thousand gallons used by city owed facilities. 
(b)  Rate. The value of all water used monthly by the city departments shall be assessed at $.11 per 1,000 gallons. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Secs. 102-140-102-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - WATER CONSERVATION PLAN 

Sec. 102-161. - Policy. 
    It is declared that, because of water conditions prevailing and which may prevail in the city, the general welfare requires that the water resources available to the city be put to the maximum beneficial use to the extent to which they are capable and that the waste or unreasonable use or unreasonable methods of use of water be prevented, and the conservation of such water is to be extended with a view to the reasonable and beneficial use thereof in the interests of the people of the city and for the public health and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 102-162. - Authorization. 
    The city manager of the city is authorized and directed to implement the applicable provisions of this division under the city manager's determination that such implementation is necessary to protect the public health and welfare and safety. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 102-163. - Applicability. 
    This division shall apply to all persons, customers and property utilizing city water. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 102-164. - Violations. 
(a)  Violations of this division by any Dothan utilities customer shall receive the following: 
(1)  First offense: Written warning and the violator to correct the violation within 30 minutes of the warning. 
(2)  Second offense in same calendar year: Disconnection of water service(s) with a $100.00 fee to reestablish water service. 
(3)  Third offense in same calendar year: Disconnection of water service(s) with a $500.00 fee to reestablish water service. 
(4)  Fourth offense in same calendar year: Disconnection of water service(s) until the water conservation plan stage that is in effect at the time of the violation has expired and a fee of $1,000.00 to reestablish water service. 
(b)  The above warnings, disconnection notices, and disconnects shall be issued and implemented by the utilities director or the director's designee. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 102-165. - Stages. 
(a)  No customer of or person who uses water from the city shall knowingly make, cause or use water received from the city for residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, governmental or any other purpose in a manner contrary to this division or in an amount in excess of that use permitted by the conservation stage in effect pursuant to action taken by the city manager in accordance with this division. 
(b)  The city manager shall promulgate guidelines which shall set forth the criteria for determining when a particular conservation stage is to be implemented and terminated. Such guidelines shall be updated when, in the opinion of the chief operating officer, the conditions of the utility system have changed so as to necessitate such update. 
(c)  The water conservation stages shall be as follows: 
(1)  Stage I, voluntary conservation. Customers or persons who use city water are requested to voluntarily limit the amount of water to the amount absolutely necessary for health, business and outdoor use. 
(2)  Stage II, mandatory compliance; water alert. Beginning April 1 through October 1 each year, the following restrictions shall apply to all customers or persons who use Dothan Utilities water. Stage II restrictions may be applied to the remaining months of the year upon implementation by the city's city manager and after public notification. 
a.  Irrigation utilizing individual sprinklers from hoses or buried sprinkler systems for the purpose of watering lawns, gardens, landscaped areas, trees, shrubs and other plants is prohibited, except on designated water-use days which shall be as follows: 
1.  Odd-numbered street addresses will water on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday. 
2.  Even-numbered street addresses will water on Sunday, Wednesday and Friday. 
3.  No watering shall be allowed on Monday. 
4.  Newly sodded yards are exempt for a period not to exceed four weeks with written approval from the utilities director or the director's designee. 
b.  This restriction shall not apply to commercial nurseries; however, commercial nurseries should restrict water use to that which is absolutely necessary. Also exempt from the restriction is any handheld garden hose with cut-off/nozzle at end of hose or small handheld watering container which may be used on any day to water small areas that might need more frequent watering. Anyone on any day can use a hose with cutoff/nozzle at end of hose to wash a car or house. 
(3)  Stage III, mandatory compliance; water warning. Upon implementation by the city manager and after public notification, the following restrictions shall be imposed in place of stage II restrictions (until further notice) to all Dothan utilities water customers or persons who use Dothan utilities water: 
a.  Irrigation utilizing individual sprinklers from hoses or buried sprinkler systems for the purpose of watering lawns, gardens, landscaped areas, trees, shrubs and other plants is prohibited, except on designated water-use days which shall be as follows: 
1.  Users of water at street addresses containing odd numbers will water on Tuesday and Saturday. 
2.  Users of water at street addresses containing even numbers will water on Sunday and Wednesday. 
3.  No watering shall be allowed on Monday, Thursday and Friday. 
The intent of this action is to allow each customer to water two times each week, either Tuesday and Saturday or Sunday and Wednesday. On the Tuesday/Saturday and Sunday/Wednesday watering days, no watering may be done between the hours of 5:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. Handheld garden hoses or small handheld watering containers may be used on any day, except during the hours of 5:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. 
b.  Washing of private vehicles is prohibited, except on the Tuesday/Saturday and Sunday/Wednesday odd-even basis. No private vehicles may be washed between the hours of 5:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. Commercial car washes and service stations are exempt from this restriction. 
c.  Swimming pools will be filled only on Tuesday/Saturday and Sunday/Wednesday on the odd/even basis. There shall be no filling between the hours of 5:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. 
d.  Washing of sidewalks, streets, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios or other paved areas is absolutely prohibited, except by the street department and the fire department to alleviate health or fire hazard. 
e.  Taking water from a fire hydrant is prohibited, unless the person taking the water from the fire hydrant has a permit from the water department for an expressed purpose and the date that the hydrant may be used signed by an authorized utility representative. The water department, street department and fire department are exempt from this condition in order to properly maintain the water system and provide for public health and safety. 
f.  The stage III restriction does not apply to commercial nurseries. However, commercial nurseries should restrict water use to what is absolutely necessary. 
(4)  Stage IV, mandatory compliance; water emergency. Upon implementation by the city manager and after public notification, the following restrictions shall be imposed in place of stage II or stage III restrictions (until further notice) to all Dothan Utilities water customers or persons who use Dothan Utilities water: during stage IV, no outside irrigation utilizing individual sprinklers from hoses or buried sprinkler systems for the purpose of watering lawns, gardens, landscaped areas, trees, shrubs and other plants is permitted. Also prohibited are the following: 
a.  The washing of private vehicles is prohibited except at commercial car washes or service stations. 
b.  The use of water from fire hydrants for any reason, other than use by the water department, street department and fire department to maintain the water system and quality, is prohibited. 
c.  The washing of sidewalks, streets, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios or other paved areas is absolutely prohibited, except by the public works department and the fire department to alleviate health or fire hazard. 
d.  The filling of swimming pools is prohibited during the water emergency. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 102-166. - Golf courses. 
    Under this division, any golf course, either public or private, that uses city water for watering greens and fairways must comply with the watering restrictions imposed by water alert (stage II) or water warning (stage III). During a water emergency (stage IV), no water from the city system may be used for watering the fairways. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 102-167. - Mandatory conservation storage implementation. 
    Under this division, the city water department shall monitor its pumping capacity and demand for water by its customers on a daily basis during periods of hot and dry weather and shall recommend to the city manager the extent of conservation required through the implementation or termination of particular conservation stages in order for the city water department to continue to supply adequate water to its customers. Thereafter, the city manager may order the appropriate stage of water conservation to be implemented or terminated in accordance with the applicable sections of this division. The order shall be made by public announcement and shall become effective immediately upon such announcement. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Secs. 102-168-102-195. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEWER[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Authority regarding sewers generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-50-50 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 102-196. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act or the act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
    Approval authority means the director of the state department of environmental management. 
    Authorized representative of industrial user means a person who may be: 
(1)  A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-president if the industrial user is a corporation. 
(2)  A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively. 
(3)  A duly authorized representative of the individual designated in subsection (1) or (2) of this definition if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates. 
    Average flow means the total flow in U.S. gallons in a normal 24-hour calendar day. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)). 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    C means Celsius degrees. 
    Capital costs means required costs of major rehabilitation, betterments, expansion or upgrading as facilities reach the end of their useful life. 
    Categorical standards means the national categorical pretreatment standards or a pretreatment standard. 
    Chlorine demand means the amount of chlorine (C12) required to produce a free chlorine residual of one-tenth mg/l after 30 minutes' contact time. 
    City means the City of Dothan, Alabama, or the city commission of Dothan, Alabama. 
    City's agent means any authorized representative acting in behalf of the city. 
    Consumer means a customer who is utilizing the sewer system operated by the city. 
    Control authority refers to the utilities director. 
    Cooling water means the water discharged from any use, such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
    Direct discharge means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the state. 
    Domestic sewage means liquid or water-carried waste from bathrooms, toilet rooms, kitchens and home laundries. 
    Dothan Utilities Director means the person designated by the city to supervise the operation of the publicly owned electrical system, water system, sanitary sewer collection system and sanitary sewer treatment system and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article or the director's duly authorized representative. 
    Dwelling means any single structure, with auxiliary buildings, occupied by one or more persons or households for residential purposes. 
    Environmental Protection Agency or EPA means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of such agency. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without the consideration of time. 
    Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks, such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
    Indirect discharge means the discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants from any source, regulated under section 307(b) or (c) of the act (33 USC 1317) into the POTW, including holding tank waste discharged into the system. 
    Industrial user means a source of indirect discharge which does not constitute a discharge of pollutants under regulations issued pursuant to section 402 of the act (33 USC 1342). 
    Infiltration means water, other than wastewater, that enters a sewer system, including sewer service connections and foundation drains, from the ground through such means as defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manholes. Infiltration does not include and is distinguished from inflow. 
    Inflow means water, other than wastewater, that enters a sewer system, including sewer service connections, from sources, such as but not limited to roof leaders, cellar drains, yard drains, area drains, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections between storm sewers and sanitary sewers, catchbasins, cooling towers, stormwaters, surface runoff, street washwaters or drainage. Inflow does not include and is distinguished from infiltration. 
    Interference means the inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment processes or operations which contributes to a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit. The term includes the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with section 405 of the act (33 USC 1345) or any criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Standards Control Act or more stringent state criteria, including those contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to title IV of SWDA, applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW. 
    Measuring device means a device or instrument used for the determination of quantity of water used by a customer or person or of the quantity of sewage or wastewater discharged into the sewer system. 
    Mg/l means milligrams per liter or parts per million. 
    National categorical pretreatment standard or pretreatment standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the act (33 USC 1347) which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
    National pollution discharge elimination system permit or NPDES permit means a permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the act (33 USC 1342). 
    National prohibitive discharge standard or prohibitive discharge standard means any regulation developed under the authority of section 307(b) of the act and 40 CFR 403.5. 
    New source means any source, the construction of which is commenced after the publication of proposed regulations prescribing a section 307(c) (33 USC 1317) categorical pretreatment standard which will be applicable to such source, if such standard is thereafter promulgated within 120 days of a proposal in the Federal Register. When the standard is promulgated later than 120 days after the proposal, a new source means any source, the construction of which is commenced after the date of the promulgation of the standard. 
    Operation and maintenance means those functions that result in expenditures during the useful life of the treatment works for materials, labor, utilities and others which are necessary for managing and which such works were designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes "replacement," as defined in this section. 
    Peak flow means the maximum rate of flow occurring at any time. 
    Permit means any permit or equivalent document or requirement issued to regulate the discharge of pollutants. 
    Person means any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, institution or group as indicated by the context in which used. 
    pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration expressed in moles per liter. 
    Pollutant means dredged spoil; solid waste; incinerator residue; sewage; garbage; sewage sludge; munitions; chemical wastes; biological materials; radioactive materials; heat; wrecked or discarded equipment; rock; sand; cellar dirt; and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water. 
    Pollution means the alteration, either manmade or man-induced, of the chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of water. 
    Pretreatment or treatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging, or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes or process changes by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d). 
    Pretreatment requirement means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard, imposed on an industrial user. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of foods that have been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
    Public sanitary sewer or public sewer means a sewer owned or controlled by the city which carries sewage or polluted industrial wastes and to which stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters and unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted. 
    Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means a treatment works, as defined by section 212 of the act (33 USC 1292), which is owned by the city. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this article, POTW shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city's POTW. 
    Replacement means expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage or polluted industrial wastes and to which stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters and unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be present. 
    Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices, equipment or structures used for treating sewage. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Sewer connection means a sewer pipeline running laterally from a street sewer, an off-street sewer or a trunk sewer to an individual tract, lot or parcel of land to serve one or more houses or other buildings, whether or not connected to any house or building. 
    Sewer lateral consists of the pipeline extending from any sewer main of the city to private property. 
    Sewer service charge means the amount charged to the customer, which includes a user charge, a charge for capital reserve and debt service, other charges for current services or all of these. 
    Sewer system means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of domestic sewage and industrial wastes. 
    Significant industrial user means any industrial user of the city's wastewater disposal system who discharges nondomestic wastewater and who: 
(1)  Has a discharge flow or the domestic waste equivalent of 25,000 gallons or more per average workday; 
(2)  Has a flow or organic loading greater than five percent of the flow or load to the receiving wastewater treatment facility; 
(3)  Has in the user's his wastes toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to section 307 of the act or state statutes and rules; or 
(4)  Is found by the city, the state department of environmental management or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality or air emissions generated by the system. 
    Slug means the discharge of any wastewater exceeding a flow or pollutant concentration greater than three times that of the average daily wastewater flow or pollutant concentration, and which is discharged continuously for a period longer than 15 minutes. 
    Standard industrial classification (SIC) means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972. 
    Standard methods means an analytical technique found in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation or in the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Water Quality Office Publication entitled "Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes." 
    Storm sewer or storm drain means a pipe or conduit, ditch or canal designed and constructed to carry stormwaters and surface waters and drainage, uncontaminated cooling water and unpolluted waters, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
    Stormwater runoff means that portion of the rainfall which reaches a drain. 
    Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    TOC (total organic carbon) means the quantity of organic carbon analyzed in a water sample as determined in accordance with a standard method. 
    Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of CWA 307(a) or other acts. 
    Unpolluted water or waste means any water or waste containing no free or emulsified grease or oil; acid or alkali, phenols or other substances imparting taste and odor in receiving waters; toxic and poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution; and noxious or odorous gases and other polluting materials, including flammable gases. These waters shall contain not more than 10,000 ppm of dissolved solids, of which not more than 2,500 ppm shall be as chloride, and not more than ten ppm of suspended solids and 20 ppm of total organic carbon. The water color shall not exceed 50 color units above background waters used for domestic purposes. 
    User means any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the city's POTW. 
    User charge means that portion of the total sewer service charge which is levied in a proportional and adequate manner for the cost of operation, maintenance and replacement of the wastewater treatment works. User charge does not include bond retirement, debt service, capital costs, etc. 
    Wastewater is the equivalent of sewage. 
    Wastewater contribution permit means the permit as set forth in section 102-297. 
    Waters of the state means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 102-197. - Purpose of article. 
    The general purpose of this article is to set forth and provide for the rightful and proper use of the sewer system owned, operated and maintained by the city in order to promote the health, welfare and safety of the citizens of the state. To accomplish this purpose, all users of the sewer system must comply with the rules and regulations contained in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 102-198. - Scope of article. 
(a)  The rules and regulations in this article: 
(1)  Prohibit the contribution of toxic compounds or substances in toxic concentrations and wastewater or sewage which may cause operational or maintenance difficulties or deterioration in the sewers, force mains, pumping stations, and other structures appurtenant to the sewer system or contaminate the resulting sludge. 
(2)  Establish a system of controls and municipal permits for all significant industrial or commercial dischargers. 
(3)  Prohibit the introduction of pollutants into the city sewer system which will pass through the system inadequately treated into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be compatible with the system. 
(4)  Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludge from the city sewer system. 
(5)  Establish a distribution of equitable costs for services and improvements to the sewer system for all consumers within the areas furnished sanitary sewer services and sewer treatment. The rate schedule for all customers using the sewer system shall be on a unit volume basis that does not allow any quantity discount. 
(6)  Establish a uniform procedure for design, installation, inspection, operation, maintenance, recordkeeping and billing for the entire sewer system. 
(7)  Comply with state and federal regulations and requirements with regard to the sewer system and maintenance of water quality parameters in accord with assigned standards for the receiving streams. 
(b)  This article provides for the regulation of contributors to the city sewer system through the issuance of permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of general requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires user reporting, assumes that an existing customer's capacity will not be preempted and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established in this article. 
(c)  This article shall apply to the city and to persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city POTW. Except as otherwise provided in this article, the utilities director shall administer, implement and enforce this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 102-199. - Annual budget. 
    Under this article, the department head shall prepare the annual budget and submit the budget to the city manager for approval. After passage of the annual budget by the board of commissioners, no expenditure is to be paid from either the capital or the operating budget without the prior approval of the department head. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 102-200. - Determination of economic feasibility of trunk line extension. 
    The city reserves the right to determine whether any trunk line extension or sewer service is economically feasible and will be in the best interest of the city and to determine whether any chemical or industrial waste shall be disposed of by connection to the city sewer system. Such determination shall be made only at a regular or regular adjourned meeting of the board of commissioners and shall be recorded in the minutes of such meeting. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 102-201. - Defective or unsanitary privy, water closet or septic tank. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the corporate limits or police jurisdiction of the city to use or permit the use of any privy, water closet or septic tank which is defective, unclean or for any reason unsanitary or which does not conform to the rules and regulations of the state board of health, and each day of use thereof in violation of this section shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 102-202. - Compliance required. 
    Compliance with this article shall be conditions for furnishing sewer service by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 102-203. - Article constitutes part of permits. 
    The rules and regulations contained in this article are a part of all residential, commercial, industrial, individual or institutional permits which allow the discharge of sewage or wastewater into the sewer system owned and operated by the city for the adequate treatment of such wastes with proper disposal of the treated effluent. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Secs. 102-204-102-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROHIBITED DISCHARGES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Environmental management generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-22A-1 et seq. 

Sec. 102-231. - General discharge prohibitions. 
(a)  Under this article, no user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation or performance of the POTW. These general prohibitions apply to all such users of a POTW whether or not the user is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements. A user may not contribute the following substances to any POTW: 
(1)  Any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial or commercial process water. The city may grant a waiver to this restriction upon the presentation by a user of evidence that compliance with this prohibition would work an undue hardship on the user considering the volume of proposed water flow, cost of installation of drainage facilities or other factors the city may deem pertinent. 
(2)  Clothing, rags, textile remnants or waste, paper, cloth, scraps, unless such materials are less than one-inch square and will not interfere with operation of the POTW. 
(3)  Any wastewater having a temperature which will damage the sewer collection system or will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the POTW treatment plant which exceeds 40 degrees Celsius (104 degrees Fahrenheit) unless the POTW treatment plant is designed to accommodate such temperature. 
(4)  Petroleum oils or greases and exhaust gases from internal combustion engines in excess of 50 mg/l. 
(5)  Liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quality may cause fire or explosion, may be in any way harmful or injurious to persons or cause damage to the POTW or interfere with the operation of a POTW. At no time, shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system or at any point in the system be more than five percent or any single reading over ten percent of the lower explosive limit (LED) of the meter. 
(6)  Sewage or wastewater having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment or personnel associated with the sewer system. 
(7)  Wastes containing any toxic or poisonous substances in toxic quantities to: 
a.  Interfere with the treatment processes used in the sewage treatment plant; or 
b.  Which, in combination with other wastes or sewage, upon passing through a sewage treatment plant, will be harmful to persons, livestock or aquatic life utilizing the receiving stream into which the treated effluent from the sewage treatment plant is discharged. 
(8)  Noxious or malodorous gases or substances capable of creating a public nuisance while being conveyed through the sanitary sewer and at the treatment plant operating in its normal mode. 
(9)  Garbage that has not been properly shredded. 
(10)  Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, grease, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, lime slurry, lime residues, processing slopes, chemical residues, paint residues, cannery waste bulk solids, or any other solids or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage collection system or sewage treatment plant. 
(11)  Materials which form excessive amounts of scum that may interfere with the operation of the sewer system or cause undue additional labor in connection with its operation. 
(12)  Waters or wastes containing dyes or other color substances which cannot be removed by the existing treatment processes and which require special chemical treatment in order for the sewage treatment plant effluent to meet stream or effluent parameters set by state and federal law or regulations in accordance with assigned stream standards. 
(13)  Any long half-life (over 100 days) radioactive isotope, without written permission of the city. The radio isotopes I-131 and P-32 used at hospitals are not prohibited if dilution at the source is determined to be adequate by the utilities director. 
(14)  Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under section 405 of the act; any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used. 
(15)  Any substances which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit or the receiving water quality standards. 
(16)  Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released at a flow rate or pollutant concentration which a user knows or has reason to know will cause interference to the POTW. In no case shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain concentration or qualities of pollutants that exceed for any time period longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration, quantities or flow during normal operation. 
(17)  Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance. 
(b)  When the utilities director determines that a user is contributing to the POTW any of the substances listed in subsection (a) of this section in such amounts as to interfere with the operation of the POTW, the utilities director shall: 
(1)  Advise the user of the impact of the contribution on the POTW; and 
(2)  Develop effluent limitations for such user to correct the interference with the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 102-232. - Federal categorical pretreatment standards. 
(a)  Generally. Upon the promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this article for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this article. The utilities director shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12. 
(b)  Modification. Where the city's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent removal of pollutants limited by federal pretreatment standards, the city may apply to the approval authority for modification of specific limits in the federal pretreatment standards. Consistent removal shall mean reduction in the amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant by the wastewater treatment system to a less toxic or harmless state in the effluent when measured according to the procedures set forth in 40 CFR 403, "General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution," promulgated pursuant to the act. The city may then modify pollutant discharge limits in the federal pretreatment standards if the requirements contained in 40 CFR 403 are fulfilled and prior approval from the approval authority is obtained. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 102-233. - Specific pollutant limitations. 
(a)  No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following concentrations to the POTWs listed below: 
Maximum Monthly Average Concentration (mg/l) 
Pollutant LCWWTP Omussee Cypress Arsenic 2.0 2.0 1.5 Cadmium 0.05 0.05 0.05 Chromium 5.0 5.0 1.5 Copper 3.5 3.5 0.1 Cyanide 2.0 1.5 0.5 Lead 1.5 1.5 1.5 Mercury 0.01 0.01 0.01 Nickel 3.0 3.0 3.0 Silver 0.01 0.01 0.01 Toluene 500 500 500 Zinc 30.0 30.0 4.0  
(b)  These limits are maximum average monthly concentrations based on a total permitted pollutant containing flow to each plant of 50,000 GPD or less. More stringent limits may be developed for users who discharge more than 50,000 GPD of wastewater containing a regulated pollutant or for groups of users who in combination cause the total pollutant containing flow to a POTW to exceed 50,000 GPD. This shall be determined on a case-by-case basis by the city at the time of permit issuance. 
(c)  Maximum allowable weekly average concentrations shall not exceed 150 percent of the values listed in subsection (a) of this section subject to the 50,000 GPD limit. More stringent limits may also be imposed for pollutants listed in subsection (a) of this section which are discharged in difficult forms or which may have synergistic effects when combined with other pollutants. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07; Ord. No. 2015-337, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 102-234. - State requirements. 
    State requirements and limitations on discharges under this article shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 102-235. - City's right of revision. 
    The city reserves the right to establish by ordinance more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal system if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in subsection 102-198(a)(1). 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 102-236. - Excessive discharge. 
    Under this article, no user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the federal categorical pretreatment standards or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the city or state. (Comment: Dilution may be an acceptable means of complying with some of the prohibitions set forth in subsection 102-231, e.g., the pH prohibition.) 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 102-237. - Accidental discharges. 
(a)  Facilities, plans to prevent notification of POTW of accident. Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances required by this article. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city for review and shall be approved by the city before construction of the facility. No user who commences contribution to the POT after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the city. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article. If an accidental discharge occurs, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume and corrective actions. 
(b)  Written notice. Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the utilities director a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills or any other damage to person or property, nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law. 
(c)  Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees who to call if a dangerous discharge occurs. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 102-238. - Unlawful discharge except as authorized. 
    Under this article, it shall be unlawful to discharge without a city permit to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city and to the POTW any wastewater except as authorized by the utilities director in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Secs. 102-239-102-265. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 102-266. - Penalties and costs for violations. 
(a)  Civil penalties. Any user who is found to have violated an order of the board of commissioners or who willfully or negligently failed to comply with any section of this article and the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued under this article shall be fined not less than $100.00 or more than $1,000.00 for each offense. Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided in this subsection, the city may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, court reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this article or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued under this article. 
(b)  Falsifying information. Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article or the wastewater contribution permit or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment for not more than six months or by both. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 102-267. - Enforcement procedures. 
(a)  Discontinuance of service. 
(1)  The city may suspend the wastewater treatment service and a wastewater contribution permit when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the city, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to the environment, which causes interference to the POTW, which causes the city to violate any condition of its NPDES permit or for nonpayment of any applicable obligation due to the city's sewer system. 
(2)  Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service or the wastewater contribution permit due to public or environmental endangerment or POTW interference shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. If the person fails to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individual. The city shall reinstate the wastewater contribution permit and the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the city within 15 days of the date of occurrence. 
(3)  Discontinuance of service by the city for any causes stated in this article shall not release the customer from liability for service already received or from liability for payments that thereafter become due under the billing provisions or other provisions of the customer's agreement. The city shall have the right to refuse to render service to any applicant who is furnished sewer services when the customer is in default in the payment of any obligation to the city or has had service disconnected because of a violation of this article. 
(b)  Revocation of permit. Any user who violates the following conditions of this article or applicable state and federal regulations is subject to having the permit revoked in accordance with the procedures of this article: 
(1)  Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of the user's discharge; 
(2)  Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(3)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; 
(4)  Violation of conditions of the permit; or 
(5)  Modifies facilities without obtaining prior written approval from the city according to city requirements. 
(c)  Notice of violation. Whenever the city finds that any user has violated or is violating this article, the wastewater contribution permit or any prohibition, limitation of requirements contained in this article, the city may serve upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within 30 days of the date of the notice, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the city by the user. 
(d)  Show cause hearing. 
(1)  The city may order any user who causes or allows an unauthorized discharge to enter the POTW to show cause before the board of commissioners why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the board of commissioners regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to show cause before the board of commissioners why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation. 
(2)  The board of commissioners may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence or may designate any of its members or any officer or employee of the engineering department to: 
a.  Issue in the name of the board of commissioners notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings. 
b.  Take the evidence. 
c.  Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the board of commissioners for action thereon. 
(3)  At any hearing held pursuant to this article, testimony taken must be under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof. 
(4)  After the board of commissioners has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances shall have been installed on existing treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued. 
(e)  Legal action. If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the city's wastewater disposal system contrary to this article, federal or state pretreatment requirements or any order of the city, the city attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal and equitable relief in the circuit court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07; Ord. No. 2009-311, § 1, 9-22-09) 
Sec. 102-268. - Interruption of service; use of laterals; availability of service; private wastewater disposal; connection fee. 
(a)  Interruption of service. The city shall not be liable for any damage resulting from the failure of any sewer main, service pipes or valves or by discontinuing the operation of its wastewater collection, treatment and sewer facilities for repair, extensions or connections or from the accidental failure of the wastewater collection system or treatment and disposal facilities or from any cause whatsoever. In an emergency, the city shall have the right to restrict the use of its wastewater collection, treatment and disposal facilities in any reasonable manner for the protection of the city and its sewer system. 
(b)  Use and maintenance of sewer laterals. Sewer laterals that have been previously used but have been abandoned due to the razing of a building structure may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and testing by a licensed plumber to the satisfaction of the city, to meet all requirements of this article. When a building structure is razed and the sewer lateral is to be abandoned, the owner of the property must supply written certification that the lateral has been plugged and located on a map for future use, using distance measurements to landmarks or points of interest. The certification shall be signed by the contractor or owner performing the work and the city inspector who witnessed the installation of the plug. Responsibility for maintenance of a sewer lateral lies entirely with the owner of the serviced property. This includes all portions of the sewer lateral from the structure being serviced to the main sewer line whether located in the public right-of-way or public easement. The city may perform repairs on portions of the service lateral located in the public right-of-way when requested to do so by the owner of the serviced property. No pavement or curbing of any public street or thoroughfare may be disturbed or cut in any way without prior approval from the director of the utilities department or his designee. Persons requesting city assistance with maintenance of a sewer lateral must execute an agreement whereby the city is held harmless for any liability for damages, including personal injury and property damage, whether real or personal, resulting directly or indirectly from the city's efforts to remedy the defect in the sewer lateral, whether on private property, public right-of-way or easement. 
    In the event a defect in the sewer lateral is discovered by the city, notice will be given to the owner of the serviced property that it must be repaired within 45 days. Failure or refusal of said owner to make proper repairs as identified by the city as requested will be grounds for immediate disconnection of the property owner's water and/or electric service. A reconnection fee of $25.00 will be assessed by the city upon completion of repairs after reconnection. 
    All installations of sewer laterals must include a clean-out assembly at the property line. Clean-outs that are located in the street, pavement or sidewalk shall be made of brass or an approved metallic section to twelve inches below grade with a traffic-supporting structure. All cleanouts shall be flush with the surface. 
    In the event the city performs work on a sewer lateral without a clean-out assembly, one will be installed by the city at the owner's expense. 
(c)  Availability of sanitary sewers. At such times as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system that is functioning properly, connection to the public sewer may be waived. However, once the private wastewater disposal becomes defective, direct connection shall be made within 30 days to the public sewer in compliance with this article. An extension of time may be granted by the public works director/city engineer for cause; however, the granting of the extension of time will not waive the payment of the sewer service charge. Any defective septic tanks, cesspools and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. As long as the private wastewater system is operating properly and connection is not made to the public sewer, no payment for the sewer service charge shall be required. 
(d)  Private wastewater disposal within city limits. Where a sanitary sewer is not available, the building sewer shall be connected to a private disposal system complying with all city ordinances and county health department regulations relating to this subject. The sewer shall be considered available where the first floor of the building above ground level can enter the city's main by gravity flow or where the main is within 150 feet of any portion or corner of the property that can enter the city's main by gravity flow. Where new sanitary sewers are constructed, the premises which can or should be connected to the new sewer, in accordance with this article and amendments thereto, shall be subject to the sewer service charge as soon as connections are made to the new sewer. 
(e)  Connection fee. A connection fee shall be paid in accordance with section 102-333 before the sewer connection is made. The property owner may pay the connection fee at the time the sewer becomes available, even though, in accordance with this section, connection may not be made until later. If the connection fee is increased at a later date, no additional fee will be charged if already paid. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 102-269. - Connection required when sewer accessible. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to connect with a public sewer within 30 days from the receipt of written notice by the public works director/city engineer or the county board of health to so connect whenever such public sewer and a public water supply are reasonably accessible. Such public sewer and public water supply shall be deemed to be reasonably accessible when such public water supply and public sewer are within a distance of 150 feet of any outside line on the lot upon which any dwelling or other building is located, provided such sewer can be reached without crossing the property of another. When such property or premises is not subdivided into lots and so designated on available surveys or maps of record, the distance shall be deemed to apply to the nearest portion of such dwelling or other building. 
(b)  This section shall apply to all persons and property within the corporate limits or the police jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Secs. 102-270-102-295. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Permits and Reports 

Sec. 102-296. - Plumbing permits. 
    Under this article, all users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the POTW, whether residential, commercial or industrial, shall obtain a plumbing permit before connecting to the POTW. The individual obtaining the plumbing permit shall certify that they have inspected the sewer lateral stub-out to confirm it is free from defects and open to the main sewer line. This requirement is in addition to any other permit requirements that may be applicable, depending on the nature and size of the proposed discharge. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 102-297. - Wastewater contribution permit. 
(a)  Required. All significant industrial users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater contribution permit before connecting to or contributing to the POTW. 
(b)  Permit application. Users required to obtain a wastewater contribution permit shall complete and file with the city an application in the form prescribed by the city and accompanied by a fee also prescribed by the city. Proposed new users shall apply at least 90 days prior to connecting to or contributing to the POTW. In support of the application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, and location, if different from the address. 
(2)  SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended. 
(3)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including but not limited to those mentioned in division 2 of this article as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to section 304(g) of the act and contained in 40 CFR 136, as amended. 
(4)  Time and duration of contribution. 
(5)  Average daily and three-minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations if any. 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances by the size, location and elevation. 
(7)  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises including all materials which are or could be discharged. 
(8)  Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any city, state or federal pretreatment standards and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards. 
(9)  If additional pretreatment and O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule: 
a.  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.). 
b.  No increments referred to in subsection (b)(9)a of this section shall exceed nine months. 
c.  Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the utilities director including, as a minimum, whether or not the user complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which the user expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the utilities director. 
(10)  Each product produced by type, amount, process and rate of production. 
(11)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day). 
(12)  Number and type of employees and hours of operation of the plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of the pretreatment system. 
(13)  Any other information as may be deemed by the city or approval authority to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
    The city will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the city may issue a wastewater contribution permit subject to the terms and conditions provided in this section. A draft of each proposed wastewater contribution permit shall be provided the industrial user with a 30-day comment period. No comment within 30 days will result in issuance of the permit as proposed. 
(c)  Permit modifications. Within nine months of the promulgation of a national categorical pretreatment standard, the wastewater contribution permits of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard within the timeframe prescribed by such standard. Where a user, subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously submitted an application for a wastewater contribution permit as required by subsection (b) of this section, the user shall apply for a wastewater contribution permit within 180 days after the promulgation of the applicable national categorical pretreatment standard. In addition, the user with an existing wastewater contribution permit shall submit to the utilities director within 180 days after the promulgation of an applicable federal categorical pretreatment standard the information required by subsections (b)(8) and (9) of this section. 
(d)  Permit conditions. Wastewater contribution permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this article and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the city. Permits may contain the following: 
(1)  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer. 
(2)  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics. 
(3)  Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization. 
(4)  Requirements for the installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities. 
(5)  Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule. 
(6)  Compliance schedules. 
(7)  Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports. 
(8)  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the city and affording city access thereto. 
(9)  Requirements for notification to the city or any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system. 
(10)  Requirements for notification of slug discharges. 
(11)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure compliance with this article. 
(e)  Term. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the city during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified in subsection (b) of this section are modified or other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in the user's permit at least 30 days prior to the elective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(f)  Transferability. Wastewater contribution permits are issued to a specific user or a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises or a new or changed operation without the approval of the city. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing permit. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 102-298. - Reporting requirements for wastewater contribution permit. 
(a)  Compliance date report. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the utilities director a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards and requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units in the user facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards or requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional O&M or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user, and certified to by a qualified professional. 
(b)  Periodic compliance reports. 
(1)  Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge into the POTW shall submit to the utilities director during the months of June and December, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the utilities director, a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of all daily flows which during the reporting period exceeded the average daily flow recorded in section 102-297. At the discretion of the utilities director and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the utilities director may agree to alter the months during which such reports are to be submitted. 
(2)  The utilities director may impose mass limitations on users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or when the imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. In such cases, the report required by subsection (b)(1) of this section shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. These reports shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or production and mass where requested by the utilities director of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be prescribed in the applicable pretreatment standards. All analyses shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the administrator pursuant to section 304(g) of the act and contained in 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto or with any other test procedures approved by the administrator. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 102-299. - Monitoring facilities, inspection and sampling, pretreatment, confidential information. 
(a)  Monitoring facilities. 
(1)  Under this article, the city shall require to be provided and operated at the user's own expense monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling and flow measurement of the building sewer and internal drainage systems. The monitoring facility should be situated at an uncontrolled point in order that the city may carry out compliance sampling without restriction to the sampling point. 
(2)  There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling and measurement equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. 
(3)  Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the city's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall he completed within 90 days following written notification by the city unless a time extension is requested by the user within ten days of receipt of notification. Such a request for a time extension shall be accompanied by justification for such an extension. 
(b)  Inspection and sampling. The city shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this article is being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the city ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination or in the performance of any of its duties. The city, approval authority and EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling inspection, compliance monitoring and metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into the user's premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with the user's security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city, approval authority and EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(c)  Pretreatment. 
(1)  Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all federal categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review and shall be acceptable to the city before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under this article. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and shall be acceptable to the city prior to the user's initiation of the changes. 
(2)  The city shall annually publish in the largest local daily newspaper a list of the users who were significantly violating applicable pretreatment requirements or standards during the 12 previous months. Significant violations would be those which remain uncorrected 45 days after notification of noncompliance, which are part of a pattern of noncompliance over a 12-month period or which involve a failure to accurately report noncompliance. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the user during the same 12 months. 
(3)  All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the EPA or approval authority upon request. 
(d)  Confidential information. 
(1)  Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restrictions unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. 
(2)  When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this article, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, state indirect discharge permit and the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
(3)  Information accepted by the city as confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency by the city until and unless a ten-day notification is given to the user. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 102-300. - Commercial wastewater disposal service. 
(a)  Application for permit. No person shall clean out, drain, flush, or discharge any septic tank or any other type of wastewater, grease trap waste, or excreta disposal system within the jurisdictional limits of this article unless such person obtains a permit from the city to perform such acts or services. Providing the above described services within the corporate limits of the city without a city permit is in violation of the Code and those actions are subject to penalties as defined in the Code. Any person desiring a permit to perform such services shall file with the city an application for such permit to the prescribed form. Upon any such application, the permit shall be issued by the city when the conditions of this article have been met and providing the city is satisfied that the applicant has adequate and proper equipment to perform the services contemplated and has sufficient knowledge of septic tank or other wastewater or excreta disposal system construction to perform the services contemplated in a safe and competent manner. Permit applications may be obtained at the Dothan Utilities operation complex. 
(b)  Fees. For each commercial wastewater disposal permit issued under this article, an annual service charge shall be paid to the city in the amount of $100.00. Any such permit granted shall be for one full fiscal year of the city or a fraction thereof, and the full service charge shall be payable for any fraction of the fiscal year and shall continue in full force and effect from the time issued until the ending of the city's fiscal year unless sooner revoked and shall be nontransferable. 
(c)  Display of number on vehicle. The number of the permit granted under this section shall be plainly painted on each side of each motor vehicle used in the conduct of the business permitted under this article. The number of the permit shall also be listed plainly on the manifest for each load discharged, along with content description, volume, and point of origin. 
(d)  Designated disposal locations. The utilities director shall designate approved locations (typically the discharge site will be the Omussee Wastewater Treatment Plant, but alternate locations may be approved by the utilities director or the director's designee, if justifiable cause is demonstrated by the hauler) for the emptying and cleansing of all equipment used in the performance of the services required under such a valid permit, and it shall be a violation for any person to empty or clean such equipment at any place other than a place so designated. 
(e)  Disposal charges. As follows: Any person having such a permit shall be charged on a volume basis for only domestic sewage and sludge or grease trap waste to be discharged into the sewer system at a rate of $50.00 per 1,000 gallons for points of origin inside the city limits, towns or municipalities adjacent to the city limits, or areas within the county beginning April 1, 2007. The domestic sewage and sludge or grease trap waste charge shall increase by 2.85 percent starting October 1, 2009 and then increase by 2.85 percent each October 1 thereafter. In absence of calibrated metering equipment, the charged volume will be based upon the capacity of the tanker discharging into the city system. No volume will be discharged before a certified manifest showing each location with specific volume serviced for the specific load is provided to and accepted by city utilities personnel. No other type sewage or sludge shall be accepted for disposal. 
(f)  Revocation of permit. Failure to comply with all the requirements of this article shall be sufficient cause for the revocation of such permit by the city. The possession within the jurisdictional limits of this article by any person or any motor vehicle equipped with a body type and accessories of a nature and design capable of serving as a septic tank or wastewater excreta disposal system cleaning unit shall be prima facie evidence that such person is engaged in the business of cleaning, draining or flushing septic tanks or other wastewater or excreta disposal systems within the jurisdictional limits of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07; Ord. No. 2009-311, § 2, 9-22-09) 
Secs. 102-301-102-330. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FEES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 102-331. - Charges and billing. 
(a)  Wastewater service charge. The wastewater service charge for all wastewater is based on the water discharged to the sewer system as measured by the public water supply meter and by any supplementary meter necessary to measure the amount of water discharged. The basic wastewater service charge shall be determined upon the metered flow and at rates as provided in this section as follows: 
(1)  Single point delivery. The rates fixed by this article are based upon the supply of service to the entire premises through a single delivery and metering point on single discharge and metering point. If service is rendered to any customers or premises through more than one point, the city reserves the right to meter and to bill each such point as a separate service. 
(2)  Multiple services through single meter. Where the city allows more than one premises to be served through a single service line and meter, the amount of water used or discharged by all the premises served through a single service line and meter on single discharge line and meter shall be allocated to each separate premises thus served by dividing the amount of water so used by the number of premises served. The sewer service charge for each such premises thus served shall be computed just as if each premises had received through a separately metered service the amount of water used or discharged, such computation to be made at the city's applicable sewer service charge rates. The separate charges for each premises served through a single service line and meter shall then be added together and the sum thereof shall be billed to the customer in whose name the service is supplied. 
(3)  Secondary meters. Any customer qualified to use a secondary meter for the purpose of measuring water not discharged to the sanitary sewer or measuring water discharged into the sanitary sewer to effect a reduction in the wastewater service charge must furnish and install the meter at the customer's expense. All expenses incident thereto, including testing, repair, maintenance, billing and reading, shall be borne by the property owner or occupant. The reading and billing expense will be determined by the city and charged off on the account to be credited each month. The meter must meet the requirements and standards of new meters then being installed by the city. When a customer furnishes his own meter, the meter shall remain the property of the customer. No secondary meter shall be installed without written approval from the city. Secondary meters are to be installed by persons qualified to do plumbing under Ordinance No. 3734 and amendments thereto. Upon completion of the installation, the city shall be notified in writing and the work of installation shall be inspected and approved by an authorized agent of the city. 
(4)  Alternate water supplies. Wells or sources of water supply other than municipal water supplies shall be registered in writing with the city, giving the name of the individual or firm, the address, source and approximate amount of water supply other than that from municipal water supplies, together with a sketch of an approximate scale showing a plan of the property, water distribution system, and sewer layout. 
a.  The residential customer shall be billed at the maximum residential sewer service charge each month. 
b.  For commercial facilities and industrial plants using water from private sources rather than being metered from a public water system, which water is discharged into the municipal sewer system, the charges shall be based upon a recording meter approved by the Dothan Utilities Manager, installed and maintained by the person, plant or establishment served. The meter shall be accessible to city personnel at all times. Such meter installation shall be properly installed and maintained to the complete and continuing approval of the utilities director. 
(b)  Surcharges for extra strength wastes. Users who discharge or cause to be discharged extra strength wastes to the sewer system in accordance with this article will be subject to a surcharge to reimburse the city for above-normal operating and maintenance expense incurred in treating and disposing of the discharge. The surcharge for extra strength wastes will be assessed in accordance with this article. Failure to pay entire surcharges for extra strength wastes bill shall be the cause for disconnecting services in accordance with section 102-34. Strong domestic waste shall be defined as follows: 
Constituent Concentration (mg/l) Total suspended solids 350 Settleable solids 20 ml/l Biochemical oxygen demand BOD 5 400 Total organic carbon 290 Oil and grease 150 Total nitrogen 85 Total phosphorus 15  
(c)  Other charges and fees. In addition to the basic wastewater service charge and any applicable surcharges, the city may also adopt charges and fees which may include: 
(1)  Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program. 
(2)  Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures. 
(3)  Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction. 
(4)  Fees for the permit application. 
(5)  Fees for filing appeals. 
(6)  Fees for consistent removal by the city of pollutants otherwise subject to federal pretreatment standards. 
(7)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained in this article. 
    These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 102-332. - Miscellaneous charges. 
(a)  The sewer charges made in this article shall be charged to all locations where sewer service is rendered and may be charged as a whole for each location. 
(b)  If any bill for monthly utility services on any such location or building shall remain due and unpaid on the day the utility services furnished by the city to such location or building becomes in arrears, such utility services shall be disconnected and shall not be reconnected until all past due bills for utility services are paid, together with all reconnecting charges (see section 102-34). 
(c)  The charges shall in no way affect other plumbing inspection and permit fees. 
(d)  The board of commissioners shall have the right to make necessary adjustments in sewer service charges as reflected by any adjustments in water billing. 
(e)  Sewer service charges shall be added to the charge for water and billed each month and collected simultaneously with the water bills of each customer. The same penalties and discontinuance of water service where such sewer service charges are not paid shall apply as for failure to pay monthly water bills. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 102-333. - Sewer connection fees. 
    For a new building lateral connection to the city's trunk or collection system, the following charges shall be paid to cover the cost of installation: 
A standard four-inch residential sewer lateral in unpaved streets and easements shall be a minimum of $850.00. The fee can be increased if installation requires extra length of pipe, larger pipe, manholes or other specific conditions that would result in a greater than normal cost as determined by the utilities director or public works director/city engineer. All laterals shall be installed by the city unless otherwise directed by the utilities manager or public works director/city engineer. 
A fee of $250.00 will be added to the above amount for street cuts and/or crossings. The fee can be increased due to large or difficult street repairs, bores, or other specific conditions that would result in a greater than normal cost as determined by the utilities director or public works director/city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07; Ord. No. 2009-311, § 3, 9-22-09) 
Sec. 102-334. - Rates. 
(a)  The classified rates and application in this section are defined and established for the furnishing of sewer service by the city. Each metered residence, family apartment, commercial building or premises through which water is furnished and sewer service is furnished by the city shall be charged for sewer services in the amount and on the basis set forth in this section. 
(b)  The discharge of wastewater into a storm sewer or open drainage ditch is expressly prohibited. In addition to other penalties and charges, such unlawful discharge is also subject to the sewer service charge. However, this shall not apply to a commercial user who has filed for a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit to the United States Environmental Protection Agency and who furnishes the city with a copy of such permit and who, at the commercial user's expense, provides, operates and maintains the wastewater treatment plant facilities, which have been approved and meet all regulations, standards and other requirements set by such agency. Such commercial user who so qualifies shall be allowed to discharge such treated industrial wastewater into the city's storm drainage system without charge, which shall be metered by a proper recording meter, furnished and installed by the commercial user at the user's expense in order to measure the treated industrial wastewater being so discharged into the storm drainage system or by a secondary recording meter furnished and installed by the commercial user at the user's expense in order to measure the untreated industrial wastewater being so discharged into the city's sanitary sewer system for which a charge shall be made as set forth by the rates as shown in this section. Furthermore, if any such meter fails to register for any period, the amount of industrial wastewater discharged into either the storm sewer system or the sanitary sewer system during such period shall be deemed to be the amount of industrial wastewater being so discharged in the corresponding period immediately prior to the failure, unless the city and the commercial user agree upon a different amount. The recording meter shall be read by the city at regular times monthly as for other meters. An official of the commercial user at all reasonable times shall have access to the meter for the purpose of verifying its readings. 
(c)  The sewer service charge is the amount charged to the customer which shall include a user charge for the operation, maintenance and minor repair, including nonexcessive infiltration and inflow, and may include charges for capital reserve, debt service, other charges for current services, surcharges, etc. 
(d)  Any revenues derived from the sale of treatment-related byproducts shall offset the costs of operation and maintenance and reduce the user charge. The board of commissioners will review the user charges at least annually and revise the rates as necessary to ensure that adequate revenues are generated to pay the costs of operation and maintenance, including replacement, and that the system continues to provide for the proportional distribution of operation and maintenance, including replacement costs among users and user classes. 
(e)  The city will notify each user at least annually of the rate being charged for operation and maintenance, including replacement of the treatment works. 
(f)  The rates shall be as follows: 
(1)  Domestic and residential . The rate for domestic and residential shall be $5.08 per 1,000 gallons of metered water billed through the December 2015 billing cycle. Beginning with the January 2016 billing cycle, the rate will increase to $5.33 per 1,000 gallons of metered water. Beginning with the October 2016 billing cycle, the rate will increase to $5.83 per 1,000 gallons of metered water. Beginning with the October 2017 billing cycle the rate will increase to $6.13 per 1,000 gallons of metered water. Beginning with the October 2018 billing cycle the rate will increase to $6.48 per 1,000 gallons of metered water. Beginning with the October 2019 billing cycle the rate will increase to $6.78 per 1,000 gallons of metered water. Beginning with the October 2020 billing cycle, the rate will increase by 2.85 percent and then by 2.85 percent each October billing cycle thereafter. A cost of service analysis will be conducted and presented to the city commission as determined by the city manager. The minimum service charge each month shall be based upon a minimum water consumption of 2,000 gallons. The maximum sewer service charge each month shall be based on a water consumption of 15,000 gallons. 
(2)  Commercial . The rate for commercial shall be $5.08 per 1,000 gallons of metered water billed through the December 2015 billing cycle. Beginning with the January 2016 billing cycle, the rate will increase to $5.33 per 1,000 gallons of metered water. Beginning with the October 2016 billing cycle, the rate will increase to $5.83 per 1,000 gallons of metered water. Beginning with the October 2017 billing cycle the rate will increase to $6.13 per 1,000 gallons of metered water. Beginning with the October 2018 billing cycle the rate will increase to $6.48 per 1,000 gallons of metered water. Beginning with the October 2019 billing cycle the rate will increase to $6.78 per 1,000 gallons of metered water. Beginning with the October 2020 billing cycle, the rate will increase by 2.85 percent and then by 2.85 percent each October billing cycle thereafter. A cost of service analysis will be conducted and presented to the city commission as determined by the city manager. The minimum sewer service charge each month shall be based upon a minimum water consumption of 6,000 gallons. 
(3)  Industrial . The rate for industrial shall be $5.08 per 1,000 gallons of metered water billed through the December 2015 billing cycle. Beginning with the January 2016 billing cycle, the rate will increase to $5.33 per 1,000 gallons of metered water. Beginning with the October 2016 billing cycle, the rate will increase to $5.83 per 1,000 gallons of metered water. Beginning with the October 2017 billing cycle the rate will increase to $6.13 per 1,000 gallons of metered water. Beginning with the October 2018 billing cycle the rate will increase to $6.48 per 1,000 gallons of metered water. Beginning with the October 2019 billing cycle the rate will increase to $6.78 per 1,000 gallons of metered water. Beginning with the October 2020 billing cycle, the rate will increase by 2.85 percent and then by 2.85 percent each October billing cycle thereafter. A cost of service analysis will be conducted and presented to the city commission as determined by the city manager. The minimum sewer service charge each month shall be based upon a minimum water consumption of 50,000 gallons. 
(4)  Recreational vehicle parks and other transient facilities. The rate for recreational vehicle parks and other transient facilities shall be $5.08 per 1,000 gallons of metered water billed through the December 2015 billing cycle. Beginning with the January 2016 billing cycle, the rate will increase to $5.33 per 1,000 gallons of metered water. Beginning with the October 2016 billing cycle, the rate will increase to $5.83 per 1,000 gallons of metered water. Beginning with the October 2017 billing cycle the rate will increase to $6.13 per 1,000 gallons of metered water. Beginning with the October 2018 billing cycle the rate will increase to $6.48 per 1,000 gallons of metered water. Beginning with the October 2019 billing cycle the rate will increase to $6.78 per 1,000 gallons of metered water. Beginning with the October 2020 billing cycle, the rate will increase by 2.85 percent and then by 2.85 percent each October billing cycle thereafter. A cost of service analysis will be conducted and presented to the city commission as determined by the city manager. The minimum sewer service charge each month shall be based upon 2,000 gallons per space. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07; Ord. No. 2009-311, § 4, 9-22-09; Ord. No. 2015-337, § 2, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 102-335. - Notice of occupancy of apartment or office. 
    Failure to notify the city utilities billing office of the occupancy of an apartment or office for which an extra minimum charge should be made shall be deemed a misdemeanor. The minimum charge for unoccupied apartments and offices shall cease only when the city is notified of such vacancy and a written order is issued by city utilities billing office for record purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07; Ord. No. 2009-311, § 5, 9-22-09) 
Sec. 102-336. - Senior citizen discount on sewage. 
    Senior citizens who have reached the age of 65 whose sole source of income is Social Security Benefits and that discharge 3,000 gallons of sewage per month or less will receive a $2.00 reduction in their monthly sewer bill after completion of the required documentation and approval by the finance department. This applies to single unit residential dwellings with individual water meters and will be based upon the metered water consumption at the customer's location. 
(Ord. No. 2015-337, § 3, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 102-337. - City uses. 
(a)  Monthly report. All sewer used by the various departments of the city shall be accounted for monthly, and a report shall be made available to the board of commissioners and city manager of the monthly 1,000 gallons used by city owed facilities. 
(b)  Rate . The rate for city use shall be $5.08 per 1,000 gallons of metered water billed through the December 2015 billing cycle. Beginning with the January 2016 billing cycle, the rate will increase to $5.33 per 1,000 gallons of metered water. Beginning with the October 2016 billing cycle, the rate will increase to $5.83 per 1,000 gallons of metered water. Beginning with the October 2017 billing cycle the rate will increase to $6.13 per 1,000 gallons of metered water. Beginning with the October 2018 billing cycle the rate will increase to $6.48 per 1,000 gallons of metered water. Beginning with the October 2019 billing cycle the rate will increase to $6.78 per 1,000 gallons of metered water. Beginning with the October 2020 billing cycle, the rate will increase by 2.85 percent and then by 2.85 percent each October billing cycle thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07; Ord. No. 2009-311, § 6, 9-22-09; Ord. No. 2015-337, § 4, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 102-338. - Sanitary sewer service outside of the city limits. 
    The following requirements shall be met for facilities located outside of the city limits that wish to have sanitary sewer service provided by the City of Dothan. 
(a)  The city commission shall approve providing sanitary sewer service to the facility. 
(b)  The cost of materials, installation and maintenance of all improvements necessary to provide sanitary sewer service to the facility including but not limited to pipe, manholes, pumping stations, pipe size upgrades, treatment plant upgrades, etc. shall be born by the facility. The design and construction of all improvements shall be approved by the city. 
(c)  The facility shall pay an impact fee equal to $5.88 per the fully developed average gallons per day usage prior to connecting to the sanitary sewer system. The average gallons per day usage shall be determined by a registered professional engineer and approved by the city. The impact cost fee shall increase by 2.85 percent on October 1, 2009 and then increase by 2.85 percent each October 1 thereafter. The facility shall pay the monthly usage fee specified in the appropriate section of the chapter. 
(d)  The facility shall be subject to all appropriate sections of the ordinance. 
(e)  Any additions to the facility that will result in an increase in the flow to the sanitary sewer system will be subject to the above listed requirements and all other appropriate sections of the chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, § 1, 2-13-07; Ord. No. 2009-311, § 7, 9-22-09) 
Secs. 102-339-102-365. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - FATS, OILS, AND GREASE CONTROL 
Subdivision I. - General 

Sec. 102-366. - Purpose. 
    This division sets forth requirements to aid in the prevention of sanitary sewer blockages, obstructions, and overflows due to the contribution and accumulation of fats, oils, and grease (FOG) into the city sewer system from commercial, industrial, religious, and institutional food service establishments. The objective is to eliminate FOG related sanitary sewer overflows and sewer line blockages to protect the area streams, prevent residential and commercial property damage, decrease sewer maintenance costs, and to improve environmental quality. 
(Ord. No. 2015-366, § 1, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 102-367. - Authority. 
    It shall be unlawful for any food service establishment to operate without approved grease control equipment as required in this division. 
(Ord. No. 2015-366, § 1, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 102-368. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act or the Act: the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act. 
    Authorized representative of the food service establishment: A person who may be: 
(1)  The owner, or 
(2)  General manager, or 
(3)  Manager, or 
(4)  Duly authorized representative of the individual designated in this definition if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates. 
    Baffle: A plate, wall, or panel to deflect, check, or regulate the passage of grease-laden wastewater through the grease trap or gravity grease interceptor. A hanging baffle is one that does not extend to the floor of the interceptor. It generally extends only to the top half of the water level. A slotted baffle is one that extends to the floor of the interceptor and has one or more slots generally located at the middle of the water level to convey liquid from the inlet side to the outlet side of the interceptor. 
    Black water or domestic sanitary sewage: Wastewater containing human waste from sanitary fixtures such as toilets and urinals. 
    Brown grease: Fats, oils, and grease that is discharged to the grease control equipment. Brown grease can be discharged from kitchen fixtures and appliances (i.e., three-compartment sinks, pre-rinse sinks, automatic dishwashing machines, mop sinks, floor drains, water cooled wok stoves, soup kettles, etc.) or other locations where the grease has been contaminated in some fashion. 
    Certified: Having met the city's requirements. In respect to the grease waste hauler/plumber certification, meaning passed the city's certified grease waste hauler/plumber test and having been issued a City of Dothan Grease Waste Hauler/Plumber certification card. 
    City: Shall mean the City of Dothan, Alabama. 
    Commissary: Usually a commercial kitchen that mobile food vendors report to daily for all food and supplies, cleaning, servicing operations, and waste disposal. 
    Director: Shall mean the Director of the Dothan Planning and Development Department or their designee. 
    Flow control device: An integral part of a hydro-mechanical grease interceptor (HGI) installed on the inlet side that controls the wastewater flow through the grease trap and entrains air bubbles in the wastewater stream via the vent to facilitate grease removal. See section 102-373(b) and section 102-378(a). 
    FOG (fats, oils, and grease): Organic non-polar compounds derived from animal and/or vegetable or plant sources. For the purposes of this division, the terms "grease" and greases may be used in lieu of FOG. 
    FOG program coordinator: Person employed or designated by the Dothan Planning and Development Department who is charged with the responsibility of administering the provisions of the grease management program to ensure compliance by users with applicable laws, rules, regulations, policies, and ordinances. 
    Food service establishment (FSE): Any establishment, business, or facility engaged in preparing, serving, or making food available for consumption. Single family residences are not a FSE, however, multi-residential facilities may be considered a FSE at the discretion of the director or building official. Food service establishments will be classified by the city's FOG program as follows: 
(1)  Class 1: Delis-engaged in the sale of salads, cold cut and microwaved/convection oven warmed sandwiches/subs with no frying or grilling on site, use of precooked meats, utilization of disposable serving ware with very limited culinary washing, meat markets with meat preparation such as slicing and grinding as defined by NAICS 445210, coffee shops (small) as defined by NAICS 7222135, ice cream shops as defined by NAICS 7222131, frozen yogurt shops as defined by NAICS 7222132, retail bakeries (small) with no on-premises frying or preparation of other non-bakery foods as defined by NAICS 311811, doughnut shops with baking only as defined by NAICS 72221331, beverage bars with limited on-premises food preparation that can be classed as a deli as defined by NAICS 722515, day care facilities (minimum classification-depending on menus, food preparation, culinary cleaning, and number of meals served) as defined by NAICS 624410, religious organizations (minimum classification-depending on menus, food preparation, culinary cleaning, number of meals served, and frequency meals are served) as defined by NAICS 813110, and mobile food vendors as defined by NAICS 722330. 
(2)  Class 2: Limited service restaurants (a.k.a. fast food facilities, drive-in, carry-out) as defined by NAICS 722513, day care facilities (maximum classification-depending on menus, food preparation, culinary cleaning, and number of meals served) as defined by NAICS 624410, religious organizations (maximum classification-depending on menus, food preparation, culinary cleaning, number of meals served, and frequency meals are served) as defined by NAICS 813110, full service restaurants (minimum classification-seating capacity less than 65) as defined by NAICS 722511, buffet and cafeteria facilities (minimum classification-seating capacity less than 65) as defined by 722514, doughnut shops with on-premises frying as defined by NAICS 7222133, coffee shops (large) as defined by NAICS 7222135, caterers as defined by NAICS 722320, convenience stores without fuel pumps as defined by NAICS 445120, convenience stores with fuel pumps as defined by 447110, and supermarkets/grocery stores as defined by NAICS 445110. 
(3)  Class 3: Full service restaurants (maximum classification-seating capacity greater than 65) as defined by NAICS 722511. 
(4)  Class 4: Buffet and cafeteria facilities (maximum classification-seating capacity greater than 65) as defined by NAICS 722514. 
(5)  Class 5: Institutions (schools, hospitals, nursing homes, prisons, etc.) which include NAICS classifications 611110, 611310, 623110, 623311, 623312, 722310, and 922140, but not to exclude self-run operations. 
    General FOG permit: A fats, oils, and grease permit in which all food service establishments are grouped and is valid for a period of five years. 
    Gravity grease interceptor (GGI): See "grease interceptor." These terms are synonymous. 
    Gray water: Refers to all other wastewater other than black water as defined in this section. 
    Grease control equipment (GCE): A device that is designed and constructed for separating and retaining food service establishments' wastewater fats, oils, and grease (FOG) prior to entering the city's sewer system. Devices include grease interceptors (gravity grease interceptors), grease traps (hydro-mechanical grease interceptors), or other FOG remediation devices approved by the city. 
    Grease interceptor (Gravity grease interceptor or GGI): Grease control equipment identified as a large, in-ground tank, usually 1,000-gallon or larger capacity, which provides FOG control for a FSE. Grease interceptors will be located outside the FSE, and be approved by the city. 
    Grease recycle container (bin): Container used for the storage of yellow grease (see yellow grease). 
    Grease trap (hydro-mechanical grease interceptor) or HGI: Grease control equipment identified as an "under the sink" trap, or a "floor trap" which is a small container or tank with baffles designed for inside installation at kitchen fixtures and appliances, although they are sometimes installed adjacent to the kitchen and outside the building either above or below the ground. For a FSE approved to install a grease trap, the minimum size requirement is the equivalent of a 20-gallon per minute/40-pound capacity trap. All grease traps shall be correctly sized, have a properly sized/installed flow control device, and be approved by the city. See section 102-373(b) for variance of existing grease traps. 
    Grease waste hauler (GWH)/plumber: A company that pumps, cleans, and maintains grease control equipment, to include grease control equipment certification. All grease waste haulers and plumbers performing these duties within the city shall be GCE certified by the city's FOG program. 
    Grease waste line (GWL): The wastewater plumbing that conveys grease-laden wastewater from fixtures and appliances to the gravity grease interceptor (GGI) or other GCE. This GWL shall be separate from any plumbing conveying sanitary wastewater. 
    Health department: The Houston County Health Department (HCHD), Environmental Health Division, part of the Alabama Department of Public Health, is responsible for the food permitting and sanitation inspection of food service establishments discharging into the City of Dothan's wastewater collection system. 
    Hydro-mechanical grease interceptor: See "grease trap." These terms are synonymous. 
    NAICS: North American Industry Classification System, using 2012 (or latest) classifications. The website is found at http://www.census.gov/epcd/www/naics.html . 
    Noncompliance notice (NCN): A notice generally issued by the City of Dothan's FOG Program Coordinator or FOG program inspector, informing the noncompliant user that it is in noncompliance with the FOG ordinance. The NCN is issued for any identified problems with grease control equipment operation, maintenance, or components. The specific noncompliance will be noted. 
    Notice of violation (NOV): A notice generally issued by the City of Dothan's Building Official to a FSE, informing the noncompliant user of violations of the city's sewer use ordinance and FOG ordinance. The specific violation will be noted. 
    Publicly owned treatment works (POTW): A treatment works, as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1292), which is owned by the city. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances, which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. 
    Sanitary wastewater line: Wastewater plumbing conveying wastewater from the urinals and toilets. 
    Series (grease interceptors installed in series): Grease interceptor tanks are installed one after another in a row and are connected by plumbing pipe to increase the effective volume of the grease control equipment. 
    Tee or T (influent and effluent): A T-shaped pipe fitting extending from the ground surface below grade into the grease interceptor to a depth allowing recovery (discharge) of the water layer located under the layer of FOG. 
    User: Any person, corporation, or company who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the city's POTW. 
    Yellow grease: Fats, oils, and grease that has not been in contact or contaminated from other sources (water, wastewater, solid waste, etc.) and can be recycled. Most "yellow grease" is used deep fat fryer grease. Yellow grease is normally stored in a grease recycle container or bin for beneficial reuse. 
(Ord. No. 2015-366, § 1, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 102-369. - General requirements. 
(a)  All existing and proposed food service establishments (FSEs) are required to have grease control equipment (GCE) installed, maintained and operating properly, in accordance with this FOG ordinance. 
(1)  Existing food service establishments in operation prior to adoption of this FOG ordinance are required to have GCE properly installed, maintained and operating in accordance with this FOG ordinance in no later than 365 days. After review by staff, a one-time extension not to exceed six months may be granted by the city manager on a case by case basis. 
(2)  All new FSE construction required by the city to have grease trap (hydro-mechanical grease interceptor) FOG remediation shall comply with section 102-374 and section 102-378(a) through (i) immediately upon the effective date of this division. 
(3)  All new FSE construction required by the city to have gravity grease interceptor FOG remediation shall comply with section 102-374 and section 102-376 immediately upon adoption of this FOG ordinance. 
(4)  After adoption of this FOG ordinance, any change of ownership of an existing FSE or FSE applying for a new business license having an existing gravity grease interceptor and/or required by the city to have a gravity grease interceptor and not meeting the requirements of section 102-376, must comply immediately with sections 102-372(1) through (7) or at the discretion and approval of the city, rebuild/modify the existing interceptor in accordance with section 102-372(7) or install a gravity grease interceptor in compliance section 102-376. 
(5)  After the effective date of the ordinance, any change of ownership of an existing FSE or FSE applying for a new business license having an existing hydro-mechanical grease interceptor (grease trap) and/or required by the city to have a hydro-mechanical grease interceptor, must comply immediately with section 102-378 and section 102-373 as determined by the FOG program. 
(b)  All FSEs will be required to maintain records of cleaning and maintenance of GCE. GCE maintenance records will be maintained on-site of the FSE and include, at a minimum, the date of cleaning/maintenance, company or person conducting the cleaning/maintenance, volume (in gallons) of grease wastewater removed and the final disposal location. In addition, grease waste haulers shall comply with Dothan Utilities manifest documentation requirements for all disposal of FOG waste. 
(c)  GCE maintenance records shall be available at the FSE premises and available for inspection by the city FOG program personnel or their representative, and/or the health department. The FSE shall maintain GCE maintenance records for a minimum of three years. As-built drawings and GCE manuals should be available for inspection and remain on premises for the life of the GCE at the FSE. 
(d)  No FSE will discharge oil and grease in concentrations that exceed the city's numerical surcharge level (150 mg/L) for oil and grease. 
(e)  Owners of commercial property will be held responsible for installation of city approved grease control equipment and shall ensure that lease agreements identify the responsible party for proper maintenance to control wastewater discharges from their property. A copy of the responsible party information shall be provided to the FOG program coordinator. 
(f)  Grease control equipment certification requirement: All food service establishments with grease control equipment must have their gravity grease interceptor or grease trap inspected and certified at least annually by a city "certified" grease waste hauler or city "certified" licensed plumber. Annually is defined as a period from January 1 through December 31. Grease control equipment certification requirements shall commence the following calendar year the FOG control general permit is issued. Any FSE that does not provide an annual grease control certification by December 31 of each year following the general FOG permit issuance will be considered to be in noncompliance. If a gravity grease interceptor or grease trap "passes" the certification requirement, no further action is required. If a grease interceptor or grease trap "fails" the certification requirement, a corrective action response is required from the FSE user/owner or authorized representative to the city (refer to section 102-369(g). Completed certification forms (gravity grease interceptor certification form A or grease trap certification form B) must be completed and signed by the city "certified" grease waste hauler or city "certified" licensed plumber, signed by the FSE owner or authorized representative, and submitted to the city. The original certification form must be submitted to the city at the following address: 
City of Dothan 
Attn: FOG Program 
P.O. Box 2128 
Dothan, AL 36302 
(g)  Failure of a gravity grease interceptor certification or grease trap certification: The FSE owner or authorized representative is responsible for including detailed "corrective action response" information on the gravity grease interceptor certification form or the grease trap certification form that is submitted to the city. If necessary, additional pages may be attached to the certification form. At a minimum, the corrective action response information must include the reason for the failed certification, what corrective action will be taken, and the date the corrective action will be completed. The FSE user/owner or authorized representative shall notify the FOG program by phone or email within one business day (Monday-Friday) of failing the certification. Any additional enforcement action will utilize the City of Dothan Food Service Establishment Enforcement Response Guide. 
(h)  FSEs shall dispose of yellow grease in an approved container, or recycle container/bin, and the contents shall not be discharged into any grease control equipment, sanitary sewer line, grease waste line, storm water grate, drain, plumbing fixture, or into the environment whereas to be conveyed to a stream, creek, or river. Yellow grease and oils disposed of in any manner other than an approved container or recycle container/bin is a violation of this FOG ordinance. 
(i)  It shall be a violation of this FOG ordinance to leave the lid open on any outdoor grease recycle bin/container. 
(j)  It shall be a violation of this FOG ordinance to allow spilled yellow grease to remain around the recycle container/bin. Refer to section 102-379(5) for cleanup. 
(k)  It shall be a violation of this FOG ordinance to push or flush the non-water portion of GCE into the public sewer. 
(l)  Mobile food vendor commissaries discharging to the City of Dothan's POTW shall be located at commercial buildings. 
(m)  Mobile food vendors discharging any grease-laden water into the city's sanitary sewer shall discharge only at locations and into GCE approved by the City of Dothan's FOG Program. 
(n)  All mobile food vendor commissaries discharging to the city's sanitary sewer shall be approved and subject to inspection by the City of Dothan's FOG Program. 
(o)  Mop basins located outside the building and drained to the sanitary sewer shall be covered with a canopy or roof whereas to prevent storm water from being introduced into the sewer. 
(p)  Dumpster pads having plumbing draining to the City of Dothan's sanitary sewer shall be covered with a canopy or roof to prevent storm water from being introduced into the sanitary sewer. Provisions are to be made to prevent and/or redirect storm water drainage from areas other than the dumpster pad from entering the dumpster pad drain. 
(q)  Dumpster pad areas belonging to buildings existing prior to the adoption of this division with dumpster pads drained to the City of Dothan's sanitary sewer shall be exempt from the aforementioned canopy or roof requirement of section 102-369(p). However, permanent measures acceptable to the city shall be implemented to prevent and/or redirect storm water from areas other than the minimum area required for the dumpster pads from entering the sanitary sewer system. 
(r)  All dumpster pad runoff drains are prohibited from connection to storm water conveyances. 
(s)  Outdoor grated cleanouts are prohibited from use. Cleanouts shall be solid to prevent storm water from being introduced into the sanitary sewer. 
(t)  The FSE user/owner or authorized representative shall notify the FOG program by phone or email within one business day (Monday-Friday) of any noted deficiencies encountered while performing GCE pumping, cleaning, or maintenance, including annual GCE certification. 
(Ord. No. 2015-366, § 1, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 102-370. - Fees and permits. 
(a)  The city shall charge inspection, monitoring, assessment, impact, surcharge, commercial food facility, and/or permit fees to the food service establishments to get reimbursement for the FOG program and/or POTW impact costs. 
(b)  A monthly FOG program surcharge fee will be added to each FSEs sewer service bill. The FOG program surcharge fee will be based on the FSE classification. The FSE classification FOG program surcharge fees will be as follows: 
(1)  Class 1: $10.00 per month 
(2)  Class 2: $20.00 per month 
(3)  Class 3: $30.00 per month 
(4)  Class 4 and 5: $40.00 per month 
(c)  The FOG program surcharge fees shall increase by 2.85 percent starting October 1 of the year following approval of this FOG ordinance and then increase by 2.85 percent each October 1 thereafter, or as modified based on CPI, whichever is greater. The current monthly FOG program surcharge fees are available for review at the planning and development office. 
(d)  An additional compliance inspection fee of at least $200.00 will be charged to each food service establishment for each re-inspection due to noncompliance issues. 
(e)  The city will issue general FOG permits for food service establishments. All new FSEs shall complete and submit the city's fats, oils, and grease inquiry form which will serve as the FSEs general FOG permit application. The city's FOG inspection form will serve as the general FOG permit application for existing FSEs. General FOG permits shall be issued for a period or duration of five years. Additional fees may be implemented by the city for food service establishment wastewater treatment and impacts to the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 2015-366, § 1, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 102-371. - Approved grease waste haulers/plumbers. 
    To ensure proper maintenance of grease control equipment (GCE) and proper disposal of the FOG waste, the city will maintain an "approved grease waste haulers/plumbers list." Within six months of the effective date of this division, food service establishments (FSEs) shall only utilize City of Dothan certified grease waste haulers and plumbers to perform any GCE pumping, cleaning, maintenance, and GCE certification. Criteria for the grease waste hauler or plumbing company to be placed on the "approved grease waste haulers/plumbers list" include, but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  The grease waste hauler or plumber employees that will be performing any GCE pumping, cleaning, or maintenance within the city, including completing the food service establishment grease control equipment certification forms must attend a City of Dothan Grease Control Equipment Certification Class and pass the GCE certification class test. Upon passing the grease control equipment certification class, the grease waste hauler or plumber employee will be issued a certification card in their name. Grease waste hauler or plumber employees performing the aforementioned GCE work shall be in possession of a valid city grease waste hauler/plumber certification card issued in their name. Grease waste hauler employees shall present this card and other proof of identification to city personnel upon request. Additional information, including the scheduling of a class may be obtained at the City of Dothan FOG Program Coordinator's office. 
(2)  The grease waste hauler or plumber performing any plumbing work associated with the GCE must have a valid plumber's license issued by the State of Alabama. 
(3)  Grease waste hauler companies and plumber companies must maintain all required city business licenses. 
(4)  Grease waste haulers and plumbers that pump gravity grease interceptors or grease traps must comply with the requirements of the city's FOG ordinance. 
(5)  The city maintains the right to modify the grease waste hauler/plumber agreement. 
(6)  Signature of the grease waste hauler/plumber company's authorized representative and submittal to the city of a completed "City of Dothan Approved Grease Waste Hauler/Plumber Agreement" form are required. "Approved grease waste hauler/plumber agreement" form will include reporting requirements to the city and making records available to city personnel. A monthly GWH/plumber summary report for all FSE or commercial grease trap/GGI waste shall be submitted to the city in accordance with this policy. Failure to meet any portion of the grease waste hauler agreement will result in removal of the grease waste hauler/plumber company from the "City of Dothan Approved Grease Waste Haulers/Plumbers List" and/or enforcement action. 
(Ord. No. 2015-366, § 1, 12-15-15) 
Subdivision II. - Existing Grease Control Equipment 

Sec. 102-372. - Existing gravity grease interceptor design/installation and requirements. 
    Any existing FSE, upgrading of an existing FSE, change of ownership of existing FSE or FSE applying for a business license, having an existing gravity grease interceptor (GGI), will be required to have the interceptor completely pumped and inspected by the City of Dothan's FOG Program personnel for suitability to perform its intended duties, for acceptable inlet and outlet plumbing components, for proper access openings over all chambers, and for acceptable baffle configuration/plumbing. The aforementioned pump out inspection will be waived if the existing GGI passed an inspection in compliance with section 102-382(a) within a previous 12-month time period. As part of the inspection, the City of Dothan's FOG Program personnel may conduct a video inspection of the inside of the interceptor. Existing gravity grease interceptors installed prior to the adoption of this FOG ordinance and not in compliance with section 102-376 but able to meet the requirements of section 102-372(1) through (6), at the discretion and approval of the city may be modified in accordance with section 102-372(7). Food service establishments required by the City of Dothan to have gravity grease interceptor FOG remediation, but having none or an interceptor deemed insufficient by the city and not allowed to be rebuilt/modified in place, shall meet the requirements of section 102-376. Under certain circumstances, the required interceptor size and location may necessitate special exceptions. Allowances for alternative GCE may be approved, provided prior approval of unit type, size, location, etc. is obtained from the City of Dothan's FOG Program Coordinator. Any gravity grease interceptor(s) installed after the adoption of the FOG ordinance shall comply with design and installation requirements of section 102-376. 
    Criteria for consideration by the city as an acceptable gravity grease interceptor existing or installed prior to adoption of this FOG ordinance and not meeting the requirements of section 102-376 of the FOG ordinance is as follows: 
(1)  Capacity and condition. Existing gravity grease interceptors installed prior to the adoption of this FOG ordinance shall have a minimum of 1,000 gallons capacity and shall be found to be in proper working order as determined by the City of Dothan's FOG Program Coordinator or their designee. Any existing gravity grease interceptor in this category not meeting these conditions shall require the installation of a gravity grease interceptor meeting the requirements of section 102-376. 
(2)  Piping. 
a.  The inlet piping shall enter the receiving chamber a minimum of 21/2 inches above the invert of the outlet piping. 
b.  On the inlet pipe inside the receiving chamber, a sanitary tee of the same size pipe in the vertical position with the top unplugged shall be provided as a turndown. A pipe (nipple) of the same size as the tee shall be installed in the top of the tee with the top of the nipple open. A pipe installed in the bottom of the tee shall extend to a point of two-thirds the depth of the water level. The inlet tee shall be made of Schedule 40 PVC or equivalent material. 
c.  The outlet piping shall be no smaller than the inlet piping, but in no case smaller than four inches diameter. 
d.  The outlet piping shall contain a tee installed vertically with a pipe (nipple) installed in the top of the tee, with the top of the nipple open. A pipe installed in the bottom of the tee shall be made of a non-collapsible material and extend to 12 inches above the tank floor. Minimum materials requirement for the outlet piping is Schedule 40 PVC. 
(3)  Baffles. 
a.  The interceptor shall have a non-flexing (i.e. concrete, steel, etc.) baffle extending from the floor to a level above of the outlet piping. An existing gravity grease interceptor having no baffle(s) present or hanging baffle(s) that are open or baffle(s) not attached at the bottom will not be acceptable. 
b.  If inverted 90-degree sweeps or tees are used to convey liquid from the inlet to outlet side of the interceptor, the baffle shall have an inverted 90-degree sweep(s), or schedule 40 PVC tee(s), fitting at least equal in diameter size to the inlet piping, but in no case less than four inches. The bottom of the sweep(s) or tee(s) shall be placed in the vertical position of the inlet compartment 12 inches above the floor. If a tee is used in lieu of a sweep, a pipe nipple of the same size as the tee shall be installed in the top of the tee and extend to the same height reached by the top nipple installed on the inlet and outlet tee. The nipple shall remain open. A pipe installed in the bottom of the tee shall extend to 12 inches above the tank floor. 
c.  In lieu of a sweep or tee through the baffle, slotted designs will be acceptable for existing gravity grease interceptors to convey liquid from the inlet to outlet side of the interceptor. 
d.  The inlet compartment shall be two-thirds of the total liquid capacity with the outlet compartment at one-third liquid capacity of the interceptor. 
(4)  Access openings (manholes). 
a.  Access to gravity grease interceptors shall be provided by a minimum of one manhole per interceptor division (baffle chamber/compartment) and be of 24-inch minimum dimension terminating one inch above finished grade with cast iron frame and cover. One manhole shall be located above the inlet tee hatch and the other manhole shall be located above the outlet tee hatch. A minimum of 24 inches of clear opening above each manhole access shall be maintained to facilitate maintenance, cleaning, pumping, and inspections. 
b.  Access openings shall be mechanically sealed and gas tight to contain odors and bacteria, to exclude vermin and ground water, and in a manner that permits regular reuses. 
c.  The manholes shall be accessible for inspection by the city. 
(5)  Location. Gravity grease interceptors shall be located so as to be readily accessible for cleaning, maintenance, and inspections. They should be located close to the fixture(s) discharging to the interceptor. Grease interceptor access manholes shall never be paved over, covered by landscaping, or have any other hindrances not allowing access. 
(6)  Construction material. Grease interceptors shall be constructed of sound durable materials, not subject to excessive corrosion/decay, and shall be water and gas tight. 
(7)  Rebuilding/modifying in place. 
a.  An existing gravity grease interceptor having a minimum of 1,000 gallons capacity and found by the City of Dothan's FOG Program personnel to be functional, but having unacceptable access openings, baffle configuration, or plumbing, may be modified in place to an acceptable configuration as outlined in section 102-372(2) through (4) by rebuilding/modifying it in-place as set forth in section 102-372(7). The FOG program coordinator reserves the right to require additional gravity grease interceptor capacity and/or the installation of a gravity grease interceptor(s) meeting the requirements of section 102-376. 
b.  If the gravity grease interceptor's baffle is not acceptable (no baffle or hanging baffle), the baffle may be modified in-place to an acceptable configuration, generally as given in section 102-372(3) or an interceptor meeting the requirements of section 102-376 shall be installed. The baffle shall extend above level of the outlet pipe. 
c.  If the interceptor does not have compliant access openings over each compartment, these shall be added in compliance with section 102-372(4). 
(8)  All new FSEs in existing buildings applying for a business license and having an existing gravity grease interceptor shall meet the requirements of section 102-372 or section 102-376 as required by the city prior to securing the signature of the FOG program coordinator for issuance of a business license. 
(Ord. No. 2015-366, § 1, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 102-373. - Existing grease trap (hydro-mechanical grease interceptor) requirements. 
(a)  Any existing FSE, upgrading of an existing FSE, change of ownership of existing FSE, or FSE applying for a business license, that is required by the city to have FOG remediation by grease traps, and having an existing grease trap, shall be required to have the grease trap completely cleaned followed by inspection from the City of Dothan's FOG Program personnel. 
(b)  The inspection shall be a determination for proper size, for acceptable functional installation including a properly sized/installed flow control device, and for proper access to the grease trap. Existing grease traps installed prior to the adoption of this FOG ordinance must meet the requirements of section 102-378(a) through (i) or receive a variance from the city. 
(c)  With the consent of the director, an FSE with an existing grease trap installed prior to the adoption of this division may receive a waiver from the design requirements in section 102-378(a) through (i) only if the grease trap is approved as an alternative grease control equipment. The alternative grease control equipment must control FOG discharges from a FSE and be maintained as outlined in this FOG ordinance. Any alternative grease control equipment must be approved by the city's FOG program. 
(d)  If a required current grease trap is not adequate or approved, a grease trap meeting the requirements of section 102-378(a) through (i) shall be installed. The city reserves the right to require FOG remediation or additional remediation of FOG laden fixtures or appliances in accordance with this FOG ordinance. 
(e)  All new FSEs in existing buildings required by the city to have FOG remediation by a grease trap and having an existing grease trap shall meet the requirements of section 102-373 as required by the city prior to securing the signature of the FOG program coordinator on a business license application. 
(Ord. No. 2015-366, § 1, 12-15-15) 
Subdivision III. - New Grease Control Equipment 

Sec. 102-374. - Grease control equipment requirements for any new FSE construction. 
(a)  Any new FSE will be required to install and maintain GCE approved by the city. FSEs in this category must submit a "food service establishment fats, oils, and grease inquiry form" to the city for approval and this form will serve as the application for the general FOG permit. 
(b)  The city will review the "food service establishment fats, oils, and grease inquiry form" and approve or recommend changes as necessary. In addition, any new FSE shall obtain a business license application and satisfy the requirements of this division prior to securing the signature of the FOG program coordinator on the business license application. 
(c)  Prior to installation of any required GCE, all proposed GCE shall meet the city FOG program coordinator's or building official's approval as stated in this FOG ordinance. Only specifically FOG program approved GCE and fixtures can be installed or connected to the grease waste line. 
(d)  All of the FSEs internal plumbing shall be constructed to separate sanitary (restroom) flow from kitchen process flow. Sanitary flow and kitchen process discharges shall be approved separately by the city and shall discharge from the building separately. Kitchen process lines and sanitary lines may combine prior to entering the public sewer; however, the lines cannot be combined until after the GCE. No sanitary wastewater (black water) or storm water shall be plumbed to the GCE. 
(e)  Gravity grease interceptors or grease traps will be installed and connected whereas to be easily accessible for inspection, cleaning, and removal of grease at any time. 
(f)  Any newly constructed FSE applying for a business license must satisfy the requirements of section 102-374, as verified by inspection from the city's FOG program personnel, prior to securing the signature of the FOG program coordinator for issuance of a business license. 
(g)  All new FSE construction shall meet the applicable requirements of section 102-376 or section 102-378(a) through (i) for GCE as required by the city. All GCE must be approved by the city's FOG program coordinator or building official. All new gravity grease interceptors must be purchased only from City of Dothan approved manufacturers and constructed in accordance with design specifications as set forth in section 102-376 of this FOG ordinance. 
(h)  New multi-unit (strip mall) facilities: New strip malls or strip centers must have two separate sewer line connections at each unit within the strip mall or strip center. One sewer line will be for sanitary wastewater and one grease waste line will be for the kitchen area, or potential kitchen area, of each unit. The kitchen area, or potential kitchen area, grease waste line will be connected to floor drains in the specified kitchen area, and will connect, or be able to connect, to other food service establishment kitchen fixtures and appliances, such as but not limited to: three-compartment sink, two-compartment sink, pre-rinse sink, mop sink, dishwasher, and hand wash sink. 
(1)  New multi-unit facility, or new "strip mall" facility, owners shall contact the FOG program prior to conducting private plumbing work at the multi-unit facility site. Multi-unit facility owners, or their designated contractor, shall have plans for separate private grease wastewater lines for kitchen and sanitary wastewater for each "individual" unit. In addition, the plans shall identify "stub-out" locations to accommodate a minimum 1,000-gallon gravity grease interceptor for each unit of the multi-unit facility, or provide a larger capacity grease interceptor that could be shared by multiple FSEs in the strip mall. Proposals for multiple FSEs connected to one gravity grease interceptor or series of gravity grease interceptors must be approved by the FOG program prior to construction. A copy of the maintenance agreement shall be filed with the FOG coordinator for any GCE that isn't owned and operated by the same entity. New multi-unit facility, or new "strip mall" facility owners shall consider suitable physical property space and sewer gradient that will be conducive to the installation of an exterior, in-ground gravity grease interceptor when determining the building location. 
(2)  FSEs located in a new multi-unit facility shall have a minimum of a 1,000-gallon gravity grease interceptor installed, unless that FSE is identified as a Class 1 facility. Sanitary wastewater, or black water, shall not be connected to GCE. 
(3)  Upon installation, the sanitary wastewater line and grease wastewater line "stub-outs" for each separate unit shall be identified (marked). The sanitary waste water line "stub-out" shall be painted green and the grease wastewater line "stub-out" shall be stenciled with the letters "GWL." 
(i)  Alternative grease control equipment: On a case by case basis, at the discretion of the director, alternative grease control equipment may be considered and approved for installation at a FSE. The alternative grease control equipment must control FOG discharges from a FSE and be maintained as outlined in this FOG ordinance. Alternative grease control equipment will not be considered for new building construction. 
(j)  Final approval of grease control equipment: All new FSEs and FSEs that have upgraded their facilities must contact the city for final approval of the grease control equipment. This will include onsite inspection of the grease control equipment by the City of Dothan's FOG Program, or the city's authorized representative. No work shall be hidden or covered prior to approval by the FOG program. Failure of the FSE to contact the FOG program to conduct the inspection of the new GCE will result in enforcement action. 
(Ord. No. 2015-366, § 1, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 102-375. - Grease control equipment sizing. 
(a)  Minimum acceptable size of grease control equipment for each FSE classification (see food service establishment section 102-368 for class details) will be as follows: 
(1)  Class 1: 20-gpm/40 pound grease trap (hydro-mechanical grease interceptor or HGI) 
(2)  Class 2: 1,000-gallon gravity grease interceptor (GGI) 
(3)  Class 3: 1,500-gallon gravity grease interceptor (GGI) 
(4)  Class 4: 2,000-gallon gravity grease interceptor (GGI) 
(5)  Class 5: 2,000-gallon gravity grease interceptor (GGI) 
(b)  To calculate the appropriate size GCE, the FSEs engineer, architect, licensed plumber, or contractor should use a formula that considers all kitchen plumbing fixture units, the discharge plumbing pipe diameter for each fixture unit, storage capacity, type of facility, and an adequate retention time. The grease control equipment minimum acceptable size for the above listed FSE classifications (Class 1 through 5) shall be met. 
(c)  The city will review information received from the completed "food service establishment fats, oils, and grease inquiry form." The city will make a decision to approve, or require additional grease interceptor volume, based on the type of FSE, the number of fixture units, additional calculations and considerations. Each gravity grease interceptor tank capacity shall not exceed 2,000 gallons. In the event that the gravity grease interceptor calculated capacity needs to exceed 2,000 gallons, the FSE shall install any additional interceptor(s) of the appropriate size in series. 
(d)  Gravity grease interceptors that are installed in series shall be installed in such a manner to ensure positive flow between the tanks at all times. Therefore, tanks shall be installed so that the inlet invert of each successive tank shall be a minimum of two inches below the outlet invert of the preceding tank or a one percent downstream slope, whichever is greater. 
(e)  Grease control equipment must remove fats, oils, and grease at or below the City of Dothan surcharge concentration level of 150 mg/L established in chapter 102, article IV, section 102-233. Failure to comply will require enforcement action. 
(Ord. No. 2015-366, § 1, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 102-376. - New gravity grease interceptor design and installation. 
    Design and installation specifications are available from the FOG program coordinator's office. Contact building permits and inspections at 615-4450. 
(Ord. No. 2015-366, § 1, 12-15-15) 
Subdivision IV. - Maintenance, Management, Abandonment and Inspections 

Sec. 102-377. - Gravity grease interceptor cleaning and maintenance requirements. 
(a)  Partial pump of interceptor contents or on-site pump and treatment of interceptor contents will not be allowed due to reintroduction of fats, oils, and grease to the interceptor. In no way shall the pumped material be returned to any private or public portion of the sanitary sewer collection system. All grease waste haulers and procedures for pumping grease interceptors shall comply with the City of Dothan, part II, Code of Ordinances, chapter 102-utilities, article IV-sewer, section 102-300-commercial wastewater disposal service. 
(b)  Gravity grease interceptors must be pumped-in-full (total pump of all contents) when the total accumulations of surface FOG (including floating solids) and settled solids reaches 25 percent of the grease interceptor's inlet liquid depth. This criterion is referred to as the "25 percent rule." At no time shall the cleaning frequency exceed 90 days unless approved in writing by the city. Failure to meet these requirements shall result in enforcement action. Approval will be granted on a case by case situation with submittal by the FSE documenting proof that a reduced cleaning frequency will meet the requirements of this FOG ordinance. Some FSEs may need to consider a more frequent pumping schedule to meet this requirement. A city approved manifest of gravity grease interceptor cleaning/maintenance, and an FSE gravity grease interceptor self-monitoring checklist shall be maintained onsite at the FSE and provided to the city upon request. These documents need to be provided to the city for review before consideration for approval can be granted for a cleaning frequency to exceed 90 days. 
(c)  The gravity grease interceptor's influent tee and effluent tee will be inspected during cleaning and maintenance and the condition noted by the grease waste hauler's company or individual conducting the maintenance. Influent and effluent tees that are loose, defective, or not attached must be repaired or replaced immediately. Grease waste haulers or individuals conducting any maintenance or pumping will use caution to not damage or dislodge tees, or cause other grease interceptor component damage. Any repairs to the grease interceptor shall be documented and kept on file at the FSE. 
(d)  All gravity grease interceptors must have access manholes over the influent tee and effluent tee for inspection and ease of cleaning/maintenance. Access manholes will be provided for all separate compartments of interceptors for complete cleaning (i.e. interceptor with two main baffles or three compartments will have access manholes at each compartment). The manholes are to be readily accessible for inspection by the city. 
(e)  Gravity grease interceptor waste must be hauled offsite and disposed of, processed, or recycled at an approved location in accordance with applicable laws. All disposal of grease interceptor waste must meet the requirements of City of Dothan, part II, Code of Ordinances, chapter 102-utilities, article IV-sewer, section 102-300-commercial wastewater disposal service. City approved manifests must be used and properly completed. 
(f)  Gravity grease interceptors must be "certified" annually by a city certified grease waste hauler or city certified plumber. A gravity grease interceptor certification (form a) must be properly completed and submitted to the city annually. 
(g)  The city may mandate the FSE to require the grease waste hauler to contact the city's FOG program by telephone at least 24 hours prior to any cleaning, pumping, maintenance, inspection, or certification of the grease interceptor. The city reserves the right to be present to inspect all maintenance. 
(h)  Responsibility. Maintaining the gravity grease interceptor(s), including complete pumping of contents at the required frequency and insuring proper components are installed, is the responsibility of the user/owner. Commercial property owners shall ensure that lease agreements identify the responsible party for proper maintenance to control wastewater discharged from their property. 
(Ord. No. 2015-366, § 1, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 102-378. - Grease trap (hydro-mechanical grease interceptor) sizing, installation, and maintenance. 
(a)  All grease traps shall have a City of Dothan approved, properly sized, installed and vented flow control device. Failure to have the flow control device and venting will be considered a violation. The flow control device shall be installed in such a manner whereas to remain visible for future inspections and servicing. 
(b)  All new FSEs that are allowed to install grease traps must have city written approval prior to starting operations. 
(c)  A grease trap's minimum size requirement is 20 gpm/40 pound capacity. 
(d)  At the discretion of the FOG program, alternative grease control equipment may be considered for installation. The alternative grease control equipment must control FOG discharges and be maintained as outlined in this FOG ordinance. 
(e)  No automatic dishwasher shall be connected to a grease trap unless it has been specifically sized and approved by the FOG program. Grease traps approved by the city for dishwasher connection must be provided with a City of Dothan approved and properly sized/installed flow control device to the inlet side of the grease trap to prevent overloading of the grease trap and allow for proper grease trap operation. 
(f)  No waste food grinder shall be connected to a grease trap. 
(g)  No automatic drip or feed systems for additives are allowed to be connected to a grease trap. 
(h)  A single grease trap device shall be installed for each significant kitchen fixture unit (i.e. each 3 compartment sink), unless the FOG program coordinator provides written approval for multiple fixtures to be connected to the grease trap. The city must approve the number of grease traps and connections to the grease trap. 
(i)  Grease traps must have the plumbing drainage institute (PDI) certification, and be installed as per manufacturer's specifications and this FOG ordinance. 
(j)  The flow control device orifice(s) shall not be removed, enlarged, or modified. 
(k)  Grease traps will be completely cleaned of fats, oils, and grease and food solids at a minimum of every 30 days. If the FOG and food solids content of the grease trap are greater than 25 percent, the grease trap must be cleaned as frequently as needed to prevent 25 percent of capacity being occupied with FOG and food solids. A written record of grease trap cleaning and maintenance shall be maintained onsite at the FSE and provided to the city upon request. 
(l)  Grease trap waste shall be sealed or placed in a container to prevent leachate from leaking, and then disposed of in the solid waste or hauled offsite by a grease waste hauler or plumber to an approved disposal location. In no way shall the pumped material be returned to any private or public portion of the sanitary sewer collection system or disposed of in the environment. All grease waste haulers, plumbers, and procedures for pumping grease traps shall comply with the City of Dothan, part II, Code of Ordinances, chapter 102-utilities, article IV-sewer, section 102-300-commercial wastewater disposal service. 
(m)  Grease trap waste shall not be mixed with yellow grease in the grease recycle container. 
(n)  Grease traps must be "certified" annually. See section 102-368. 
(o)  The city may mandate the FSE to require the grease waste hauler/plumber or FSE owner to contact the city's FOG program by phone at least 24 hours prior to any cleaning, pumping, maintenance, inspection, or certification of the grease trap. The city has the right to be present to inspect all maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 2015-366, § 1, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 102-379. - Best management practices and accidental discharge prevention. 
    Food service establishments shall implement best management practices (BMPs) to prevent the discharge of fats, oils, and grease from their facility to the city sanitary sewer system. Food service establishments shall provide such facilities and institute such procedures as are reasonably necessary to prevent or minimize the potential for accidental discharge of fats, oils, and grease into the sewage collection system. Failure to implement and comply with BMPs and accidental discharge prevention is in violation of this FOG ordinance. Examples of BMPs include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Recycle waste cooking oil; dispose in grease recycle bin or container. Do not pour any grease into sinks, floor drains, or mop sinks, lavatories, or environment. 
(2)  Post "no grease" signs above all kitchen sinks and dishwashers. These signs are available at the FOG program office. 
(3)  "Dry wipe," scraping into a trash container as much food particles and grease residue from pots, pans, and plates, etc., as possible. 
(4)  Use strainers in sink drains and floor drains to prevent large food particles, containers, and other elicit materials from going into the sewer line. 
(5)  If an oil or grease spill occurs, clean up using "dry" oil absorbent material or use ice to make grease solidify. Scoop up material and dispose of it into a trash container. Do not wash oil or grease into drains! 
(6)  Dispose of food items in the trash. Food waste grinder use is prohibited in wastewater discharging to hydro-mechanical grease interceptors (grease traps) due to build up of solids in the GCE, stoppages, decreased efficiency, and the need to increase pumping frequency of the GCE. Food waste grinder use is discouraged in wastewater discharging to gravity grease interceptors. 
(7)  Post "BMPs signs" in the kitchen areas, educate, and train all employees on grease control and preventing sewer pipe clogs and sewer overflows. These signs are available at the FOG program office. 
(Ord. No. 2015-366, § 1, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 102-380. - "Additives" prohibitions for use. 
(a)  Additives include but are not limited to products that contain solvents, emulsifiers, surfactants, caustics, acids, enzymes, chemicals, hot water, and bacteria. 
(b)  This FOG ordinance prohibits the use of additives (including automatic drip or feed systems) to cause FOG to pass through the user's plumbing and reform in the city's wastewater collection and conveyance system. The use of additives in an FSE will not be a substitute for regular cleaning, or pumping of GCE as required in this FOG ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2015-366, § 1, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 102-381. - Private sewer line cleaning of FOG requirement. 
    Any grease waste hauler, plumber, or contractor that cleans FOG from a food service establishment's private sewer lines must insure that the FOG and other debris cleaned from the private sewer lines does not cause an obstruction or blockage in the city's sanitary sewer system. Therefore, the FOG or other debris cleaned from the private sewer line should be "vactored" or removed. The grease waste hauler, plumber, or contractor shall immediately contact the city if FOG is "pushed" or "jetted" into the city sanitary sewer system to make the city aware of the FOG and debris at the specific location. 
(Ord. No. 2015-366, § 1, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 102-382. - In ground grease interceptor abandonment. 
    The property owner or authorized representative of a building utilizing an in ground gravity grease interceptor or hydro-mechanical grease interceptor (grease trap) shall notify the City of Dothan's FOG program within 30 days whenever a FSE meets the criteria for temporary or permanent abandonment of said interceptor as set forth in section 102-382(a)(1) or section 102-382(b)(1). 
(a)  Temporary abandonment. 
(1)  An in ground grease interceptor is considered to be temporarily abandoned if a FSE temporarily closes for business and the property owner intends to utilize the interceptor for another FSE in the same location. 
(2)  At the property owner's expense, the interceptor shall be completely pumped and the grease waste properly disposed of by a City of Dothan certified grease waste hauler. 
(3)  Once conditions of section 102-382(a)(1) through (2) have been met, the City of Dothan's FOG Program personnel shall be contacted to complete a pumping inspection for the temporary abandonment of an in ground interceptor. The completed grease waste hauler's manifest shall be available onsite for verification during the pumping inspection. 
(4)  Any noted noncompliant functional or plumbing components shall be repaired or replaced, followed by re-inspection from the City of Dothan's FOG Program personnel. 
(5)  Once the in ground grease interceptor has passed inspection, it shall be filled with water to prevent possible floatation. 
(b)  Permanent abandonment. 
(1)  An in ground grease interceptor is considered to be permanently abandoned when the building is remodeled such that the grease interceptor will not be used; or the building is replaced with a type of business that will not be required to utilize the grease interceptor; or when the property is condemned. An in ground grease interceptor considered to be permanently abandoned, shall be properly [removed] in accordance with section 102-382(b)(2) through (3), or demolished in place in accordance with section 102-382(b)(4). 
(2)  The in ground grease interceptor may be removed. Prior to removal, the interceptor shall be completely pumped and the waste properly disposed of by a City of Dothan certified grease waste hauler. Once the interceptor has been completely pumped, the City of Dothan's FOG Program personnel shall be contacted to complete an in ground grease interceptor pumping verification inspection. The grease waste hauler's manifest shall be available onsite for verification during the in ground interceptor pumping verification inspection. Service components remaining in place are not exempt from meeting the plumbing codes. 
(3)  After the interceptor has passed the pumping verification inspection by the city's FOG program personnel, if no replacement is intended, the interceptor may be removed and the hole left by the removal of the grease interceptor shall be back filled with suitable backfill material. Once back fill requirements have been met, the City of Dothan's FOG Program personnel shall be contacted to complete an in ground grease interceptor abandonment final inspection. 
(4)  Alternatively, in lieu of removal, the interceptor can be demolished in place. The interceptor shall be completely pumped and the waste properly disposed of by a City of Dothan certified grease waste hauler. Once the interceptor has been completely pumped, the City of Dothan's FOG Program personnel shall be contacted for an in ground grease interceptor pumping verification inspection. The grease waste hauler's manifest shall be made available onsite during the in ground grease interceptor pumping verification inspection. Demolition of the interceptor shall not commence until the interceptor has passed the pumping verification inspection. The top cover over the interceptor shall then be crushed into the empty tank or removed. The bottom of the tank shall be ruptured. The sides of the interceptor shall then be crushed into the tank. The inlet and outlet plumbing shall be disconnected and the lines capped if not to be used. 
a.  Upon completion of crushing the interceptor in place, the FOG program shall be contacted for an in ground grease interceptor abandonment semifinal inspection. 
b.  After passing the in ground grease interceptor abandonment semifinal inspection, the interceptor shall be back filled with suitable fill material. 
c.  Once backfill requirements of section 102-382(b)(4) have been met, the FOG program shall be contacted for an in ground grease interceptor abandonment final inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2015-366, § 1, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 102-383. - Right of entry, inspections, and monitoring. 
    The city, or their authorized representative, shall have the right to enter the premises of FSEs or commissaries to determine whether the FSE or commissary is complying with the requirements of this FOG ordinance and the City of Dothan, part II, Code of Ordinances, chapter 102-utilities, article IV-sewer. FSEs or commissaries shall allow city personnel, or their authorized representative, upon presentation of proper credentials, full access to all parts of the premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, and/or records examination. Unreasonable delays in allowing city personnel access to the FSE premises shall be a violation of this FOG ordinance. 
(a)  All gravity grease interceptors and grease traps shall be subject to review, evaluation, and inspection by the city or their authorized representative. The city can require at the property owner's expense, a video inspection of the inside of any interceptor. Inspections will determine proper maintenance, changes in operation, proper records and files, ability of gravity grease interceptor or grease trap to prevent grease from entering the sewer system, and any other factors pertaining to the control of grease discharges to the city sewer system. The city can require notification to the FOG program by phone 24 hours prior to any pumping, cleaning, maintenance, or certification of the GCE so the city can do a visual inspection of the total GCE. The city can require the FSE to schedule pumping of their interceptor (at the owner's/FSE's expense) if the city determines that the interceptor may be defective or there is chronic FOG obstruction in the downstream sewer from the FSE. City personnel, or their authorized representative, reserve the right to make determinations of gravity grease interceptor or grease trap condition, and adequacy based on review of all information regarding the interceptor's or trap's performance and can require increased cleaning frequency, additional maintenance, modification or replacement of the GCE. All records will be available on site for review by city personnel, or their authorized representative, for a period of 36 months. Copies shall be provided upon request from the city. 
(b)  The city may require that the FSE install monitoring or additional pretreatment equipment deemed necessary for compliance with this FOG ordinance and the City of Dothan, part II, Code of Ordinances, chapter 102-utilities, article IV-sewer. 
(Ord. No. 2015-366, § 1, 12-15-15) 
Subdivision V. - Violations and Enforcement 

Sec. 102-384. - Fog treatment, disposal, and resource recovery plan. 
    The city may implement a FOG treatment, disposal, and resource recovery plan (plan). The plan may be implemented if problems continue with FOG disposal, FOG obstruction in the sewer system, or inconsistent maintenance of FSE grease control equipment provided by grease waste haulers to prevent FOG discharges. The plan may include a request for proposal (RFP) for the treatment and disposal of FOG waste generated from the City of Dothan food service establishments. The RFP may include that the successful RFP respondent provide some form of beneficial reuse of the FOG waste that is treated. Also, the RFP may include a cost estimate for maintenance (complete pump of grease interceptors and grease traps) and certification of the grease control equipment of all City of Dothan food service establishment gravity grease interceptors and grease traps. The results of the RFP may provide a single source for GCE pumping, GCE certification, FOG treatment, FOG disposal, and reporting to the city. The city will implement quality control practices to ensure that the successful RFP respondent meets all RFP requirements. In addition, the total cost of the food service establishment GCE pumping, and FOG treatment and disposal should be the same or lower cost than the average market cost of GCE maintenance as determined by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-366, § 1, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 102-385. - Violations and enforcement action. 
(a)  Enforcement action against the food service establishment may result from, but is not limited to, failure to clean or pump grease control equipment, failure to maintain grease control equipment including installation of a properly functioning influent/effluent tees and baffle(s), failure to install grease control equipment, failure to control FOG discharge from the FSE, failure to certify the gravity grease interceptor or grease trap, FSE responsible for sewer line obstruction, FSE responsible for a sanitary sewer overflow, and FSE use of additives so that FOG is diluted and pushed downstream of the FSE. 
(b)  Whenever city personnel, or their authorized representative, determine that a gravity grease interceptor or grease trap is in need of installation, pumping, repairs, maintenance, or replacement, a noncompliance notification (NCN) or a notice of violation (NOV) will be issued stating the nature of the violation(s) and timeframe for corrective measures. 
(c)  If the FSE fails to initiate corrective action in response to a NCN or NOV, a second notice will be issued and additional fees assessed. Fees may include compliance inspection fees, costs associated with service calls for sewer line blockages, line cleaning, camera trucks, line and pump repairs, including all labor, material and equipment. Further noncompliance will result in escalation in enforcement action. 
(d)  Immediate discontinuance of Dothan Utilities services may be issued if the facility presents an imminent endangerment to the health, welfare of person or to the environment, causes stoppages or excessive city maintenance of the sanitary sewer system, causes significant interference with the wastewater treatment plant, or causes the city to violate any condition of its NPDES permit. Service shall be reinstated when such conditions have been eliminated and after payment of reconnection fees or other assessed fees. 
(e)  In addition to any inspection or violation fees, any user who is found to have violated this FOG ordinance, or City of Dothan, part II, Code of Ordinances, chapter 102-utilities, article IV-sewer, shall be fined not less than $100.00 or more than $1,000.00 for each offense. Each day on which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided in this subsection, the city may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, court reporters' fees, and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this article or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued under this article. 
(f)  If inspections and field investigations determine that any fats, oils, and grease interference or blockage in the POTW (including the sewer system, a sewage pumping station, or the wastewater treatment plant) is caused by a particular user, or food service establishment, then that user, or FSE, may be required to reimburse the city for all labor, equipment, supplies and disposal costs incurred by city to clean the interference or blockage. The charges will be added to the user's or FSE's utility bill. Failure to reimburse the city may result in termination of utility services. 
(g)  For all other violations not specifically mentioned above, the city will use the City of Dothan Food Service Establishment Enforcement Response Guide as a guide for enforcement action. 
(Ord. No. 2015-366, § 1, 12-15-15) 
Chapter 106 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Tree cutters, § 18-357 et seq.; health and sanitation, ch. 46. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 106-1-106-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WEED CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Weed abatement generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-67-20 et seq. 

Sec. 106-31. - Purpose of article. 
    In order to serve the public health, safety and welfare, the declared purpose of this article is to prohibit and order the abatement of certain public nuisances within the city which are defined by this article. 
(Code 1977, § 11-31) 
Sec. 106-32. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Excluded properties means those properties which are in a heavily wooded area, areas in their natural state (i.e., not previously developed in any manner), property under current construction and farm properties. A lot or premises of more than five acres, including subdivisions in which no lots have been sold or occupied, shall be considered farm property and exempt from cutting or mowing; except that each such designated farm property, when such property is not under cultivation for useful purposes, shall be required to maintain an area of 100 feet from the abutting property lines of abutting residential or business property, which area shall be in compliance with this article. 
    Owner or owners of property means the legal titleholder, lessee, occupant of property, agent of the legal titleholder or lessee, person in charge, possession or control of such property. 
    Private property means real property owned by any individual, partnership, association, syndicate, company, firm, trust, corporation, business or any entity recognized by law. 
    Public nuisance means any growth of weeds, scrub, wild bushes, grass or other vegetative growth which exceeds 12 inches in height and which is injurious to the general public health, safety and welfare by providing breeding grounds and shelter for rats, mice, snakes, mosquitoes and other vermin, insects and pests; which obtains such heights and dryness so as to constitute serious fire threats or hazards; which bear wingy or downy seeds, when mature, that cause the spread of weeds and, when breathed, irritation to the throat, lungs and eyes of the public; which hides debris, such as broken glass or metal, which could inflict injury on any person going upon the property; or which is unsightly. 
    Vacant lots means any area of land that either has no structure upon it or has an unoccupied structure, whether that unoccupied structure is business or residential, upon the premises. A vacant lot will encompass adjoining and/or included easements, ditches and alleyways. 
(Code 1977, § 11-32) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 106-33. - Maintenance of vacant property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a public nuisance in violation of this article for the owner of any private property situated within the corporate limits of the city to allow such private property to become overgrown with tall grass or with any weed or plant or other vegetable matter which exceeds a height of 12 inches, other than ornamental plant growth. This section does not apply to excluded properties. 
(b)  Private property in violation of this article is a public nuisance and will be dealt with by the city pursuant to the provision of this article and Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-67-20 et seq. The city may also initiate criminal proceedings against the owner of such property. The institution of one procedure does not preclude the subsequent or simultaneous institution of the other procedure. 
(c)  A criminal prosecution within the purview of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable, upon conviction, as provided for in section 1-4. Each day's continuing violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1977, § 11-33) 
State Law reference- Municipalities authorized to abate nuisances, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-47-117, 11-47-118. 
Sec. 106-34. - Notification and enforcement. 
(a)  Nuisance declaration. All weeds, scrub, wild bushes, grass or other vegetable growth located upon the streets, sidewalks or upon private property in the city which bear seeds of a wingy or downy nature or which attain such growth of 12 inches or taller which becomes a fire menace when dry or which are otherwise noxious or dangerous may be declared a public nuisance by the commission and, thereafter, abated as provided in this section. 
(b)  Nuisance resolution. Whenever any such weeds are growing upon any street, sidewalk or private property, the board of commissioners of the city may, by resolution, declare the weeds to be a public nuisance and order its abatement. Such resolution shall refer to the street by the name under which it is commonly known, describe the property upon which or in front of which the nuisance exists by giving a legal description thereto, and no other description of the property shall be required. Any number of streets, sidewalks or parcels of private property may be included in one and the same resolution. 
(c)  Notice of hearing. After passage of such resolution, notice of a public hearing on the matter shall be given by certified mail, return receipt requested, mailed 30 days prior to the date of the hearing and shall inform the owner of the time, date and place of the hearing and the reason therefor. The notice shall be mailed to the owner of the property as the property appears on record in the tax assessor's office for the county. All notices shall carry a list of names of persons and/or private contractors who perform such work and are registered with the city clerk. Such names shall not constitute a recommendation, and the failure to include such a list shall in no way affect the operation of this article. Notice shall also be given by publication in a newspaper normally read by all segments of the population published in the county for once a week for two consecutive weeks. The first notice shall be published at least 14 days prior to the date of the scheduled hearing. In addition thereto, two signs shall be conspicuously posted on the property. The wording of such signs shall not be less than one inch in height and shall be in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE TO DESTROY WEEDS 
    Notice is hereby given that on the _____ day of ________, 19___, at _____ a.m./p.m. in the commission chambers, the board of commissioners of the City of Dothan will consider a resolution regarding the weeds growing upon or in front of the property on ___________ Street in the City of Dothan and more particularly described in said resolution, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk; and at that time and place will determine whether the weeds constitute a public nuisance which must be abated by the removal of the noxious or dangerous weeds; and, if so, will order the abatement and removal of the nuisance; in which case, the cost of such abatement and removal shall be assessed upon the lots and lands from which or in front of which such weeds are removed, and such cost will constitute a lien for weed removal upon such lots or lands until paid. 
    If no objections are filed with the city clerk at least five days before the meeting of the commission, and unless such person appears before the commission in person or through his representative to show cause, if any, why his objection should be sustained, it shall be presumed that the person accepts the notice as fact and waives any rights he may have to contest the removal of the weeds. The action of the commission shall be final unless good and sufficient cause can be otherwise shown. 
    Reference is hereby made to the resolution, on file in the office of the city clerk, for further particulars. 
    Dated this _____ day of ________, 19___. 
City of Dothan, Alabama 
By: _____
City Clerk  
The notice shall be posted at least seven days prior to the time for hearing objections by the board of commissioners. 
(d)  Objections. If objections are filed at the time stated in the notice, the board of commissioners shall hear and consider all evidence, objections and protest regarding the proposed removal of weeds. The commission may continue the hearing from time to time. Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the commission by resolution shall decide whether a public nuisance exists and, if so, shall order it to be removed or abated with respect to any property or part of such property described. The commission by passage of such resolution shall be deemed to have acquired jurisdiction to proceed and either to perform or have performed the work of removal or abatement with respect to such property or part of such property. The decision of the commission on the matter shall be deemed final and conclusive. 
(e)  Abatement. After the commission passes the resolution finding the conditions of the property to be a nuisance and ordering its abatement, all employees and duly authorized agents of the city are hereby expressly authorized to enter upon private property for that purpose. The board of commissioners may at its option authorize private contractors, companies, enterprises or individuals to abate and remove the nuisance. The commission by resolution shall designate the contractors, companies, enterprises or individuals who may perform the work. Those persons so designated are hereby authorized to enter upon private property for purposes of abating or removing the nuisance. For purposes of this article, compliance with the competitive bid law is not required. Any property owner shall have the right to have such weeds removed at his own expense providing that the removal is done prior to the commencing of the work by the employees or agents of the city to remove such weeds. 
(Code 1977, § 11-34) 
Sec. 106-35. - Administrative procedures. 
(a)  The city shall keep and account for the costs of abating or removing such nuisances in front of or on each separate lot or parcel of land where the work is done by it or its employees or by a duly authorized private contractor, company, enterprise or individual, and shall render an itemized report in writing to the commission showing the cost of removing the nuisance on each separate lot or in front thereof, or both; provided, however, that before the report is submitted to the commission, a copy of the report shall be posted for at least five days prior thereto on or near the chamber door of the commission, together with a notice of the time when the report shall be submitted to the commission for confirmation. 
(b)  At the time fixed for receiving and considering the report, the commission shall hear the report, together with any objections which may be raised by any of the property owners liable to be assessed for the work of abating the nuisance and, thereupon, make such modifications in the report as they deem necessary after which by motion or resolution the report shall be confirmed. The amounts of the cost for abating such nuisance in front of or upon the various parcels of land mentioned in the report shall hereinafter be referred to as "weed liens" and, as thus made and confirmed, shall constitute a weed lien on the property for the amount of such weed liens, respectively. After confirmation of the reports, a copy shall be turned over to the county tax collector who, under the optional method of taxation, is charged with the collection of the city's municipal taxes pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-51-40-11-51-74, as amended; whereupon, it shall be the duty of the county tax collector to add the amounts of the respective weed liens to the next regular bills for taxes levied against the respective lots and parcels of land. Thereafter, such amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal ad valorem taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency. 
(c)  Private contractors seeking to participate in this program in accordance with this article shall be required to provide proof of liability insurance in the amounts routinely required by the city for similar projects, prior to being listed as a private contractor with the commission, and will provide proof of current liability insurance coverage, upon request, and will accept responsibility for any damages to the subject lots and surrounding areas which may occur during the cutting/cleaning of the subject property. The insurance policy shall contain an endorsement that such policy shall not be cancelled without giving to the city ten days' written notice of any proposed cancellation of such policy. 
(d)  If the subject property is brought into complete compliance with this article after the property is declared a public nuisance and prior to the private contractor or city crew being dispatched for cutting, the property will not be cut; however, the assessed owner will be subject to and liable for the administrative charges which will be collected in the same manner as other charges in accordance with this article. 
(e)  If the subject property is not brought into complete compliance with the article prior to the day designated by the board of commissioners for the property to be delegated to a private contractor or city crew for cleaning, the subject property will be cleaned, and a weed lien shall be assessed against the property in the amount of administrative charges and cleaning costs. 
(Code 1977, § 11-35) 
Sec. 106-36. - Abatement of lot and parcel groups. 
    Groups of lots and parcels to be abated under this article and Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-67-20 et seq., will be established fairly and equitably taking into consideration the following criteria: 
(1)  A comparable disbursement of property to begin with, based upon square footage, within each group; and 
(2)  As minimal a traveling distance between lots and parcels within each group as possible. 
(Code 1977, § 11-37) 
Sec. 106-37. - Verification and payment of private contractor. 
(a)  Upon the private contractor bringing all lots/parcels in a group into complete compliance within the required 15 days, the private contractor will submit a request for payment along with verification of cutting/cleaning (i.e., dated before and after photographs). 
(b)  Payment will not be made for any cutting within a group unless the entire group is brought into complete compliance within the specified period of time allowed following all requirements of this article, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-67-20 et seq., and established policies and procedures. 
(c)  Upon compliance with the requirements as set forth, payment will be made by the city to the private contractor at an established rate per square foot as set by the city commission from time to time and for debris removal as applicable. 
(Code 1977, § 11-38) 
Secs. 106-38-106-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REPEAT OFFENDERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2014-298, § 1, adopted Nov. 18, 2014, set out provisions intended for use as Art. III, §§ 106-38, 106-39. In order to preserve the style of the Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 106-61, 106-62. 

Sec. 106-61. - Notification and enforcement. 
(a)  Notice of violation. Pursuant to Act 2014-303, whenever a nuisance exists that was previously abated pursuant to article II of this chapter, the owner of the property on which the nuisance is located shall remove all weeds, scrub, wild bushes, grass or other vegetative growth located upon the streets, sidewalks or upon private property in the city which; bear seeds of a wingy or downy nature, or which attain a growth height of 12 inches or taller, or which becomes a fire menace when dry, or which provide habitat to rats, snakes or other disease vectors, or which are otherwise noxious or dangerous. A notice of violation shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of the property ordering the condition be abated within ten calendar days. 
(b)  Abatement. Should the owner fail, neglect, or refuse to abate the condition by the date in the notice, the city official shall cause the offending grass or weeds to be cut either by city forces or as contracted. Those persons so designated are hereby authorized to enter upon private property for purposes of abating or removing the nuisance. For purposes of this article, compliance with the competitive bid law is not required. Any property owner shall have the right to have such weeds removed at his own expense providing that the removal is done prior to the commencing of the work by the employees or agents of the city to remove such weeds. Further, should the conditions warrant, criminal proceedings may be initiated against the owner of such property and docketed for expedited hearing. 
(c)  Appeal. A property owner shall have seven calendar days following issuance of notice to request a hearing before the administrative official to appeal the determination of the city official. The administrative official shall be appointed by the governing body of the municipality. Requested hearings before the administrative official shall be held no more than 14 days following receipt of the appeal by the administrative official. After the hearing, the administrative official shall notify the owner by personal service or by first class mail of his or her determination. If the administrative official determines that a nuisance does not exist, the abatement process shall be terminated. 
(Ord. No. 2014-298, § 1, 11-18-14) 
Sec. 106-62. - Administrative procedures. 
    The administrative procedures for this article shall be the same as specified for article II, section 106-35. 
(Ord. No. 2014-298, § 1, 11-18-14) 
Chapter 110 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 110-1-110-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Consent of city required to use streets for public or private enterprise, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-49-1. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 110-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Conviction means a final conviction. A forfeiture of bail to secure a defendant's appearance in court, which forfeiture has not been vacated, shall be equivalent to a conviction. 
    Taxicab, taxi means any motor-driven vehicle used for the transportation of passengers for hire within the city, the destination of which is subject to the will of the passenger. 
(Code 1977, § 21-20) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 110-32. - Penalties for violation of article. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article, or who shall neglect to comply with any of the provisions of this article, shall for each offense, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-4, and, in addition to the foregoing penalty, upon conviction, the license for the taxicab used by such person at the time of such violation or the driver's permit shall be suspended for such period as the municipal judge deems wise, or may be revoked at the discretion of the judge. 
(Code 1977, § 21-34) 
Sec. 110-33. - Insurance. 
    Prior to the issuance of any privilege license for the operation of a taxicab, the owner or operator of the taxicab or the applicant for such license shall first deposit with the city clerk, an insurance policy issued by some reputable insurance company approved by the city clerk, for an amount as follows: 
Type 
Equipment Limit for 
bodily injuries 
to or death 
of one person Limit for 
bodily injuries 
to or death 
of all persons 
injured or 
killed in 
any one 
accident Limit for loss 
or damage in 
any one acci- 
dent to prop- 
erty of others 
(excluding cargo) Passenger equipment seating 5 or less passengers $20,000 $50,000 $20,000 Passenger equipment seating 5-20 passengers $50,000 $200,000 $30,000  
    The insurance policy shall be deposited with the city clerk and kept in a safe place, and shall be available for inspection by any persons. The insurance policy shall cover liability to the person as to property. Such policy shall not be cancelled by the company issuing such policy except after 30 days' notice in writing to the city clerk. 
(Code 1977, § 21-21; Ord. No. 99-54, § 1, 2-23-99; Ord. No. 2000-279, § 1, 9-12-00) 
Sec. 110-34. - Place of business; telephone; record of specified information. 
    Every person operating one or more taxicabs in the city shall maintain a definitely established place of business equipped with a business telephone. A person shall be in charge of such place at all times during which any taxicab is in service. Such person shall keep accurate information concerning the whereabouts of all taxicabs at all times they are in use as taxicabs, and shall keep accurate information as to who is the driver or operator of such taxicabs for all hours which such taxicabs are in use. 
(Code 1977, § 21-22) 
Sec. 110-35. - Inspection of vehicles. 
    No application for a license shall be approved by the chief of police, nor shall any vehicle be licensed, until such vehicle has been inspected and examined and found to be safe for the transportation of passengers, as well as clean, fit and of good appearance. The chief of police shall make or have made by someone authorized by him such examination and inspection before approving any issuance of a license. He shall refuse to approve issuance of a license to, or, if already issued, shall suspend the license of, any vehicle found by him to be unfit or unsuited for public patronage until such time as the vehicle is put into proper condition. When the chief of police notifies the person engaged in the business of operating a taxicab that an inspection is to be made, such person shall submit the vehicle for inspection at the time and place specified by such officer. Nothing in this section shall prevent the chief of police from inspecting any taxicab at any reasonable time that he sees fit, and if he finds it to be in a defective condition, to order its use as a taxicab discontinued until it has been approved. 
(Code 1977, § 21-31) 
Sec. 110-36. - Parking or standing on streets. 
    Unless such space shall have been leased to the taxi owner under resolution or ordinance, it shall be unlawful for any owner, driver or operator of a taxicab to stand, park or cause any taxicab to be parked on the streets, avenues or thoroughfares of the city for any purpose in violation of signed or posted parking time limits. 
(Code 1977, § 21-32) 
Sec. 110-37. - Soliciting passengers by loud voice and shouting. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person operating or driving a taxicab to speak or holler in a loud tone of voice in an effort to solicit passengers. 
(Code 1977, § 21-33) 
Sec. 110-38. - Posting of rates. 
    There shall be prominently displayed at all times on the inside of each taxicab, where it can be seen by each passenger, a card at least six inches by eight inches setting forth the schedule of rates for taxicab service in such vehicle. 
(Code 1977, § 21-23) 
Secs. 110-39-110-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DRIVER'S PERMIT 

Sec. 110-71. - Required; expiration date. 
(a)  Every person before driving a taxicab for hire upon a public street in the city shall procure a driver's permit. Driver's permits shall expire September 30 following the date of issuance, but may be renewed, upon application and payment of the fee and in the manner provided for in section 110-74. 
(b)  No owner or operator of any taxicab business in the city shall employ any driver of a taxicab who does not have a valid taxicab driver's permit. 
(Code 1977, § 21-24) 
Sec. 110-72. - Application. 
    Each person desiring a permit shall apply to the city clerk's department for such driver's permit or a renewal of such permit upon a form which shall be provided by the city clerk. 
(Code 1977, § 21-25; Ord. No. 97-24, § 1, 1-21-97) 
Sec. 110-73. - Disqualification of applicants. 
    A driver's permit shall not be issued to the following persons: 
(1)  Any person less than 18 years of age. 
(2)  Any person whose driving right or privilege is suspended or revoked. 
(3)  Any person who is an habitual drunkard or addicted to the use of narcotic drugs. 
(4)  Any person adjudged insane, an idiot, an imbecile, or feeble-minded, until restored to competency by judicial decree, or released from a hospital for the insane or feeble-minded, upon certification by the superintendent or medical director that such person is competent. 
(5)  Any person afflicted with, or suffering from a physical or mental disability which, in the opinion of the commission, will prevent such person from exercising reasonable and ordinary control over a motor vehicle. 
(6)  Any person who does not possess a valid state driver's license. 
(7)  Any person who has been convicted of criminal sex offense which requires the applicant to register as a sex offender as defined in the Code of Alabama § 15-20-21. 
(Code 1977, § 21-26; Ord. No. 2008-103, § 1, 4-22-08) 
Sec. 110-74. - Issuance; initial and annual renewal fees. 
    Applications shall first be approved by the chief of police, or his designee, certifying that the applicant has no police record to his knowledge which, according to provisions stated in this division, would prohibit the issuance of such permit. The city clerk shall charge a fee of $10.00 for the initial issuance of such permit, and shall charge a fee of $5.00 for the renewal of the permit on or after January 1 of each year. If such permit is lost, the city clerk shall charge a fee of $2.00 for the issuance of a replacement permit. 
(Ord. No. 2007-394, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 110-75. - Carrying; display on demand. 
    Every driver shall have his permit in his immediate possession at all times when driving a taxicab and shall display the permit upon demand of a police officer. However, no person charged with violating this section shall be convicted if he produces in court or the office of the court magistrate a driver's permit theretofore issued to him and valid at the time of his arrest. 
(Code 1977, § 21-28) 
Sec. 110-76. - Driver's identification card; issuance; description; assignment or transferral. 
(a)  At the time of issuing a taxicab driver's permit, the city clerk shall issue to the applicant an identification card, five inches by seven inches in size, upon which shall be affixed a photograph of the applicant at least two inches by two inches in size. The identification card shall be signed by the applicant and shall list the applicant's physical description. Taxicab owners are to provide a suitable device with transparent glass for the identification card. The identification card shall be placed in the taxicab where it is visible to the passenger at all times and shall be preserved in good order. The taxicab driver shall insert and keep his card in the holder at all times while he is in charge of the taxicab. 
(b)  No identification card shall be assigned or transferred to any other person. 
(Code 1977, § 21-29) 
Sec. 110-77. - Suspension, cancellation or revocation. 
(a)  The municipal judge is authorized to suspend the permit of a driver of a taxicab without preliminary hearing upon a showing by court records or other sufficient evidence that a driver of a taxicab: 
(1)  Is an habitually reckless or negligent driver of a motor vehicle. 
(2)  Is an habitual violator of the traffic laws. 
(3)  Is incompetent to drive a motor vehicle. 
(4)  Is convicted of violating any ordinance of the city, or the laws of the state, in regard to selling liquor or transporting a person for immoral purposes. 
(5)  Drives a taxicab under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs. 
(6)  Has permitted an unlawful or fraudulent use of the permit. 
(b)  The municipal judge is authorized to cancel any driver's permit upon determining that the person to whom the permit was issued was not entitled to issuance under this article or that the person failed to give the required or correct information in his application or committed any fraud in making such application. Upon such cancellation, the person holding a driver's permit must surrender the permit so cancelled. If such person refuses to surrender such permit, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished in the manner provided in section 1-4. 
(c)  The municipal judge shall forthwith revoke the permit of any driver of any taxicab upon receiving a record of such driver's conviction of any of the following offenses, when such conviction has become final: 
(1)  Manslaughter, resulting from the operation of a motor vehicle. 
(2)  Driving a motor vehicle by a person who is a user of drugs or while under the influence of intoxicating liquors. 
(3)  Any felony in the commission of which a motor vehicle is used. 
(4)  Failure to stop and render aid as required under the laws of the state in the event of a motor vehicle accident resulting in the death or personal injury of another. 
(5)  Perjury or the making of a false affidavit or statement under oath to an official of the city under this article or under any other law relating to the ownership or operation of a motor vehicle. 
(6)  Conviction or forfeiture of bail not vacated, upon two charges of reckless driving committed within a period of 12 months. 
(Code 1977, § 21-30) 
Chapter 114 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, adopted Dec. 1, 2015, amended Ch. 114 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 114, §§ 114-1-114-13, 114-25, 114-26, 114-38-114-42, 114-54-114-62, 114-73-114-81, 114-93-114-103, 114-115-114-118, 114-130-114-132, 114-140-114-143, 114-155-114-157, 114-170-114-186, 114-207-114-224, 114-236-114-242, pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for a detailed history of derivation. 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; cemeteries, ch. 22; planning, ch. 70. 
Note- Section 3 of Ord. No. 2010-258 states that the "administrative official" referred to in this chapter shall be the director of planning and development. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 114-1. - Short title; zoning map. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "Zoning Regulations of Dothan, Alabama" and the map herein referred to, identified by the title "Zoning Map of Dothan," as amended from time-to-time, shall be further identified by the signature of the mayor and attested by the city clerk. The zoning map and all explanatory matter thereof are adopted and made a part of this chapter. Such map shall be maintained by the planning and development department with a copy filed in the office of the city clerk and shall show thereon the date of adoption of this chapter. 
(a)  Changes in district boundaries. If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made in district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the official zoning map, such changes shall be entered onto the digital files comprising the official zoning map. Changes shall be made promptly after the amendment has been approved by the city commission and advertised as required by law. No amendment to this chapter which involves information portrayed on the official zoning map shall become effective until after such change and entry has been made on said map. 
(b)  Unauthorized changes prohibited. No changes of any nature shall be made in the official zoning map, or matter thereon, except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this chapter. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person or persons, shall be considered a violation of this chapter and punishable as provided by City Code. 
(c)  Final authority to zoning. Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official zoning map, which may from time to time be made, published or printed, the official zoning map, which shall be located in the office of the administrative official, shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land, buildings, and other structures in the city. 
(d)  Replacement of official zoning map. From time to time and in the event the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the city commission may, by resolution, adopt a new official zoning map. The new official zoning map will reflect changes in boundaries since last adopted, correct drafting, or other errors or omissions, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original official zoning map or any subsequent amendment thereof. The new official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor and attested by the city clerk, under the following words: "This is to certify that this official zoning map supersedes and replaces the official zoning map adopted (date of adoption of map being replaced) as part of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Dothan, Alabama." 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-2. - Purpose. 
    The fundamental purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and general welfare; to encourage the use of lands and natural resources in the City of Dothan in accordance with their character and adaptability; to limit the improper use of land; to provide for orderly development and growth; to reduce hazards to life and property; to establish the location and size of and the specific uses for which dwellings, buildings and/or structures may hereafter be erected or altered, the minimum open space required, sanitary, safety and protective measures that shall be required for such dwellings, buildings, and buildings and/or structures; to avoid congestion on the public roads and streets; to provide safety in traffic and vehicular parking; to facilitate the development of an adequate system of transportation, education, recreation, sewage disposal, safe and sufficient water supply and other public requirements; to conserve life, property and natural resources and the expenditure of funds for public improvements and services to conform with the most advantageous uses of land, resources and properties, for the general good and benefit to the people of the City of Dothan. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-3. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be considered minimum requirements. Where other chapters or regulations which may be adopted impose greater restrictions than those specified in this chapter, compliance with such other chapters or regulations are mandatory. The administrative official shall make all interpretations of these regulations necessary to administer those regulations. Purposes and intent statements (where applicable) shall guide the interpretation of these standards, and direct the application of any flexibility specifically permitted under the regulations. 
    Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  "And" indicates that all connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(2)  "Or" indicates that one or more of the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(3)  "Either or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singularly but not in combination. 
    Except as defined by this chapter, words, terms and phrases used in this chapter, shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others that have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law, shall be construed and understood according to such meaning except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-4. - Authority. 
(a)  Planning commission. Unless specified otherwise in the Code of Alabama 1975, § 11-52-14, the duties, powers, responsibilities and procedures of the planning commission shall be as provided for in Title 11, Chapter 52, Code of Alabama 1975, § 11-82-1 et seq. These provisions, as amended, shall apply to all changes and amendments. 
(b)  Board of zoning adjustment. Unless specified otherwise in the Code of Alabama 1975, § 11-52-80, the duties, powers, responsibilities and procedures of the board of zoning adjustment shall be provided for in Title 11, Chapter 52, Code of Alabama 1975, § 11-52-80, and Alabama Act Number 97-673. These provisions, as amended, shall apply to all changes and amendments. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-5. - Delegation of authority. 
    The administrative officer may authorize subordinates to perform the required acts or duties of these zoning regulations unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. Subordinates delegated to perform required acts or duties of this chapter shall have the authorities assigned to the administrative officer. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-6. - Computation of time. 
    The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; if the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, that day shall be excluded. In the computation of time for public hearing notice, both the first day (day of the advertisement) and the last day (day of the hearing) shall be excluded. The following time-related words shall have the meanings ascribed below. 
(1)  Day means one calendar day unless working day is specified. 
(2)  Week means seven calendar days. 
(3)  Month means one calendar month. 
(4)  Year means one calendar year, unless otherwise indicated. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-7. - Jurisdiction. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply within the corporate limits of the City of Dothan, Alabama. Said provisions shall be applicable to the corporate limits, which exist at the time of adoption of this chapter, as well as to any future revisions to the corporate limits. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-8. - Number. 
    A word indicating the singular number may be extended and applied to include the plural. The use of the plural number shall be deemed to include the singular unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-9. - Fractions. 
    When any requirement of these regulations results in a fraction of a dwelling unit or other measurement, that fraction will be disregarded and the fraction if less than 0.5 shall be rounded down the nearest whole number, and if equal to or greater than 0.5 shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-10. - Shall and may. 
    The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-11. - Tense. 
    Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past or present, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-12. - Text. 
    In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this zoning code and any figure, the text shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-13. - Building and/or structure. 
    The words building and/or structure are sometimes used interchangeably. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Secs. 114-14-114-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 114-25. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to define words, terms and phrases used in this chapter. Words, terms and phrases not defined in this article shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others that have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law, shall be construed and understood according to such meaning except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. If a word, term or phrase is not listed or not defined elsewhere in this section, the conventional meaning of the word, term or phrase shall apply. The administrative official is authorized to make a final determination of the meaning of any word, term or phrase used in this section, and in case of any dispute, an appeal of the administrative official's determination may be filed with the planning commission. 
    Abandoned sign. Any sign or sign structure that no longer identifies a current business, product, service, use or activity being conducted on the premises on which the sign is located or that has not occupied the site for a period longer than 60 days and which does not maintain a current business license. 
    Accessory building. Any detached minor building in the area of the main building consisting of masonry or frame walls and roof, one or two stories in height, necessary as an adjunct to the use or occupancy of a principal or main building and/or structure, except open buildings and/or structures such as pergolas, arbors, and other garden houses of similar character. An accessory building is one which: 
(1)  Is not used as a residential dwelling, 
(2)  Is subordinate to and serves the principal building and/or principal use, 
(3)  Is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal building and/or principal use served, 
(4)  Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants of the principal building and/or principal use served, and 
(5)  Is located on the same zoning lot as the principal building and/or principal use served, with the single exception of such accessory off-street parking facilities as are permitted to be located elsewhere than on the same zoning lot with the building and/or use served. 
    Accessory dwelling unit (ADU). A secondary residential dwelling that is intended to be used in conjunction with single-family dwellings and/or uses. 
    Accessory dwelling unit for owner/operator. A residential dwelling that is intended to be used in conjunction with another use, other than single-family residential uses. 
    Accessory use. A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use and located on the same lot with such principal use. 
    Administrative official. The Director of the City of Dothan Planning and Development Department or his/her designee. The administrative official may appoint a representative as appropriate. 
    Adult bookstore. An establishment having a majority of its stock in trade books, magazines, or other periodicals, or other goods or items which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined below for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult day care. The provision of care for adult persons, who are not related to the primary caregiver, for less than 24 hours per day. 
    Adult entertainment. Any "adult bookstore," "adult video store," "adult theater," "adult nightclub," or any commercial establishment which for a fee is charged for presentation of material or exhibitions distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined below for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult nightclub. A theater, concert hall, auditorium, nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial establishment which regularly features live performances that are characterized by the exposure of "specified sexual activities" or by "specified anatomical areas," as defined below. 
    Adult video. A video, CD, laser disk, or similar medium with a cover available that depicts "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    Adult video store. A commercial establishment having a majority of its stock or a majority of its floor space dedicated to "adult videos," as defined herein, which are rented or sold or presented for a fee or incidentally to another service which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as defined below for observation by patrons therein. 
(1)  Specified anatomical areas: 
a.  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
1.  Human genitals; pubic region, 
2.  Buttock, and 
3.  Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; 
b.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(2)  Specified sexual activities: 
a.  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
b.  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; 
c.  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast. 
    Agricultural activity. The raising of animal, fowl, fish and agricultural or horticultural crops, including but not limited to soybeans, tobacco, timber, orchard fruits, vegetables, flowers and/or ornamental plants for commercial purposes. 
    Aircraft landing field. A private loading and unloading facility for aircraft and helicopters. Included are runways, hangers, refueling and repair facilities, parking and all other facilities needed to operate aircraft. This use is not intended to be open to the public. 
    Airport/heliport. A passenger and freight loading and unloading facility for aircraft and helicopters. Included are runways, hangers, refueling and repair facilities, parking and all other facilities needed to operate aircraft. Ticket purchasing, restaurants and retail stores are permitted as accessory uses. 
    Alcoholic beverage establishment. A commercial establishment located in the city which allows for the sale of alcoholic beverages (liquor, beer or wine) to be consumed by patrons on the premises until the legally required closing time as prescribed by law and entrance is age restricted. Food service may be provided but is incidental to the consumption of alcoholic beverages. This term includes, but is not limited to lounges, bars, taverns, pubs, bottle clubs, etc. 
    Alley. A narrow public or private way less in size than a street, designed for the special accommodation of the property it reaches, and not intended for general travel. 
    Alteration; altered. The term "alteration" includes any of the following: 
(1)  Any addition to the height or depth of a building and/or structure. 
(2)  Any change in the location of any exterior walls of a building and/or structure. 
(3)  Any increases in the interior accommodations of a building and/or structure. 
    In addition to such, a building and/or structure shall be classified as "altered" when it is repaired, renovated, remodeled or rebuilt at a cost in excess of 50 percent of its tax value prior to the commencement of such repairs, renovation, remodeling or rebuilding. 
    Animal. Refer to the City of Dothan Code of Ordinances, chapter 10, animals. 
    Animal hospital. An enterprise for the care and treatment of the diseases and injuries of animals, and where animals may be boarded during their treatment and convalescence. (Also see definition of veterinarian.) 
    Animated sign. A sign employing actual motion, the illusion of motion, or light and/or color changes achieved through mechanical, electrical or electronic means. Animated signs, which are differentiated from changeable signs as defined and regulated by this Code, include the following types: 
(1)  Mechanically activated: Animated signs characterized by repetitive motion and/or rotation activated by a mechanical system powered by electric motors or other mechanically induced means. 
(2)  Electrically activated: Animated signs producing the illusion of movement by means of electronic, electrical, or electromechanical input and/or illumination capable of simulating movement through employment of the characteristics of one or both of the classifications noted below: 
a.  Flashing: Animated signs or animated portions of signs whose illumination is characterized by a repetitive cycle in which the period of illumination is either the same as or less than the period of non-illumination. For the purposes of this chapter, flashing will not be defined as occurring if the cyclical period between on-off phases of illumination exceeds four seconds. 
b.  Patterned illusionary movement: Animated signs or animated portions of signs whose illumination is characterized by simulated movement through alternate or sequential activation of various illuminated elements for the purpose of producing repetitive light patterns designed to appear in some form of constant motion. 
    Antenna support structure. Any building or other structure other than a tower which complies with the maximum height allowed in the district in which it is located and which can be used for location of telecommunications facilities. 
    Applicant. Any person who applies for development permit, rezoning request, variance request, special exception, etc. 
    Application. The process by which an owner submits a request to develop, construct, build, modify or erect a tower. Application includes all written documentation, verbal statements and representations, in whatever form or forum, made by the applicant to the city concerning such a request. 
    Architectural projection. Any projection from a building that is decorative and/or functional and not intended for occupancy, and that extends beyond the face of an exterior wall of a building but that does not include signs as defined herein. See also: Awning, back-lit awning and canopy, attached and freestanding. 
    Assisted living facility. A licensed "assisted-care living facility" that provides domiciliary care, room, board and nonmedical living assistance service to primarily aged, ambulatory persons who live in a rooming unit. Where there is a common kitchen and communal area for all residents within the facility, three rooming units in the facility shall be counted as one dwelling unit for determining the facility's density. 
    Auction. The sale of items to the highest bidder. 
    Audio/video tape transfer. The production of multiple copies of audio or visual tapes from master copies. 
    Automated teller machine (ATM). A facility to provide banking and other electronic services that are operated by the customer. 
    Automobile parking. The use of property for the commercial parking or storage of operable automobiles on a temporary basis. Such parking shall be for the use of licensed vehicles only and is not intended to include merchandise or vehicles for sale. 
    Automobile repair. Any building and/or structure, improvements, or land used for the general repair, adjusting, overhauling, removing, replacing, rebuilding, or reconditioning of automobiles and engines, including but not limited to body, frame or fender straightening or repair, welding, painting, or upholstery work, collision repair, vehicle steam cleaning, but excluding the assembly, disassembly, dismantling or salvage of automobiles, in whole or in part. Abandoned vehicles shall not be stored on the premises and must be removed in accordance with City Code of Ordinances, section 98-161. 
    Automobile sales, new. A franchised retail automobile dealership that is primarily housed in a building and/or structure and characterized by a mixture of secondary supporting uses; however, the principal use of the site shall be the marketing and display of new automobiles, whether by sale, rental, lease or other commercial or financial means. Secondary supporting uses may include an inventory of vehicles for sale or lease either on-site or at a nearby location of new or used automobiles in operating condition, and on-site facilities for the repair and service of automobiles previously sold, rented, or leased by the dealership as defined under "automobile repair" and "automobile service." No abandoned vehicles shall be stored on the premises. 
    Automobile sales, used. A retail business which sells operable, used automobiles that pass state vehicle inspection requirements upon display in the open for sale or trade. Secondary supporting uses may include the service of automobiles previously sold or traded as defined under "automobile service." No "automobile repair" or "scrap operation" activities may occur on-site and no abandoned vehicles shall be stored on the premises. 
    Automobile service. Any building and/or structure, improvements, or land used for the replacement of any part, or repair of any part, to an automobile that does not require removal of the engine head or pan, engine transmission or differential, including, but not limited to oil change and lubrication, cooling, electrical, fuel and exhaust systems, wheel alignment and balancing, brake adjustment, relining and repairs, mufflers, batteries, new tire services and sales, shock absorbers, installation of stereo equipment, car alarms or cellular phones, but excludes dismantling, rebuilding, reconditioning, or salvage of automobiles, in whole or in part. No abandoned vehicles shall be stored on the premises. No vehicle to be serviced shall remain on the premises more than 45 days. 
    Automobile wash. A building or portion thereof containing facilities for washing more than two automobiles, using production-line methods with a chain conveyor, blower, steam cleaning device or other mechanical devices within an enclosed building and/or structure or a self-service facility with one or more wash bay(s) that is free or coin-operated. Car wash also includes operations that are done by hand such as auto detailing. 
    Automotive rental/leasing. The rental or leasing of automobiles, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, boats, recreational equipment, and light trucks and vans, including incidental parking and servicing of vehicles for rent or lease (e.g. rental car agencies and taxi-cab dispatch areas). No "automobile repair" or "scrap operation" activities may occur on-site and no abandoned vehicles shall be stored on the premises. 
    Awning. An architectural projection that provides weather protection, identity or decoration and is wholly supported by the building to which it is attached. An awning is comprised of a lightweight, rigid skeleton building and/or structure over which a covering is attached. 

    Awning sign. A sign displayed on or attached flat against the surface or surfaces of an awning. See also: Wall Sign. Signs on awnings shall be included in the applicable sign area requirements for wall signs [see section 114-219(c), table 4]. Only the sign area displayed on an awning shall be used to determine the permitted sign area the entire awning shall not be included in a sign area calculation. 
    Balcony. A platform enclosed by a railing or parapet projecting from the wall of a building for the private use of tenants or for exterior access to the above-grade living units. When a balcony is roofed and enclosed, it is considered part of the room it serves. 
    Bank or financial institution. Any building, room, space or portion thereof where an establishment provides a variety of financial services, including generally, banks, credit unions, and mortgage companies. 
    Banner. Any sign made of cloth, canvas, plastic, sheeting or any other flexible material, which is not rigidly and permanently attached to a building or the ground by a permanent support structure. 
    Bar (tavern or lounge). A commercial enterprise whose primary activity is the sale of alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises. Bars include taverns, night clubs, private clubs, bottle (BYOB) clubs, and similar facilities serving alcoholic beverages. 
    Beacon. Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same lot or parcel as the light source. 
    Bed and breakfast (B&B). A transient lodging establishment either converted from a single-family dwelling or specifically constructed for the purpose of providing overnight or otherwise temporary lodging for the general public and may provide meals for compensation. 
    Berm. A manmade raised bank of earth, a minimum of four feet above grade, used to provide privacy, separation of uses, and/or barriers to visual pollution. 
    Billboard. For the purposes of this chapter, a billboard shall be defined as any sign, structure or device which advertises or contains information unrelated to a business, profession, or activity conducted, or to a commodity or service sold or offered upon the premises where the sign is located (see off-premise sign). 
    Block. A unit of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets and public land, railroad rights-of-way, waterways, or any other barrier to the continuity of development. 
    Boardinghouse. A building other than a hotel, cafe or restaurant where, for compensation, meals are provided for three or more persons. 
    Buffers. The use of landscaping, retained native vegetation or landscaping along with berms, walls or decorative fences that has 80 percent opacity within five years so as to partially or completely screen from the street or an abutting property vehicular use areas, parking lots, parked cars, detention ponds and conflicting activity areas another in order to mitigate the impacts of noise, light, or other nuisance. 
    Building. A building and/or structure attached or placed on the ground, enclosed by exterior walls, built, erected and framed of a combination of materials, having a roof for the shelter of persons, animals, or property. 
    Building area. Includes, but is not limited to, a portion of the lot occupied by the main building, including porches, carports, accessory buildings and other roofed buildings and/or structures. 
    Building contractors supply. The construction and incidental storage activities performed by construction contractors on zoned lots other than construction sites, as well as the retail or wholesale sale of materials used by the construction trades. 
    Building envelope. The area formed by the front, side, and rear building setback lines of a lot within which the principal buildings must be located. 
    Building height. See definition of height of building and/or structure. 
    Building line. A line showing the nearest distance to the property line where it is permissible to build or place a dwelling or building. 
    Build-to line. An alignment establishing a certain distance from the property line to a line along which the building shall be built. Front porches and handicap ramps shall be exempt from build-to line requirements but must occur behind the property line. 
    Business school. An enterprise offering instruction and training, including four-year degrees and/or postgraduate degrees, in a service or the arts such as secretarial, cosmetology, commercial artist, computer software, legal, and similar training, provided that such enterprise does not offer student housing or athletic facilities at the site. 
    Butcher. A retail store supplying meat and poultry products where meat processing is limited to making cuts of meat from preprocessed carcasses. 
    Caliper. Diameter of tree trunk measured at six inches above grade. 
    Camouflaged tower. means a self-supporting communications tower concealed to resemble an object that blends with its surroundings, such as a communications tower concealed to resemble a tree within a wooded setting, a street lamp, a lookout tower, a clock tower or a light post on an athletic field. 
    Camp. A place where children, youth and/or adults gather together for spiritual, recreational, or educational purposes in an organized and supervised manner, and where overnight lodging (e.g. tents, cabins), food, counseling, religious, and outdoor recreational activities may be provided. 
    Candela. The basic unit of measurement of light in SI (metric) units. 
    Candela per square meter (cd/m 2 ). The SI (metric) unit used to describe the luminance of a light source or of an illuminated surface that reflects light. Also referred to as Nits. 
    Candle or candlepower. Synonymous with Candela, but in English, not SI (metric), terms. 
    Canopy. An attached or unattached multi-sided overhead structure or architectural projection supported by attachment to a building on one or more sides and either cantilevered from the building or supported by columns but not enclosed by walls. The surface and/or soffit may be illuminated by either an external or internal light source. 
    Canopy (shade) tree. Any tree that is normally more than 40 feet in height at maturity that provides shade from its foliage mass; also individual or tree groups forming an overhead cover. Examples of recommended canopy (shade) trees are included in section 114-239(a) of article XIII. Canopy (shade) trees should be located so as to minimize potential interference with utilities and avoid sight and height obstructions. 
    Cash advance. Any building, room, space or portion thereof where unsecured, short-term cash advances are provided, including those made against future pay checks. 
    Cemetery/mausoleum. Land used or dedicated to the burial of the dead, including crematoriums, mausoleums, necessary sales, and maintenance facilities. Mortuaries shall be included when operated within the boundary of such cemetery. 
    Check cashing. Any building, room, space or portion thereof where checks are cashed in exchange for a fee. 
    Church. A building wherein persons regularly assemble at a specific time for religious worship following a recognized creed and which is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized and recognized by the IRS as a tax exempt religious institution together with all accessory buildings and uses customarily associated with such primary purpose. The definition includes synagogue, temple, mosque, or other such place for worship and religious activities. 
    City horticulturist. A city employee who is an expert in the science of cultivating plants and is in charge of all plantings within the city limits. If the position of horticulturist is vacant, the city manager may appoint an acting horticulturist. 
    City services. Services to the public at large, including emergency services, fire prevention and protection, law enforcement, traffic control, water, sewer, electricity and other services provided by the city in the city. 
    Civic building. Any building and/or structure designed and constructed for community use or benefit by governmental, cultural, educational, public welfare, religious or transportation organizations. 
    Clear cutting. The removal of all vegetation upon a tract of land at one time. 
    Clinic, outpatient. See definition of outpatient clinic. 
    Club (fraternal). A facility which offers social, educational, cultural or other similar activities that are only available to members and their guests. 
    Collection center. A facility which is staffed and fenced that has waste receptacles on site that are open to the public, when an attendant is present, to receive household waste, municipal solid waste and recyclable material. 
    College or university. An institution of higher education offering undergraduate or graduate degrees. 
    Commercial amusement, inside. The provision of entertainment or games of skill to the general public for a fee and that is wholly enclosed in a building, including but not limited to a bowling alley or billiard parlor. This use does not include an arena. 
    Commercial amusement, outside. The provision of entertainment or games of skill to the general public for a fee where any portion of the activity takes place outside of a building, including but not limited to a golf driving range, archery range or miniature golf course. This use does not include a stadium. 
    Commercial message. Any sign wording, logo, or other representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial activity. 
    Community education (K-12). Public or private instruction on an elementary, middle and high school level, approved under the regulations of the State of Alabama. 
    Condominium. A form of property ownership in which each owner holds title to his/her individual unit, plus a fractional interest in the common areas of the multi-unit project. Each owner pays taxes on his/her property, and is free to sell or lease it. 
    Conservation easement. A nonpossessory interest in real property imposing limitations or affirmative obligations, the purposes of which include retaining or protecting natural, scenic, or open space values of real property; assuring its availability for agricultural, forest, recreational, or open space use; protecting natural resources; or maintaining air or water quality. 
    Consignment sale. A sale of personal property by someone who is acting as an agent of another. 
    Construction/demolition landfill. See definition of landfill, construction/demolition. 
    Convenience store. A facility where flammable and combustible liquids, such as gasoline and other motor fuels, are stored and subsequently dispensed, by use of fixed approved dispensing equipment by customers of the facility on a self-service basis and/or by employees on a full-service basis and which may include an automatic car wash for washing one automobile at a time, within an enclosed building; in addition, a facility which also provides sandwiches, snacks, staple groceries and other similar retail products or services, which are not recognized or defined by the zoning code as separate uses or as necessary components of separate uses, for sale on premises for consumption off premises by the customer. 
    Core area. The portion of a lot or parcel of property that is not located within the tree protection area or the residential buffer. 
    Corner lot. See definition of lot, corner. 
    Correctional facility. A facility for the housing and care of persons legally confined for violations of law. 
    Crematory. A facility which reduces the deceased to ashes by burning. 
    Cultural center. Services to the public, such as, but not limited to museums, art galleries and libraries by a public or private, non-profit facility. 
    Curb market. A business dealing in buying or selling fruit, produce or any grocery item, whether permanent or temporary, seasonal or year-round, of which the building must be permanent and comply with the building code (e.g. a store selling food). 
    Custom assembly. The on-site production of goods by hand manufacturing that generally involves only the use of hand tools. Incidental direct sale to consumers of the goods produced on-site is permitted. 
    Daycare. The provision of care for persons (preschool age, disabled or the elderly), who are not related to the primary caregiver, for less than 24 hours per day including: 
(1)  Daycare center: A facility that provides daycare for more than six (6) persons; 
(2)  Daycare home: Accessory to a single-family dwelling for up to six (6) persons; 
(3)  School daycare: Daycare centers of unlimited size for before, during and after school programs. 
    Detention area. A pond, pool or basin used for the temporary storage of stormwater runoff. 
    Development plan. A dimensional presentation of a proposed development of a specified parcel (or parcels) of land that illustrates the location of buildings, easements, parking arrangements, public access, street pattern, and other similar features. 
    Development review committee (DRC). A committee consisting of the administrative official, public works director or their designee, building official, fire marshal, utilities director or their designees and traffic engineer or their designee having the responsibility and authority to review and approve certain development plans as provided for in article V of this chapter. 
    Developments, major. Non-residential development containing more than 15,000 square feet of gross floor area and/or has a common boundary with a residentially zoned and/or used parcel. 
    Developments, minor. Non-residential development containing less than 15,000 square feet of gross floor area and that does not have a common boundary with a residentially zoned and/or used parcel. Common boundary shall include roadways not considered to be a major thoroughfare (see definition). 
    Diameter at breast height (DBH). Diameter of a tree measured at four and one-half feet (54 inches) above the ground. 
    Directional sign. Signs that are designed and erected solely for the purpose of traffic or pedestrian direction and placed on the property which the public is directed. 
    Directory sign. Signs that are designed and erected to direct traffic or pedestrian direction and placed on the property which the public is directed. These signs generally provide a map of the entire complex to which the sign relates. 
    Display area. The area of a sign or advertising device that can be enclosed or measured by the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle, or geometric figure that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display, or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed, also including any supporting framework, bracing, or decorative fence or wall. 
    Distributive business/wholesale. The sale or distribution of goods from the premises that may consist of the flexible use of the floor area for warehouse, assembly, showroom and office space within tenant areas, with the showroom and office area not exceeding 50 percent of the total floor area permitted on the parcel. 
    Donation center, drop-off. Any lot, building and/or structure or premises used solely for the collection of clothing, furniture, housewares, small electrical appliances, household textiles, toys, and other small household items. The center shall not pay for materials collected or sell any collected materials on the premises. Collected materials shall be stored in an enclosed location on-site until picked up and taken to a central sorting and distribution center. Types of drop-off donation centers range from storefront centers, which may include a drive-thru facility, to other enclosed facilities. 
    Dripline. A collective name for all vertical lines from the earth to the outermost tips of the crown of a tree. These lines will completely encircle the tree and thereby define its outermost reaches. 
    Dripline area. The total area underneath a tree that would encompass all driplines. 
    Drive-in restaurant. A restaurant or public eating business so conducted that food, meals or refreshments are brought to the motor vehicles for consumption by the consumer or patron. Seating may be provided. 
    Drive-in theater. A theater so arranged and conducted that the customer or patron may view the performance while being seated in a motor vehicle. 
    Driving range. An establishment containing an area equipped with distance markers, clubs, balls, and tees for practicing golf drives and putting, and which may include a snack-bar and pro-shop, but excludes miniature golf courses or "putt-putt" courses. 
    Dry cleaning and laundry establishment. An establishment containing no more than 3,000 square feet, for the mechanical cleaning of garments, articles or goods of fabric for retail customers, using non-flammable liquids with no odor, fumes, or steam detectable to normal senses from off the premises. A dry cleaning and laundry establishment does not include a laundry or laundromat which provides self-service type washing and drying for use of retail customers. 
    Dry cleaning and laundry plant. An establishment for the mechanical cleaning of garments, articles or goods of fabric, including a linen, diaper, or uniform laundering service, containing more than 3,000 square feet of gross floor area. A dry cleaning and laundering plant may perform work on the premises for other dry cleaning and laundry services and serve retail customers. 
    Dry cleaning and laundry pick-up station. An establishment where customers drop-off and pick-up garments or articles that are sent to another location for cleaning or laundering. A dry cleaning and laundry pick-up station does not include on-site dry cleaning or laundry facilities. 
    Dwelling unit. A building providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation to include: 
(1)  One-family (single-family): A building containing one detached dwelling unit. 
(2)  Two-family (duplex): A building containing two attached dwelling units. 
(3)  Multi-family: A building containing at least three attached dwelling units. 
    Election sign (political sign). A sign erected for the purpose of expressing support for or opposition to a candidate or stating a position regarding an issue to be decided by vote (refer to section 114-211 for applicable standards). 
    Electronic message center sign (EMC). An electrically activated changeable sign whose variable message and/or graphic display capability can be electronically programmed by computer from a remote location. EMCs typically use light emitting diodes (LED) as a lighting source. 
    Emergency situation. A sudden unexpected occurrence, either the result of human or natural forces, necessitating immediate action to prevent or mitigate significant loss or damage to life, health, property, essential public services, or the environment. 
    Engineer. Any professional engineer licensed by the state. 
    Extended hours. Hours of operation (of a business) that are extended beyond 10:00 p.m. Monday through Thursday and 12:00 A.M. midnight for the purpose of selling alcoholic beverages. 
    FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration. 
    Façade. The entire area of a building facing or side extending from the roof or parapet to the ground and from one corner of the building to another but does not include any structural or nonstructural elements which extend beyond the roof of a building. 
    Family. A single person, or a group of two or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, which may be together with no more than three additional persons not related by blood, marriage or adoption; or any number of persons not related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together as a single household. However, the number of unrelated persons shall not exceed the number of bedrooms in the dwelling. 
    FCC. The Federal Communications Commission. 
    Financial institution or bank. Any building, room, space or portion thereof where an establishment provides a variety of financial services, including generally, banks, credit unions, and mortgage companies. 
    Flashing sign. Signs whose illumination is characterized by a repetitive cycle in which the period of illumination is either the same as or less than the period of non-illumination. For the purposes of the ordinance, flashing will not be defined as occurring if the cyclical period between on-off phases of illumination exceeds eight seconds. 
    Flood. A temporary rise in the level of rivers, streams, lakes and drainageways which results in inundation of areas not ordinarily covered by water. 
    Flood hazard area. Any area shown on the flood insurance rate maps as being located within the boundaries of flooding under regulatory flood conditions (100-year frequency flood). 
    Flood insurance rate maps. The officially adopted city maps designating the elevation and boundaries of flooding under regulatory flood conditions. Such maps to be maintained by the public works director and based on information prepared by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the Federal Insurance Administration or other reputable reports accepted by the public works director based on competent engineering studies prepared by a professional engineer currently registered in the State of Alabama. 
    Footcandle. An English unit of measurement of the amount of light falling upon a surface (illuminance). One footcandle is equal to one lumen per square foot and is measured with an illuminance meter. 
    Fraternity/sorority house. A facility which serves as living quarters for private social organizations, serving students of colleges or universities. 
    Freestanding sign. Any sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on or anchored in the ground and that are independent from any building or other structure. The posts or other supporting structures shall be considered part of the sign, except that they shall not be included in computing the sign display area. Illustrations of typical freestanding signs follow. 


    Fruit stand. See definition of produce and fruit stand. 
    Funeral home. An establishment with facilities for the preparation of the dead for burial or cremation, for the viewing of the body, and for funerals. 
    Garage (yard) sale sign. A temporary sign pertaining to the sale of personal property at or upon any residentially zoned lot or parcel. 
    Governmental/public use. A building or structure owned, operated, and/or occupied by governmental agency for the purpose of providing a governmental service to the public. 
    Grand opening sign. A temporary on-premise sign announcing the opening of a new business. 
    Greenway. A linear park, alternative transportation route, or open space conservation area that provides passive recreational opportunities, pedestrian and/or bicycle paths, and/or the conservation of open spaces or natural areas. 
    Gross vehicle mass (GVM). The accepted safe, maximum allowable total mass of a fully loaded motor vehicle. It consists of the tare mass (mass of the vehicle itself with all operating fluids) plus the payload. 
    Ground cover. Natural plant material such as vines, shrubs, or grasses that would not normally attain a height of more than two feet. 
    Group home. A facility which serves as a home for persons with disabilities as defined by the Fair Housing Act of 1988 and may include up to two additional persons acting as house-parents or guardians who need not be related to each other or to any of the persons residing in the home. 
    Halfway house. A facility, which is licensed by the State of Alabama, for housing persons on release from more restrictive custodial confinement or initially placed in lieu of such more restrictive custodial confinement, wherein supervision, rehabilitation, and counseling are provided to mainstream residents back into society, enabling them to live independently. 
    Hazardous operation. A use that may present serious hazards to human life and health such as, but not limited to arsenals, atomic reactors, explosives and fireworks manufacture. 
    Heavy equipment sales and service. The retail or wholesale sale or rental of heavy motorized vehicles or equipment, along with incidental service or maintenance such as, but not limited to construction equipment rental yards, tractor-trailers, semi-trailers, boats, buses, recreational vehicles, farm equipment and moving trailer rental. (See "automobile sales, new," "automobile sales, used.") 
    Heavy manufacturing. See definition of manufacturing, heavy. 
    Height of building and/or structure. The vertical distance from the average level of the highest and lowest point of that portion of a lot covered by the building to the top-most point of the roof. 
    Heliport. See definition of airport/heliport. 
    High bulk retail. A business use where the display of merchandise requires large areas such as furniture. 
    Home improvement sales. A facility for the retail sale of a diverse range of hardware and related materials generally used in the maintenance, repair or construction of buildings and/or structures, including lawn and garden supplies. 
    Home occupation, non-qualifying. A business use of residential property that is clearly secondary, and incidental and includes characteristics that might, in the opinion of the administrative official, generate or involve external impacts including storage of equipment, trailers or vehicles used in the business. (e.g. lawn care business with a home office but with outside equipment storage). 
    Home occupation, qualifying. A business use of residential property that is clearly secondary, and incidental and does not include characteristics that might, in the opinion of the administrative official, affect the residential character of the neighborhood (e.g. home office for work conducted at other locations). 
    Homeless shelter. A facility providing temporary housing to indigent, needy, homeless, or transient persons and which may also provide ancillary services such as counseling, vocational training, etc. 
    Homeowners association. An incorporated, nonprofit organization operating under recorded land agreements through which: 
(1)  Each lot owner and homeowner in a planned or other described land area is automatically a member; 
(2)  Each lot is automatically subject to a charge for a proportionate share of the expenses for the organization's activities, such as maintaining a common property. 
    Hospital. A public or private institution where medical or surgical care is provided for the sick or injured on an out-patient or long-term basis. 
    Hotel. A building or portion thereof which contains at least ten guestrooms intended for occupancy by persons for compensation, whether paid directly or indirectly. 
    Household. A family living together in a single dwelling unit with common access to, and common use of, all living and eating areas and all areas and facilities for the preparation and storage of food within the dwelling unit. (Refer to definition of "family.") 
    Illegal nonconforming building and/or structure. A building and/or structure which was erected or altered outside the provisions of a prior zoning ordinance. 
    Illegal nonconforming use. Any use which, on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, was operating outside the provisions of a prior zoning ordinance, such as a dine and dance establishment operating in a residential zone in defiance of zoning restrictions. 
    Illuminance. The amount of light falling upon a real or imaginary surface, commonly called "light level" or "illumination." Measured in footcandles (lumens/square foot) in the English system and lux (lumens/square meter) in the SI (metric) system. 
    Indoor assembly. A place where people gather for a specific purpose for a designated period of time. 
    Interior landscape island. An island in the parking area with 150 square feet of minimum area containing a minimum of one tree eight feet in height with a one and one-quarter-inch caliper measured at six inches above grade after planting, four shrubs and ground cover or other approved material not to exceed three feet in height. 
    International Code Council (ICC). A membership driven association that develops building codes and standards used to construct residential and commercial buildings and provides minimum safeguards for people at home, at school and in the workplace. The I-Codes are a complete set of comprehensive, coordinated building, life safety and fire prevention codes. 
    Junkyard or salvage yard. A lot or parcel of land on which is kept, stored, bought or sold articles commonly known as junk, including scrap paper, scrap metal and used automobile bodies and parts, appliances, etc. 
    Kennel or stable. Any lot, building and/or structure or premises used for the boarding, breeding, training, and/or raising of domestic animal/wildlife (excluding livestock), whether by owners of such animals or by persons providing facilities and care, whether or not for compensation, but shall not apply to the keeping of animals in a municipal animal pound, pet store, a bona fide laboratory for scientific or experimental purposes (e.g. dental, veterinary, pharmaceutical or biological) or in a veterinary establishment for the purpose of observation and/or recovery necessary to veterinary treatment. 
    Kitchen facilities. A portion of a building used for the preparation of meals, and for the purpose of this chapter shall include a sink or similar fixture for washing dishes. 
    Landfill, construction/demolition. A facility for the disposal of non-biodegradable waste, resulting from road building, construction, remodeling, repair or demolition of buildings and/or structures. 
    Landfill, sanitary. A facility for the burial of nonhazardous and non-medical farm, residential, institutional, commercial or industrial waste according to the provisions of subtitle "D" of the Resource Recovery and Conservation Act. 
    Landscaping. Any additions to the natural features of a plot of ground to restore construction disturbance and to make it more attractive, as by adding lawns, trees, and shrubs to the natural environment. 
    Landscaping plan. A plan containing the information required in section 114-238(b) of this chapter. 
    Legal nonconforming building and/or structure (grandfathered building and/or structure). A building and/or structure which was lawfully erected or altered in conformity with all applicable municipal ordinances or through variances granted by the board of zoning adjustment, but which the building and/or structure does not comply with all the provisions this chapter establishes for buildings and/or structures in the district in which the buildings and/or structure is located. 
    Legal nonconforming use (grandfathered use). A land use which, on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, was lawfully operated in accordance with the provisions of any prior zoning ordinance or through a variance granted by the board of zoning adjustment, but which use is not a permitted use as established by this chapter in the district in which the use is located. 
    Light manufacturing. See definition of manufacturing, light. 
    Line of site. A visual path emanating from an average eye level adjudged to be three and one-half feet above ground level. 
    Liquor sales. The retail sale of alcoholic spirituous beverages to patrons or customers, in sealed packages, and not for consumption on the premises. 
    Listed sign. A sign manufactured and labels in accordance with specifications promulgated by a recognized testing laboratory designed to assure compliance with American National Standards (ANSI) and/or the National Electric Code (NEC). 
    Live work. A building or space within a building that is used jointly for commercial and residential purposes where the residential use of the space is secondary or accessory to the primary use as a place of work. 
    Livestock. Refer to the City Code of Ordinances, chapter 10 animals. 
    Living quarters. Housing providing facilities for sleeping and bathing. 
    Living space. The floor space in a dwelling to be calculated on the basis of total habitable room area. 
    Lounge. See definition of bar, tavern or lounge. 
    Lot. A piece, parcel or plot of land occupied or intended to be occupied by one main building, accessory building, uses customarily incidental to such main buildings and such open spaces as are provided in this chapter or as intended to be used with such piece, parcel or plot of land. Two or more lots of record may be combined to create one zone lot provided a "unity of title declaration" is submitted and recorded (see section 114-187). 
    Lot, corner. A lot situated at the intersection of two or more streets. On corner lots, the narrower side shall be considered the front, regardless of the location of the main entrance of the dwelling. Where both frontages of the lot are equal, the front yard shall be considered the side on which the majority of the lots front the block. 
    Lot, double-frontage. A lot having frontage on two nonintersecting streets, as distinguished from a corner lot. 
    Lot of record. A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the Judge of Probate of Houston, Dale or Henry Counties, or any parcel of land, whether or not part of a subdivision, that has been officially recorded by a deed in the office of the judge of probate, provided such lot was of a size which met the minimum dimensions for lots in the district in which it was located at the time of recording or was recorded prior to the effective date of zoning in the area where the lot is located and met the requirements of the subdivision regulations in effect at the time of the recording. 
    Lot width. The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured along a line that is parallel to the front lot line. 
    Lot, zone. Two or more lots of record combined into one unified building site. Such land area may be designated as a zone lot only by the owner or owners thereof through the filing of a unity of title declaration (see section 114-187). 
    Luminance. The light that is emitted by or reflected from a surface. Measured in units of luminous intensity (candelas) per unit area (square meters in SI measurement units or square feet in English measurement units.) Expressed in SI units as cd/m 2 , and in English units as foot lamberts. Sometimes also expressed as "nits," a colloquial reference to SI units and measured with a luminance meter. 
    Lux. The SI (metric) unit for illuminance. One lux equals 0.093 footcandles. 
    Maintenance. The act of replacing, repairing, or repainting a portion of a structure. 
    Major thoroughfares (arterials). Refer to the definition of major arterial in the City of Dothan Code of Ordinances, chapter 90, subdivision regulations. Major thoroughfares/arterials shall include the following: Ross Clark Circle, U.S. Highway 231, U.S. Highway 431, U.S. Highway 84, Westgate Parkway, Honeysuckle Road between U.S. Highway 84 and Alabama Highway 52, Park Avenue, Denton Road north of U.S. Highway 231, Alabama Highway 52, Alabama Highway 53, Fortner Street east of Honeysuckle Road, Alabama Highway 605, Headland Avenue from Reeves Street northward to the city limits, Hodgesville Road from U.S. 231 to Saunders Road, Saunders Road between Hodgesville Road and U.S. Highway 231, Napier Field Road, Flynn Road, Flowers Chapel Road or as hereafter designated by the board of commissioners. 
    Manufactured (mobile) home. A structure designed in one or more sections on a permanent chassis without independent motive power to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation, connected to public utilities incorporating plumbing, heating and air-conditioning and electrical systems and displaying a current HUD certification sticker. 
    Manufactured home lot/site. A parcel of land designed for the exclusive use of the occupants of a single manufactured home. 
    Manufactured home park/community. Any site, lot, field or tract of land privately or publicly owned or operated upon which two or more manufactured homes used for living quarters. 
    Manufactured home park/community street. A hard surfaced street which affords principal access to manufactured home lots/sites or auxiliary buildings from any adjacent public street. 
    Manufactured home skirting. A durable material designed and installed to enclose the space from the bottom of the manufactured home to the surface of the manufactured home stand. 
    Manufactured home stand. That part of an individual lot/site which has been reserved or designed specifically for the placement and support of one manufactured home unit. 
    Manufacturing, heavy. The manufacture or compounding process of raw materials. These activities or processes would necessitate the storage of large volumes of potentially flammable, toxic or explosive materials needed for the manufacturing process. These activities may involve outdoor operations as part of their manufacturing process. Typical heavy manufacturing uses include but are not limited to: concrete batch plants; concrete, tile, or brick manufacturing; automobile, truck, and tire assembly; ammonia or chlorine manufacturing; metal casting or foundries; gas manufacturing; grain milling or processing; metal or metal ore production, refining, smelting, or alloying; petroleum or petroleum product refining; boat, pool and spa manufacturing; slaughtering of animals; glass manufacturing; paper manufacturing; and wood or lumber processing. 
    Manufacturing, light. The manufacture, predominately from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment and packaging of such products, and incidental storage, sales and distribution of such products, but excluding basic industrial processing and custom manufacturing. Typical light manufacturing uses include but are not limited to: electronic goods, food and bakery products, non-alcoholic beverages, paper imprinting, household appliances, leather products, jewelry, food and bakery products, and clothing apparel. 
    Mausoleum. See definition of cemetery/mausoleum/crematory. 
    Medical or scientific lab. A facility for research, testing or investigation of a medical or scientific nature, but not for the production of a product. 
    Microbrewery. The production of beer, regardless of the percentage of alcohol by volume (ABV), in quantities not to exceed 5,000 barrels per month, with a barrel containing 31 U.S. liquid gallons. 
    Mineral extraction. The extraction of metallic and nonmetallic minerals or materials, including rock crushing, screening and the accessory storage of explosives. 
    Minor modification (PUDs only). Any change which does not alter the scope or intent of the PUD or adversely affect adjacent areas or increase financial or maintenance responsibility to the city. 
    Minor plan amendment. Alterations to existing developments which do not increase either the building area or the square footage of existing building(s) by more than 50 percent and which, in the judgment of the administrative official, will not significantly affect neighboring property or public services and facilities, including but not limited to water, sanitary sewer, transportation and storm drainage systems. 
    Mobile storage unit. The purchase, lease, or rental of any storage unit or container that is either set on the ground or on wheels, and which is typically used for, but is not limited to the storage of equipment, excess inventory, layaway items, back-to-school merchandise, seasonal merchandise, records or clearance sale items. A mobile storage unit excludes semi-trailers, and/or containers belonging to a railroad or barge operation located in a railroad yard, on a railroad track, and on or near a navigable river. 
    Mobile vending. Any equipment, apparatus, trailer, vehicle, cart, or other conveyance, other than a vending machine, located outdoors, from which a vendor displays, sells, offers for sale, gives away, or offers to give away anything of value including any food, beverage, goods, wares, merchandise, or services. 
    Mobile vendor. A person who peddles, vends, sells, displays, or offers for sale goods, wares or merchandise at a temporary location and/or on a temporary or occasional basis. Notwithstanding the foregoing, vendors selling only food and/or beverages, vendors selling living plants and agricultural products, and street vendors shall not be considered "mobile vendors." 
    Modular home. A dwelling unit constructed or assembled on-site in accordance with the applicable building code and composed of components substantially assembled in a manufacturing plant and transported to the building site for final assembly on a permanent foundation. 
    Monument sign. A freestanding sign that is detached from a building and having a support structure that is a solid-appearing base constructed of a permanent material, such as concrete block or brick. 
    Motel. A building or group of buildings containing one or more guestrooms having separated outside entrances for each such room or suite of rooms and for each of which rooms or suite of room's an automobile parking space is provided. 
    Motor freight. Facilities engaged in the shipment of goods from shippers to receivers for a charge including the services of other transportation establishments to effectuate delivery. 
    Multi-copy. Services for instant reproduction of documents by the photocopy process for individual patrons. 
    Multi-faced signs. Any sign that uses more than one side to relay a message, statement, or expression. 
    Multi-family. Three or more dwelling units within a single building. 
    Multimedia productions. A facility for the staging and recording of video or audio productions such as, but not limited to music commercials, programs and motion pictures. 
    Natural vegetation. A generally undisturbed, maintenance-free, self-perpetuating stand of vegetation comprised of indigenous shrubs, flowers, wild grasses, and trees. 
    Net residential acreage. Land used or proposed to be used for the placement of dwelling units and their accessory uses, private open spaces, parking areas, etc. This does not include streets or public recreation or open spaces. 
    Nits. The unit of measurement for luminance which is the total amount of light emitted from a sign divided by the surface are of the sign (candelas per square meter cd/m 2 ). 
    Non-commercial message. A message that carries no statement or expression related to the commercial interests of the sign owner, lessee, author or other persons responsible for the sign message. 
    Nonconforming sign. Any sign that is allowed by this chapter yet does not conform to the requirements of the ordinance. 
    Nonconforming use. A land use of any building and/or structure and/or land which, though originally lawful, does not conform to this chapter or any subsequent amendments thereto for the district in which it is located. 
    Nonconformity. A condition that occurs when, on the effective date of adoption of this code or a previous ordinance or on the effective date of an ordinance text amendment or rezoning, an existing lot, building and/or structure, sign, development, or use of an existing lot or building and/or structure does not conform to one or more of the regulations currently applicable to the district in which the lot, building and/or structure, sign, development, or use is located. 
    Non-protected trees. Any pine tree less than 18 inches DBH and any non-pine species less than 12 inches DBH, plus any other species of trees that the city horticulturist may certify to the planning commission in writing as not being suitable for preservation. A list of such non-protected species shall be maintained by the planning and development department. 
    Nonresidential drug treatment facility. A facility characterized by the dispensing of substitute narcotics for the treatment of drug addictions with little or no professional counseling on an outpatient basis. 
    Nursing home. A State of Alabama licensed facility providing full-time convalescent or chronic care to persons who, by reason of advanced age, chronic illness or infirmity are unable to care for themselves and require skilled nursing and related medical services. 
    Off-premise sign (off-site sign). Any sign containing a message unrelated to a business, profession, or activity conducted, or to a commodity or service sold or offered, upon the premises where the sign is located. 
    Office, general. A building providing space for executive, management, administrative or professional services, but not involving medical services. 
    On-premise sign. Any sign containing a message related to a business, profession, or activity conducted, or to a commodity or service sold or offered, upon the premises where the sign is located. 
    Open space. An area open to the sky which may be on the same lot with a building. The area may include, along with natural environmental features, swimming pools, tennis courts or any other recreational facilities. Streets, buildings and/or structures for habitation and the like shall not be included. 
    Open space, permanent, useable. These terms are meant to include public open spaces, not occupied by buildings, and may consist of pedestrian walkways, play areas, landscaped areas, sports areas, ponds and any other areas suitable for the common enjoyment of the residents of the project. Privately owned lots or privately occupied space shall not be considered as permanent useable open space. 
    Outpatient clinic. A facility for examining and treating patients with medical problems on an outpatient basis, including ambulatory care or similar medical services that generally require a stay of less than 24 hours. 
    Owner. Any person with fee title or with written permission from a person with fee title, to any plot of land within the city who desires to develop, construct, build, operate, modify or erect a structure upon such land. 
    Ownership. This term is meant to include the following: 
(1)  A person, partnership or corporation. 
(2)  An association of property owners legally bound to one another. 
(3)  The homeowners association of a condominium project, established under laws of the State of Alabama. 
    Park. Any facility that is open to the public for recreational uses, including, but not limited to, hiking, swimming, boating, camping; predominately kept in a natural state; or the property of the local, state or federal government, or any department or agency thereof, specifically designated as a park, natural area or recreation area. 
    Parking space. The space necessary to park an automobile. Not less than an area nine feet wide and 18 feet long shall be provided for each parking space, and all parking spaces required shall be provided with necessary lanes and maneuvering areas. Handicapped parking spaces shall have dimensions in accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act requirements and/or the International Building Code as adopted. 
    Pawnshop. Any building, room, space or portion thereof where a pawnbroker regularly conducts business. 
    Perimeter landscaping. The use of landscaping along the outer limits of the development area excluding access points. 
    Person. Any individual, including any trustee, receiver, assignee, or personal representative thereof. 
    Personal care services. Services such as fitness centers, spas, tanning salons, nail salons, beauty and barber care, and dry cleaning and laundry services not to include a laundry plant. 
    Personal instruction. Services for training individuals or groups in the arts, personal defense, crafts or other subjects of a similar nature. 
    Photometric plan. Illustration depicting the anticipated light levels generated by all exterior lights across the site and 50 feet beyond the property lines. 
    Planned unit development (PUD). A development that: 
(1)  Is land under unified control, planned and developed as a whole in a single development operation or approved programmed series of development operations for dwelling units and related uses and facilities; 
(2)  Includes principal and accessory uses and buildings substantially related to the character of the development itself and the surrounding area of which it is a part; and 
(3)  Is developed according to comprehensive and detailed plans which include streets, utilities, building sites and the like. 
    Pool house. An exterior building designed and used as an accessory to an outdoor swimming pool and not for human habitation. 
    Portable sign. Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; signs converted to A-frames or T-frames; menu or sandwich board signs; balloons or other inflatable devices used as signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from public right-of-way, unless such vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business. 
    Portable storage building. A building and/or structure that is designed to be transported from place-to-place solely for the purpose of storing inanimate objects, does not have a door or other entranceway into a dwelling unit and that does not have water fixtures within its confines, the use of which is limited solely to storage of objects. 
    Power/gas substation. A facility that regulates electric current or natural gas pressure for distribution to individual neighborhoods. 
    Printing and publishing. The production and distribution of books, magazines, newspapers and other printed matter, including retail photocopying and blueprinting services, as well as record pressing and publishing, engraving and photoengraving. 
    Produce and fruit stand. A building and/or structure constructed for the display and sale of fresh produce only. It is not intended to be a market where unpackaged, prepackaged or home-prepared foods are offered for sale, or where foods which require refrigeration for health safety are offered for sale. 
    Prohibited sign. Any sign that is not allowed as of the effective date of this chapter. 
    Projecting sign. A sign other than a wall sign that is attached to or projects more than 18 inches from a building face or wall of a structure whose primary purpose is other than the support of a sign. 

    Protected tree. Any pine tree 18 inches or greater DBH and any non-pine species 12 inches or greater DBH except for those classes or species of trees included in the list of non-protected trees. 
    Public land use. Any land use operated by or through a unit or level of government, either through lease or ownership, such as municipal administration and operation, county buildings and activities, state highway offices and similar land uses, and federal uses such as post offices, bureau of public roads and internal revenue offices, military installations, etc. 
    Public utilities. Any essential services to the public at large, including water, sewer, telephone (except wireless), electricity, natural gas and other services regulated by the Alabama Public Service Commission as a public utility, but excluding cable TV, radio, television and any public utility operation of a wireless communications facility for a profit. 
    Putrescible waste. Material which is capable of undergoing the process of decomposition resulting in the formation of malodorous byproducts. 
    Radio/television/satellite tower. A building and/or structure for transmitting and receiving radio, television, satellite and other broadcast signals, including radar surveillance and including accessory buildings. 
    Reader board. Permanent sign containing messages in the form of removable letters or changeable copy. A reader board may be a wall sign or part of a freestanding sign. 
    Real estate sign. An on-premise sign that is used to identify property for sale (refer to section 114-211 for applicable standards). 
    Recommended tree. Any tree listed in section 114-239(a) of this chapter or any tree determined by the city horticulturist. A landscape architect licensed by the State of Alabama or a landscape designer licensed by the State of Alabama may recommend other trees for consideration to the city horticulturist that are suited to the soils and climate of Dothan, Alabama. 
    Recreation facility (indoor). A commercial or public recreational land use conducted entirely within a building, including but not limited to arcade, arena, athletic and health clubs, auditorium, bowling alley, community center, conference center, exhibit hall, gymnasium, library, movie theater, museum, performance theater, pool or billiard hall, skating rink, swimming pool, tennis court, etc. 
    Recreation (public). Publicly owned or operated recreation facilities. 
    Recreational vehicle (RV), camping-type. A vehicular portable building designed as a temporary dwelling unit for travel, recreation and vacation uses, which is identified on the unit by the manufacturer as a "camper," "travel trailer," or "motor home," is not more than eight feet in body width and does not exceed 40 feet in length. 
    Recycling collection center. A drop-off facility for the temporary assemblage of small recyclable consumer items such as food and beverage containers, fabrics and paper. 
    Recycling facility. A facility, other than a facility open to the public, to receive household waste and recyclable material, where any method, technique, or process is utilized to separate, process, modify, convert, treat or otherwise prepare non-putrescible waste so that component materials or substances may be used or reused or sold to third parties for such purposes. The use or reuse of solid waste may not be used in a manner that would constitute solid waste disposal. 
    Regulatory flood. A 100-year frequency flood as delineated on the flood hazard maps which has a probability of occurring once every 100 years or having a one percent chance of occurring each year. 
    Rehabilitation facility. A facility offering treatment for addictive, mental or physical disabilities on either a 24-hour a day or outpatient basis. 
    Religious institution. Any building and/or structure or site used primarily for religious practices. 
    Research service. A facility offering basic or applied research, or experimental study, testing or analysis in the natural sciences, including any educational uses associated with and accessory to such research. 
    Residential. Any land area used and/or zoned for housing activities with personal use or enjoyment without the intent of realizing a profit or recovering costs through the sale of goods or services. 
    Restaurant, carry-out/take-out/delivery. Establishments where food is ordered by telephone and prepared on the premises for pick-up by the customer. There is limited or no seating provided on the premises. There is no on-site drive-through menu order station although orders may be placed at a pick-up window. The establishment may deliver food to the customer. 
    Restaurant, fast-food. Any building, room, space, or portion thereof where food is sold for consumption on-site or off-site within a short period of time, orders are made at either a drive-through or walk-up window or counter, payment for food is made prior to consumption, and the packaging of food is done in disposable containers. 
    Restaurant, full-service. Any building, room, space or portion thereof where food is sold for consumption on-site, customers are provided an individual menu, a restaurant employee serves the customers at the same table or counter at which items are consumed, where seating turns over at a rate of 30 minutes or more and whose gross sales of food constitute the principal activity of the business. Alcoholic beverages may or may not be offered for sale to accompany the meal. 
    Retail. The sale of goods and/or services at retail. For purposes of calculating required parking, retail includes "retail, general" and "retail, convenience" and "retail, shopping center." 
    Retail, general. An establishment providing general retail sales, services or rental from the premises, of goods and/or services not specifically classified in another commercial activity type. Exterior displays and sales are allowed. 
    Retail, indoor sales only. An establishment providing general retail sales, services or rental from the premises, of goods and/or services not specifically classified in another commercial activity type. No exterior displays and/or sales shall be permitted. 
    Retail, shopping center. A single building containing two or more different individual stores engaged in general retail sales. 
    Retention area. A pond, pool or basin used for the permanent storage of stormwater runoff. 
    Roadside stand. A building and/or structure for display and sale of farm products raised on the premises with no space for customers within the building and/or structure itself. 
    Roof line. The fascia, soffits, bargeboards and cladding that forms the frontage immediately below the roof and the eaves of most homes. These are traditionally made from wood, but can also be made of plastics, such as polyvinyl chloride. 
    Roof peak. The highest point of a roof. _____ 
    Roof sign. A sign mounted on the main roof of a building or on the uppermost edge of a parapet wall of a building and which is wholly or partially supported by such building. Signs mounted on mansard facades, pent eaves and architectural projections such as canopies or marquees shall not be considered a roof sign. 


  
  _____ 
    Rooming house. Any building or portion thereof which contains not less than three or more than nine guestrooms which are designed or intended to be used, let or hired out for occupancy by persons for compensation, whether paid directly or indirectly. 
    School. Refer to the following definitions in this article: 
(1)  Business school, 
(2)  Daycare, 
(3)  Community education (grades K-12), 
(4)  College or university, and 
(5)  Vocational school. 
    Scrap operation. The storage, processing and/or sale from the premises of used or waste material, including automotive dismantlers and recyclers, where a person, firm, association, corporation, or trust resident or nonresident, is engaged in the business and/or providing facilities for the purpose of recovering parts from automobiles and trucks, which have been wrecked or otherwise rendered inoperable as transportation vehicles with the parts recovered being for resale and further reduces used automobiles and trucks to a condition capable of salvage for their metal scrap content by scrap processors. 
    Searchlights. Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same lot or parcel as the light source. 
    Seasonal use. See definition of temporary/seasonal use. 
    Self-service laundry. A building and/or structure containing washing machines and usually drying machines, which are coin-operated by the customer. It may or may not have an attendant. 
    Self-service storage. An establishment that leases or rents storage units for the purpose of storing personal property. 
    Semipublic land uses. A philanthropic and charitable land use including YMCAs, YWCAs, Salvation Army, orphanages, private welfare organizations, Red Cross, and other general charitable institutions. 
    Shelter, storm. A building and/or structure intended to provide protection to human life during periods of danger from nuclear fallout, air raids, storms or other emergencies. 
    Shrub. A woody plant or bush of relatively low height two to six feet distinguished from a tree by having several stems rather than a single trunk. 
    Sight triangle. A triangular shaped portion of land established at street/drive aisle intersections in which nothing is erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight distance of motorists entering or leaving the intersection. Standards for sight triangles can be found in section 98-10 of the City of Dothan Code of Ordinances. 
    Sign. Any writing, pictorial representation, number, illustration, or other device which is supported by or contained within a structure specifically designed to announce direct attention to, identify, advertise or otherwise make anything known. Excluded are governmental signs erected for public safety; signs located completely within an enclosed building; and flag emblems or insignia of a nation, political unit, school or religious group. The term sign shall not be deemed to include incidental architectural embellishments. 
    Sign area. The area of a sign or advertising device that can be enclosed or measured by the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle, or geometric figure that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display, or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed, also including any supporting framework, bracing, or decorative fence or wall. The entire face of a projecting or detached sign, excluding those posts, uprights, braces or other structural members that support it, containing no message(s) and having a horizontal dimension of less than 24 inches. 
    Slaughterhouse. A place where animals are slaughtered and prepared for distribution to butcher shops or retail sales establishments such as grocery stores. A slaughterhouse is designed to accommodate the confinement and slaughtering of live animals and may include packing, treating, storage, or sale of the product on the premises. 
    Sorority house. See definition of fraternity/sorority house. 
    Special exception. A special exception is a land use that would generally not be considered as an appropriate land use in a particular zoning district as a use permitted by-right, but could be considered appropriate with certain controls and/or restrictions which promote the public health, safety, welfare, order, comfort, convenience, appearance, prosperity, or general welfare. Special exceptions require approval by the board of zoning adjustment as outlined in this chapter in article VI, board of zoning adjustment. Uses that qualify for special exception consideration are outlined in the table of permitted uses in article VIII, district regulations. 
    Stable. See definition of kennel or stable. 
    Story. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there is no floor above it, the space between such floor and the ceiling next above it. 
    Street. Any public or private way set aside for common travel. Refer to the City of Dothan Code of Ordinances, chapter 90, subdivision regulations for street classifications, definitions and requirements. 
    Street frontage. The length of the property line of the lot, lots, parcel or tract of land abutting a public street, road or highway. 
    Structure. Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or attached to something having a location on the ground, including among other things signs, billboards, fences and walls, but not including telephone poles, overhead wires, wire fences and other fences less than three feet high, retaining walls or terraces (see definition of "building"). 
    Street vendor. Any person engaging temporarily in the retail sale of goods, wares, or merchandise within the city, including any person who for the purpose of conducting such business from a cart or motor vehicle of any kind. 
    Tank farm. An open air facility containing aboveground large containers for the bulk storage of material in liquid, powder or pellet form. 
    Tavern. See definition of bar (tavern or lounge). 
    Taxidermy. The art of preparing, stuffing, and mounting the skins of animals. 
    Telecommunications facilities. Any cables, wires, lines, wave guides, antennas and any other equipment or facilities associated with the transmission or reception of communication which a person seeks to locate or has installed upon or near a tower or antenna support structure. The term "telecommunications facilities" shall not include: 
(1)  Any satellite earth station antennas two meters or less in diameter and located in any area zoned to generally permit commercial or industrial uses. 
(2)  Amateur radio service antennas (HAMS). 
(3)  Direct broadcast satellite (DBS) antennas one meter or less in diameter. 
(4)  Antennas which are one meter or less in diameter designed to receive video programming services via multichannel, multipoint distribution (wireless cable) providers (MMDS). 
(5)  Antennas which receive signals from television broadcast stations (TVBS) provided such antennas do not exceed 25 feet above the established height of the zoning district. 
(6)  Accessory facilities used exclusively for dispatch communications by public emergency agencies or government agencies. 
(7)  Accessory facilities used exclusively for dispatch communication by government agencies. 
(8)  Facilities, such as supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) or distribution automation (DA) facilities, exclusively used by public utilities and by the city for monitoring and controlling the operation of public utility systems and city services, where accessory to a permitted public utility installation or a permitted city installation, provided such facilities do not exceed 20 feet in height above a structure or building when mounted thereto or 100 feet in height when ground-mounted. 
    Temporary festival. The provision of rides, games, food, amusements, and/or activities, open to the public. The use shall have duration of no more than 14 days in one month. 
    Temporary/seasonal use. A use established for a fixed period of time, with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of such time that does not involve the construction or alteration of any permanent building and/or structure. 
    Temporary sign. A sign displaying information for a use or event for a limited period of time. 
    Time and/or temperature sign. Any sign that displays current time and/or temperature for the location in which the sign is placed. 
    Tower. A self-supporting lattice, guyed or monopole structure constructed from grade which supports telecommunications facilities. 
(1)  Guyed tower means a communications tower anchored with guy wires. 
(2)  Lattice tower means a self-supporting communications tower with three or more sides of open-framed supports. 
(3)  Monopole tower means a cylindrical self-supporting communications tower constructed as a single spire. 
    Townhouse. An attached dwelling unit having a separate ground floor entrance and separate private yard space, with common sidewalls on one or both sides of the dwelling unit. 
    Townhouse building. A single building within a townhouse complex containing as many as seven individual residential units sharing at least one common wall as regulated by article IX, townhouse regulations. 
    Townhouse complex. A group of townhouse buildings each containing not less than two or more than seven attached townhouse units as regulated by article IX, townhouse regulations. 
    Townhouse unit. A single living space located within a townhouse building sharing at least one common wall as regulated by article IX, townhouse regulations. 
    Tree. A woody plant with one main, erect trunk with a diameter of at least three inches at breast height at maturity with a distinct and elevated crown. 
    Tree protection area. The portion of a lot or parcel located in a required setback or yard. 
    Tree removal. The removal of a tree by any act that causes it to die including, cutting, pruning, root damage or other damage resulting from construction, grading, paving, or other activities. 
    Tree removal plan. A plan conforming to section 114-237(c) of this article. 
    Under canopy/awning sign. A sign attached to the underside of a canopy or awning. 
    Understory tree. Any tree that is normally less than 25 feet in height at maturity, but that still provides shade and a degree of protection to the earth and vegetation beneath it. Examples of recommended understory trees are included in section 114-239(a) of this article. Understory trees shall not be pruned or trimmed to restrict their growth unless such pruning or trimming is necessary to prevent interference with utilities or sight obstructions. 
    University. See definition of "college or university." 
    Use. The purpose for which land or a building and/or structure is designed, arranged or intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained. 
    Utility companies. Any person, governmental body, organization, or entity of any type, and their agents, representatives, and employees, supplying electricity, natural gas, water, communications, or similar or associated services. 
    Utility equipment. Poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, conduits, guys, stubs, cross arms, braces, transformers, insulators, cut-outs, switches, communication circuits, used or useful in supplying electricity, natural gas, water, communication or similar or associated services. 
    Variance. A relaxation of the terms of this chapter where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where such variance is due to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant. 
    Vehicular rental/leasing. An establishment that offers the rental or leasing of automobiles, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, boats, recreational equipment, and light trucks and vans, including incidental parking and servicing of vehicles for rent or lease (e.g. rental car agencies and taxi-cab dispatch areas). No "automobile repair" or "scrap operation" activities may occur on-site and no abandoned vehicles shall be stored on the premises. 
    Vehicular sales and service, limited or limited vehicular sales and service. An establishment that offers the retail or wholesale sale of motorcycles, trucks and vans, recreational vehicles, boats, or similar motorized recreational equipment, along with incidental service or maintenance such as, but not limited to boat dealers, motorcycle dealers, and recreational vehicle dealers. No "automobile repair" or "scrap operation" activities may occur on-site and no abandoned vehicles shall be stored on the premises. 

    Veterinarian. An enterprise for the outpatient care and treatment of the diseases and injuries of animals. Boarding of animals is not permitted at a veterinarian. (Also see definition of "animal hospital.") 
    Vocational school. A facility offering regularly scheduled instruction in technical, commercial or trade skills. 
    Wall or fascia sign. A sign that is affixed in any manner to an exterior wall of a building or structure and that projects no further than 18 inches from the surface of the building or structure wall. Also includes signs painted on the wall or affixed to architectural projection that extends from a building provided the copy area of such signs remain parallel to the face of the building façade or to the face of the architectural projection to which it is affixed. 
    Warehouse. A facility used primarily for the bulk storage of goods and materials either for a private entity or the general public. 
    Wholesale. See definition for distributive business/wholesale. 
    Wind sign. Any sign, pennant, ribbon, spinner, streamer, flag, feather, captive balloon, or other objects or materials fastened in such a manner as to move upon being subjected to pressure by wind and/or acting to draw attention to a business, product, service or activity whether it contains a message or not. 
    Window. Any single window pane, or a series of adjacent window panes separated by a mullion(s) of 12 inches or less. Adjacent window panes set at different angles shall constitute separate windows regardless of the width of their mullion separation. 
    Window sign. A picture, symbol, or combination thereof designed to communicate information about a business, commodity, event, sale, or service that is placed inside or upon a window and is visible from the exterior of the window. Sunscreen applications to windows are not signs provided opacity is less than 50 percent. 
    Wrecker service. An establishment for the removal of a motor vehicle by towing, carrying, hauling or pushing from public or private property when such vehicle is inoperable or has been ordered to be impounded to a public or private impound lot. This shall not include an "automobile service" use that has a tow truck and service vehicles on-site. 
    Yard. The open space on the lot between the lot lines or street right-of-way and the building envelope for the main building, left open, unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings and/or structures from the ground to the sky, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. Yards shall be measured from the wall of the building and/or structure to the property line. The maximum allowable roof overhang within the yard setbacks shall be 30 inches. If a roof overhang exceeds 30 inches, the appropriate yard setback shall be measured from the property line to the facing of the overhang less the allowed 30 inches of overhang. See figures below for illustrations of one house with a 30-inch overhang and another house with a greater than 30-inch overhang. 

    Yard, front. An open space extending across the entire width of the lot between the main buildings, including covered porches, and the front lot line, or if an official future street right-of-way line has been established, between the main building including covered porches and the right-of-way line. On corner lots, the narrower side shall be considered the regardless of the location of the main entrance of the dwelling. Where both frontages of the lot are equal, the front yard shall be considered the side on which the majority of the lots front the block. No storm shelter, even though it does not exceed 30 inches in height, shall be permitted in any front yard. 

    Yard, rear. An open space extending across the width of the lot behind the main building to the property line, excluding accessory buildings and/or structures. 
    Yard, side. An open space extending along the side lot line, front yard to the rear yard, between the main building, excluding accessory buildings and/or structures and such lot line. 
    Yard, street-side. A street side yard is an open space extending along the side lot line, front yard to the rear yard, between the main building and the street. This definition only applies to corner lots. 
    Yard, required. A yard is an open space, the depth of which is specified in the "district dimensional regulations" pertaining to the district in which such yard is required to be provided (See article VIII, section 114-132). The actual front, rear or side yard may exceed the required yard but may not be less than the required yard unless a variance is approved by the board of zoning adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15; Ord. No. 2018-115, § 1, 5-15-18; Ord. No. 2018-212, § 1, 8-21-18) 
Secs. 114-27-114-37. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 114-38. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to specify the process to administer and enforce the City of Dothan's Zoning Regulations and identify remedies when enforcement action becomes necessary. This article is also intended to link requirements of this chapter to an applicant's responsibility for obtaining required building permits. Regulations in this article are not intended to modify regulations established in the City of Dothan Code of Ordinances, chapter 14, buildings and building regulations, or any other regulations established in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-39. - Enforcing officer. 
    Regulations in this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the administrative official. Upon good cause and upon presentation of proper credentials, the administrative official or his authorized agent may enter at any reasonable time any building, structure, or premises for the purpose of determining whether this chapter is being violated. When a violation of this chapter is found, the administrative official is authorized and directed to institute any appropriate action to prevent or terminate such violation including without limitation, direct abatement, citation, or civil action to enjoin the violation. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-40. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful to commence the excavation for or the construction of any building and/or structure, including accessory buildings and/or structures, or to store building materials and/or erect temporary field offices and/or to commence the moving, alteration and/or repair (except necessary repairs not affecting the external or party walls, chimneys, stairways or heights of buildings) of any building and/or structure, including accessory buildings and/or structures, until the administrative official has authorized the release of a building permit for such work. 
(a)  Application required. Application for a building permit shall be made to the building official on forms provided for that purpose. Application forms shall include a statement, to be signed by the applicant or the applicant's agent, stating that the plans, specifications and intended use of such building and/or structure in all respects conform to this chapter. 
(b)  Plans required. It shall be unlawful for the administrative official to approve any plans or authorize release of a building permit for any excavation or construction until he has inspected such plans in detail and found them in conformity with this chapter. Therefore, the administrative official shall require that every application for a building permit for the excavation, construction, use of land, moving or alteration thereof be accompanied by a plan or plat drawn to scale and showing the following in sufficient detail to enable the administrative official to ascertain whether the proposed excavation, construction, use of land, moving or alteration is in conformance with this chapter: 
(1)  The actual shape, proportion and dimensions of the lot to be built upon. 
(2)  The shape, size and location of all buildings and/or structures to be erected, altered or moved and of any buildings or other buildings and/or structures already on the lot. 
(3)  The existing and intended use of all such buildings or other buildings and/or structures. 
(4)  Information such as the location of property lines and location(s) of existing buildings on adjoining lots may be essential for determining conformance with this chapter. Other information may be requested by the administrative official. 
(c)  Review and determination. The administrative official shall review the permit application. After concluding that zoning regulations have been satisfied, the administrative official shall notify the building official that the plans are in compliance with this chapter, and hereby authorize the release of the respective permit. If zoning regulations have not been satisfied, the administrative official shall state in writing, on the application, the cause of any disapproval. Issuance of a building permit shall, in no case, be construed as waiving any provision of this chapter. 
(d)  Fee required. Application filing fees may be required. Fees associated with rezoning regulations, when required, are outlined in article IV, amendment and rezoning procedure, and shall be required at the time of application submission. Fees associated with building permits are outlined in the City of Dothan Code of Ordinances, chapter 14, buildings and building regulations, and shall be paid in accordance with policies established by the department. 
(e)  Final inspection. Prior to the occupancy or use of any land, building and/or structure or part thereof, a final inspection shall be required. The purpose of the final inspection is to ensure that any land or building and/or structure or part thereof is found to be in conformity with this chapter. It shall be the duty of the owner or agent to contact the administrative official to schedule a final inspection. 
(f)  Certificate of occupancy. The building official shall issue the certificate of occupancy after the project passes the final inspection. The issuance of the certificate of occupancy shall occur no later than the end of the next business day following the final inspection. 
(g)  Temporary certificate of occupancy. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the building official after consultation with the administrative official for a period not to exceed 60 days. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-41. - Appeals. 
    Appeals to the administration and enforcement of this chapter shall be permitted as follows: 
(1)  Zoning. Appeals pertaining to the regulations of this chapter and/or decisions, determinations or interpretations of the administrative official shall be handled by the board of zoning adjustment in accordance with article VI of this chapter. 
(2)  Building code. Appeals pertaining to building code regulations or enforcements shall be handled in accordance with the City of Dothan Code of Ordinances, chapter 14, buildings and building regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-42. - Remedies. 
    The administrative official shall have the power to seek redress in municipal court and may secure injunctions and abatement orders to further ensure compliance with this chapter. If any building and/or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained or if any building and/or structure or land is used in violation of this chapter, the administrative official or any other appropriate authority or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be especially damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use to correct or abate such violation or to prevent occupancy of such building and/or structure or land. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-43. - Penalties. 
    Wherever in this Code or in any of the city ordinances any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or misdemeanor or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful and no specific penalty is provided, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not less than $1.00 nor more than $500.00 or by imprisonment in the jail or at hard labor for a period of not exceeding six months or by both such fine and imprisonment, at the discretion of the judge trying the case. Each day any violation of this Code or any such city ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(a)  Responsibility. Persons charged with such violation(s) may include: 
(1)  The owner, agent, lessee, tenant, contractor, or any other person using the land, building or premises where such violation has been committed or shall exist. 
(2)  Any person who knowingly commits, takes part or assists in such violation. 
(3)  Any person who maintains any land, building or premises in which such violation shall exist. 
(b)  Written notice. Prior to any criminal prosecution, the administrative official shall give a written notice or citation to the person, firm, corporation, or organization violating any provision of this chapter stating the rule or regulation being violated and notifying the said person, firm, corporation, or organization to cease and desist such violation immediately. Otherwise, such person, firm, corporation, or organization will be prosecuted as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Secs. 114-44-114-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AMENDMENT AND REZONING PROCEDURE 

Sec. 114-54. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to identify and clarify the processes associated with making application for amendments to this chapter, including changes to the official zoning map. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-55. - Amendment procedure. 
    Following submission and review by the planning commission, the regulations and the number, area and boundaries of districts established by article VII, classification and establishment of uses, may be amended, supplemented, changed, modified or repealed by the board of commissioners. No amendment shall become effective unless it is first submitted to the planning commission for its recommendation following a public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-56. - Petition. 
    Any person desiring to petition for rezoning under the authority of this article must present such petition to the secretary of the planning commission in writing by the second Friday of the month preceding the desired hearing date month. The petition will be submitted according to planning commission procedure as follows: 
(1)  Application required. An application shall be submitted to the planning and development department on a form provided by the department. The application shall be signed by the property owner or accompanied by an affidavit that the applicant is authorized to act on the owner's behalf. 
(2)  Entire parcel. Rezoning requests shall be submitted for entire parcel only. Requests to split zone a parcel will not be accepted. 
(3)  Map required. The application shall be accompanied by the following: 
a.  Paper copies. Eight copies of a map drawn by a surveyor licensed in the State of Alabama of the property proposed to be rezoned, to a scale suitable to fit on a 24-inch by 36-inch (24"×36") sheet. The map shall show distances, bearings, legal description, all surrounding zoning, property as is and state the proposed rezoning is from _______ district to _______ district. 
b.  Digital copy. A digital copy of any maps submitted for review, in .PDF or .JPG format. 
c.  Vicinity map. A map identifying the exact location of the property to be rezoned, illustrating a one-half mile radius from the site, drawn on the rezoning map or submitted as an attachment. 
(4)  Legal description required. The application shall be accompanied by the following: 
a.  Paper copies. A written legal description of the property to be rezoned written on paper copies of proposed rezoning maps or submitted on a separate sheet and labeled as an attachment to the maps. For metes & bounds parcels, a recorded legal description or if located in a recorded subdivision, the lot number and block may be used. 
b.  Digital copy. A legal description of the property to be rezoned, submitted in electronic media in .doc format. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-57. - Fee required. 
    To offset the costs to review and process the request, the application will be accompanied by cash or check, payable to the City of Dothan, in the amount of $100.00 plus $10.00 per acre, not to exceed $250.00. Application fees shall not be refunded except upon the recommendation of the administrative official and approval by the city manager. Payment of the fee set out in this section and the cost for publication of the notice shall not be required of employees or agents of the city submitting proposed amendments in the course of their official duties. The application fee does not include the cost of public notice by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-58. - Public hearings required. 
(a)  Planning commission. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing, notice of which shall be given, for the consideration of any proposed amendment to this chapter or the zoning map and report its recommendation to the board of commissioners. 
(b)  City commission. The city commission may hold a public hearing, notice of which shall be given, for the consideration of any proposed amendment to this chapter or the zoning map. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-59. - Notice required. 
(a)  Publication of legal notice. Rezoning petitions require publication in the local newspaper prior to public hearings by the planning commission and the board of commissioners. 
(1)  Planning commission. The administrative official shall cause the preparation of required notice for public hearings by the planning commission and submit the required notice to a newspaper of general circulation for publication. Required notice shall be accomplished by publishing the meeting agenda. Unless otherwise provided, costs of said notice are included in the initial application fee. 
(2)  City commission. Should the planning commission recommend the rezoning to the city commission, notice of the proposed rezoning shall be published as required by law. Required notice shall include a written legal description and map of the property to be rezoned. The applicant will be notified of the cost of publication as determined by the newspaper to the office of department of planning and development. Cost of publication is not included in the initial application fee. Further processing shall be withheld until the cost of publication is paid. Upon passage by the city commission, the approved ordinance will be advertised one additional instance. The cost of advertising will be the responsibility of the applicant as determined by the city clerk's office. 
(b)  Posting notice. A public notice sign must be erected and maintained at the applicant's expense not less than 14 calendar days prior to the date of the public hearing. The public notice sign must be placed on all street frontages for proper notification of adjacent property owners. The applicant will be responsible for making sure the sign is erected and conforms to specifications established by the planning commission. Tabled applications shall be required to post notice before being heard by the planning commission. 
(c)  Written notice. Written notice to adjacent property owners is required. The applicant shall provide the names and addresses of adjacent property owners on all sides and across any street according to the official tax records of the appropriate county in which the proposal is located. The city shall send notice of the proposed rezoning to adjacent property owners via first-class mail. The cost of said written notice shall be included in the initial application fee. Tabled applications shall be required to pay for additional written notice before being heard by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-60. - Action on petition. 
    Failure of the petitioner to remit full payment for the cost of publication as outlined is section 114-59(a)(2) within 90 days of the planning commission public hearing shall constitute consent to withdraw the petition from further consideration. Applications for rezoning on the same parcel of property shall not be submitted for consideration within six (6) months of original petition without first securing unanimous approval of the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-61. - Development plans or subdivision plats. 
    The submission of development plans and/or subdivision plats shall not be required as a condition precedent to amending this chapter. However, in order to induce an approval recommendation for a rezoning request from the planning commission, an applicant may link the approval to a specific development plan. Should the applicant not submit an application for development plan approval within six months of the planning commission approval, the zoning shall automatically revert to the previous designation. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-62. - Zoning of annexed land. 
    Where land now lying in unincorporated county is annexed into the corporate limits of the City of Dothan, these parcels shall be automatically zoned A-C and subject to all zoning regulations therein unless rezoned as part of the annexation process. Regardless, the property must be formally rezoned prior to issuance of any building permits. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-63. - Appeal from the action of the planning commission. 
(a)  Pursuant to Ala. Code 1975, 11-52-14, actions of the planning commission may be appealed to the city commission. Appeals must be submitted within 15 days of the hearing. 
(b)  A petitioner shall submit to the planning department: 
(1)  A signed narrative and any other material that states and supports the rationale for the appeal. 
(2)  A list of the names and addresses of adjacent property owners. 
(3)  All advertising and legal notice costs associated with the appeal shall be responsibility of the petitioner and payable to the City of Dothan. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Secs. 114-64-114-72. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DEVELOPMENT PLANS 

Sec. 114-73. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to encourage a high standard of land development through careful review of proposed development projects as well as to provide full consideration of the potential impacts of proposed development projects on surrounding uses and land. It is the purpose of the development plan review process to provide a mechanism to ensure that the individual components of the development process are integrated to ensure a project meets not only the minimum regulatory requirements but also addresses the design guidelines described later in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-74. - Pre-application. 
    Pre-application meetings are encouraged and may be held between the developer or their representative(s) and city staff. The purpose of the meeting is to give staff a clear understanding of what is being proposed and to determine if any conditions exist which need to be resolved before the application can be accepted. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-75. - Approval required. 
    Development plan approval is required prior to the issuance of any building permit for all land uses subject to these regulations where any of the following exists: 
(1)  A parcel of land proposed for a non-residential use. 
(2)  A parcel of land proposed for multi-family apartment dwellings. 
(3)  A parcel of land proposed for a manufactured home community. 
(4)  A parcel of land containing a non-residential use, multi-family apartment dwellings or building or a manufactured home community that is proposed to be expanded. 
(5)  A parcel of land, which is to be developed utilizing a planned unit development (PUD) district zoning classification. 
(6)  A parcel of land located in the downtown overlay district (DOD). 
(7)  A parcel of land containing an existing use being converted to a more intense use. 
(8)  A parcel of land where, due to the unique characteristics of the land, surrounding use(s), proposed use or other features of the development, the administrative official determines it to be in the interest of the public health, safety or welfare that such project be subject to the development plan review process. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-76. - Review process. 
    Developments subject to development plan review shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Submission requirements. No request for development plan approval shall be considered complete until all of the following has been submitted to the administrative official: 
a.  Application form. The application shall be submitted to the department on a form provided by the department. The application shall be signed by the property owner or accompanied by an affidavit stating that the applicant is authorized to act on the owner's behalf. Applications requiring planning commission approval shall be submitted by the first business day of the month preceding the desired hearing date. 
b.  Map required. Each application shall be accompanied by the following: 
1.  Paper copies. Eight copies of a development plan drawn by a design professional such as an engineer, surveyor, or architect licensed in the State of Alabama of the property proposed to be developed. Preliminary drawings may be submitted by non-professional designers for planning commission consideration. However, construction plans submitted for permitting by an architect or non-professional designer containing civil engineering design shall be stamped by a registered civil engineer. Development plan sheets shall be at a minimum scale of one inch equals 50 feet, suitable to fit on a 24-inch by 36-inch sheet. When more than one sheet is required, an index sheet of the same size shall be included showing the entire parcel with individual sheet numbers referenced thereon. The following information is required on or in an acceptable form so as to accompany the development plan: 
(i)  Development plan (project) name. 
(ii)  North arrow, scale and date prepared. 
(iii)  Legal description (metes and bounds). 
(iv)  Location map (vicinity map) showing one-half-mile radius from the site. 
(v)  Zoning district of subject property, which is the subject of the development plan and adjacent properties. 
(vi)  Identification of watercourses, floodplains, potential wetlands, tree masses including protected trees as defined by section 114-237, tree protection and landscaping. 
(vii)  Gross and net site area expressed in square feet and acres (if larger than one. 
(viii)  Number of dwelling units proposed, if any. 
(ix)  Floor area devoted to each category of use. 
(x)  Delineation in mapped form and computation of the area of the site devoted to building coverage and other impervious surfaces expressed in square feet and as a percentage of the overall site. 
(xi)  Number of parking spaces required and proposed (stated in relationship to the applicable formula). 
(xii)  Location of proposed driveways, parking areas, median crossings and curb cuts for the site being developed on property immediately adjacent and within 200 feet of the right-of-way or as otherwise determined by the traffic engineer. 
(xiii)  Ingress, egress and site circulation including location of proposed connection to existing access roads and/or adjacent parking lots as determined by the traffic engineer. The traffic engineer, in his professional judgment, may require a traffic impact study in accordance with chapter 98, article IX, City of Dothan Code of Ordinances. 
(xiv)  Location of proposed public and private easements for utilities, ingress, egress and drainage within and adjacent to the site. 
(xv)  The location, size and height of all existing and proposed buildings on the site. 
(xvi)  Locations of all refuse collection facilities, including screening and access. 
(xvii)  Provisions for proposed on-site storm water drainage and detention related to the proposed development. 
(xviii)  Existing and proposed utilities, including size and location of all water lines, sewer lines, storm drain lines, gas mains, fire hydrants, manholes, lift stations and other utility appurtenances. 
(xix)  Existing two foot contours or key spot elevations on the site, and such off-site elevations as may be specifically required and not otherwise available which may affect the drainage of or stormwater retention/detention necessary for the site. 
(xx)  The proposed general use and development of internal spaces, including any recreation or open space areas, plazas and major landscape areas, etc. 
(xxi)  A note indicating the party responsible for maintenance of all common elements and open space. 
(xxii)  The location of all proposed earth or water retaining walls, earth berms, and public and private sidewalks. 
(xxiii)  Phase lines, if development is to be constructed in phases. 
(xxiv)  Dimensions of lot lines, streets, drives, building lines, building setbacks, building height, etc. 
(xxv)  Landscape, buffer and tree removal plan that complies with article XIII, Landscaping and Buffers. 
(xxvi)  The provision of a photometric plan submitted prior to release of building permit indicating the luminance of all proposed exterior lighting extending 50 feet beyond the property boundary when the project is adjacent to residentially zoned or used property. 
(xxvii)  Typical building elevations with a description of proposed materials to be used. 
2.  Digital copy. A digital copy of all paper maps, formatted as either .PDF or .JPG. 
(2)  Design guidelines for development plan review. It is the purpose of these design guidelines to aid the design of a development plan and supplement the standard requirements found in the zoning ordinance. This information is offered as help to the designer to tailor the land planning process to the unique features of each site. The following items should be given careful consideration in the preparation of development plans required under this article. 
a.  Plan and regulation requirements. Development plans shall be consistent and in conformity with all applicable rules and regulations of the city and the state, including but not limited to; city zoning and subdivision regulations, ordinances, resolutions, policies and administrative directives and applicable provisions of the laws for the State of Alabama. The city long range development plan and its constituent elements should be consulted for guidance on specific development policies. 
b.  Environment and open space requirements. Development plans should recognize significant existing environmental, historical, cultural and open space features of the site and property immediately adjacent. City staff will look at: topography, including elevation, slopes and impact on potential cut and fill areas; the physical characteristics of "blue line" surface water features as shown on USGS maps; vegetated areas on the site, including stands of protected trees as defined by article XIII, landscaping and buffers. It is the objective of this guideline to assure that the project will not significantly degrade the existing environmental features of the site in a manner that is unnecessary to allow for the reasonable use of the property. 
c.  Traffic and parking requirements. Development plans should be designed to provide for adequate traffic flow and control of traffic onto public streets. Coordinate with public transportation modes where applicable. Internal circulation patterns should enhance site accessibility. Service access should be compatible with the adjacent public street system and traffic management policies. Pedestrian and bicycle facilities should be designed to maximize user safety. It is the objective of this guideline to ensure adequate provision for vehicular and pedestrian movement and safety within the site. 
d.  Drainage and utilities requirements. Development plans should be designed to provide for all necessary utility connection including, water supply, sewage disposal, refuse collection and storm water detention. It is the objective of this guideline to assure that adequate service capacity is available and that utility and drainage systems are appropriately designed for the proposed development site in relationship to the larger systems entering and leaving the site. 
e.  Neighborhood compatibility requirements. Development plans should be designed to assure that the overall function of the proposed project is compatible and harmonious with other properties in the immediate area. Designers should pay particular attention to adjacent land uses, building location, height and dimension, relationship of parking areas to the building, pedestrian facilities, hours of operation, noise levels (outdoor speakers, dumpster service, etc.), outdoor lighting, impact on views, buffer treatment and integration of open space. It is the objective of this guideline to encourage design treatments that reflect consideration of and between adjoining developments and preclude any significant adverse impacts. It is not the purpose of this provision to preclude development based upon normal change or inconvenience which might ordinarily be expected to result from the land development process. 
(3)  Review and determination. 
a.  Upon determination by the administrative official that an application complies with all applicable submission requirements, he shall transmit a copy of the proposal to the development review committee (DRC). 
b.  Committee members shall review the development plan with specific regard to the design guidelines contained in this article and make findings with respect to the satisfactory application of the design guidelines, both individually and in combination, to the subject plan. 
c.  All development plans shall be reviewed by the DRC. The DRC shall review to determine if development plans are in conformance with all applicable regulations, standards and guidelines. Following review, a comprehensive list of non-conforming items shall be compiled and transmitted to the applicant. The applicant is responsible for resolving the items contained in the list that results from DRC review; revised plans shall be submitted in the same manner as the original submission. 
d.  Minor developments. Any proposed development containing less than 15,000 square feet gross floor area and is located on property that does not have a common boundary with a residentially zoned or used parcel, shall be considered a minor development. Common boundary shall include a roadway not exceeding more than two lanes. Plans for minor developments that meet the requirements of this chapter, and for which all comments have been resolved may be approved by the DRC without public hearing. Any submission may be referred to the planning commission for public hearing. 
e.  Major developments. Any non-residential development containing 15,000 square feet or more gross floor area and/or located on property that has a common boundary, including across a roadway greater than two lanes with a residentially zoned or used parcel, shall be considered major development. After the DRC review of the plans and determines that all applicable requirements have been met, the plans shall be presented to the planning commission for consideration at a public hearing. 
f.  The committee may, for the purpose of allowing the applicant an opportunity to address unresolved issues, continue consideration of the development plan. Under no circumstance shall any development plan be approved which is inconsistent with any term contained in these regulations unless a variance has been authorized in accordance with the provisions contained in article VI of this chapter. 
g.  Following DRC or planning commission approval, the development plan shall be stamped "approved." Two copies of the approved plan shall be returned to the applicant, one of which shall be submitted with the building permit package. No application for a building permit shall be accepted without an approved development plan which comports to the DRC or planning commission approval. 
(4)  Fee required. A filing fee of $100.00 plus $10.00 per acre, not to exceed $250.00, is required for development plan review and shall be paid at the time of the application. This fee shall be nonrefundable, irrespective of the final disposition of the application. 
(5)  Notice required. 
a.  Publication of legal notice. All major development plans require publication of a legal notice. The administrative official shall cause the preparation of the notice for submission to a newspaper of general circulation for publication. Payment of the fee set out in section 114-76(4) includes the cost of publication but shall not be required of employees or agents of the city submitting proposed plans in the course of their official duties. 
b.  Posting notice. Public notice signs are required for properties that are the subject of major development plan review by the planning commission. Such posting shall be accomplished by the applicant as directed by the administrative official. Tabled applications for major development plan approval shall be required to post notice before being heard by the planning commission. 
c.  Written notice. Written notice to adjacent property owners is required for all developments plans (minor or major). The applicant shall provide the names and addresses of adjacent property owners on all sides and across any street according to the official tax records of the appropriate county in which the proposal is located. The city shall send notice of the proposed development project to adjacent property owners via first-class mail. The cost of said written notice shall be included in the initial application fee. Tabled applications for major development plan approval shall be required to pay for additional direct notice before being heard by the planning commission. 
(6)  Certification of plan. A development plan approved or approved conditionally by the planning commission or DRC shall be the certified development plan. All certified development plans are valid for one (1) year but may be extended with planning commission approval. 
(7)  Building permit. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining a building permit within one year from the date of approval of a certified plan. 
(8)  Amendment of a certified plan. The administrative official shall determine whether a proposed plan amendment is a major or minor amendment (see definition of minor plan amendment). The administrative official, at his discretion, may forward any application for development plan amendment to the planning commission, development review committee or to one or more individual departments for review. 
(9)  Accessory structures. Accessory structures not initially identified on the development plan may be approved by the administrative official regardless of development size. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-77. - Consistency. 
    All building and construction permits issued for any project requiring development plan review shall be consistent with the certified development plan. The approval and certification of a development plan shall not under any circumstance be construed to waive or otherwise diminish the applicable city requirements for construction or installation of buildings and/or structures, materials or appurtenances. Whenever a conflict between the development plan and such construction details occurs, the more restrictive shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-78. - Integration of other review procedures. 
    Any development involving the following related provisions of these regulations shall be coordinated as set forth below. 
(a)  Planned unit development plans. Properties which are proposed to be developed as a planned unit development (PUD, UPUD or UTND) shall submit a plan of the entire proposed development to the DRC. Following approval by the DRC, the planning commission shall review the plan at public hearing. A revised development plan, incorporating matters of concern to the planning commission shall be prepared and submitted to the administrative official for certification. 
(b)  Rezoning. Those developments requiring an action to rezone the property shall have the rezoning approved by the planning commission prior to consideration of a development plan. 
(c)  Variances, special exceptions. Those developments requiring a variance from any applicable regulation shall have the variance approved by the board of zoning adjustment prior to consideration of a development plan. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-79. - Noncompliance. 
    Failure to comply with a certified development plan or any of the conditions upon which such approval was contingent, including time limits for performance, shall be cause to deny issuance of a building permit or, where a permit has been issued pursuant to a certified development plan, to render such building permit invalid. Any action, construction, development or use of property undertaken in violation of the provisions of this article shall constitute a violation of these zoning regulations and shall be subject to remedies ascribed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-80. - Appeal. 
    An applicant may appeal the recommendations of the DRC to the planning commission. For any such appeal, the applicant shall submit a written statement identifying the conditions appealed from and include any fees for public notice and posting requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-81. - Records. 
    The administrative official shall submit a monthly report to the planning commission listing all development plans reviewed by the DRC and the action taken on each. A record of actions taken for all development plans submitted shall be maintained by the administrative official. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-82. - Stacking uses. 
    With the exception of shared parking agreements filed in accordance with section 114-182(g), sites proposed to contain multiple uses shall observe any development standards that may apply as if each use were independent. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-83. - Architectural requirements. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish minimum exterior architectural standards for commercial, office, institutional, religious, industrial and warehouse buildings. These standards are intended to ensure a higher quality of development, redevelopment, and compatibility with evolving architectural or planning themes that contribute to a community image of quality, visual aesthetics, permanence and stability, which are in the best interest of the citizens of the city. These standards are intended to prevent the use of certain building materials that are unsightly and contribute to depreciation of area property values or cause urban blight. These standards are further intended to enhance the appearance of building exteriors, additions and accessory structures in order to prevent visual disharmony, to minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties from buildings which are or may become unsightly, and to discourage buildings that detract from the character and appearance of the area. It is not the intent of this section to unduly restrict freedom of design when reviewing and approving project architecture in relationship to the proposed land use or site characteristics. 
(2)  Scope of regulations. The provisions of this section are applicable to all nonresidential and nonagricultural properties within the City of Dothan located on a major highway corridor as defined in subsection (3). 
(a)  The provisions of this section are applicable only to new development, and redevelopment of existing structures that will alter the existing facade area by 50 percent or greater. 
(b)  All proposed development or redevelopment within the Downtown Overlay District (DOD) shall conform to the historic character of downtown Dothan, and the provisions of article X of these regulations shall apply. 
(c)  Developments located within any overlay district or a planned unit development shall be subject to specific site plan controls, and all aspects of the proposed construction including architecture, signage, buffering, ingress/egress, and other considerations that merit inclusion in the approval process. 
(d)  Deviations to any provision of this section are appealable to the planning commission. 
(e)  Agricultural buildings and facilities located within an A-C zoning district shall be excluded from these requirements. 
(f)  Buildings and facilities located within a bona fide industrial park shall be excluded from these requirements. 
(3)  Architectural design standards. Minimum architectural standards shall be required for all nonresidential buildings located on any major highway corridor. Major highway corridors are defined as: US Highway 231 (north and south outside of Ross Clark Circle), South Oates Street, Montgomery Highway, US Highway 431, Reeves Street, US Highway 84 (east and west outside of Ross Clark Circle), Main Street, State Highway 52, Brannon Stand Road, Honeysuckle Road, Westgate Parkway and Ross Clark Circle. 
(4)  Exterior wall finish requirements. 
(a)  The front building façade of any building facing a major highway corridor, as defined in subsection (3) above, shall be erected and constructed so that a minimum of 50 percent of the façade below the roof line contains any combination of the following approved materials: brick; exterior insulated finish system; stucco; glass; fiber cement board; wood (painted or stained); decorative masonry products (split faced, textured, glazed); painted concrete block, stone (natural, synthetic); aluminum or vinyl lap siding; ornamental metal; or any other comparable or superior materials as approved by the planning commission. 
(b)  Any building constructed on a corner lot with side and/or rear public street frontage shall be required to be erected and constructed so that a minimum of 50 percent of the side walls or rear walls facing a public street contain any combination of the following approved materials: brick; exterior insulated finish system; stucco; glass; fiber cement board; wood (painted or stained); decorative masonry products (split faced, textured, glazed); painted concrete block, stone (natural, synthetic); aluminum or vinyl lap siding; ornamental metal; or any other comparable or superior materials as approved by the planning commission. Buildings located within an L-I or H-I zoning district shall be excluded from adhering to the requirements of subsection (4)(b). 
(c)  Secondary buildings behind the primary building facing a major highway corridor shall not be required to meet the exterior wall finishes noted in subsection (4)(a) above. 
(5)  Building design and orientation. 
(a)  Roof mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from view from a public street. 
(b)  Regardless of lot configuration, no dumpster enclosure, accessory building or outdoor storage area shall be located forward of the principal building. All loading and service areas shall be screened to the satisfaction of the planning commission. 
(c)  Outdoor storage areas, dumpster enclosures, utility equipment, ground level mechanical units and similar appurtenances shall be located so as to minimize visibility from off the premises. If outdoor storage areas, dumpster enclosures, utility equipment, mechanical equipment and similar appurtenances cannot be located so as not be seen from a public street, then such improvements shall be visually screened with fencing, landscaping or other material approved by the planning commission. 
(d)  Dumpster enclosures shall be four sided structures that completely conceal trash receptacles. If visible from a public street, the color and architecture of the dumpster enclosure shall be compatible with the building that it serves. Such enclosures may utilize a chain link gate with appropriate metal or plastic inserts woven into the chain link material. If not visible from a public street, a six foot chain link fenced enclosure is allowable as long as the chain link fencing incorporates metal or plastic inserts woven into the chain link material. 
(Ord. No. 2019-1, § 1, 1-15-19) 
Secs. 114-84-114-92. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BOARD OF ZONING ADJUSTMENT 

Sec. 114-93. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article it to identify the duties, responsibilities, powers and proceedings of the board of zoning adjustment as authorized under the State Code of Alabama. This article is also intended to identify and clarify the processes associated with making application to the board of zoning adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-94. - Created; appointment; duties and responsibilities per State Code of Alabama. 
(a)  The board of zoning adjustment, as heretofore provided for in section 23-30 of the 1977 Code of Ordinances is provided for as follows: pursuant to and under the authority of the 1975 State Code of Alabama, § 11-52-80, and Alabama Act No. 97-673, a board of zoning adjustment is hereby created. The appointment, procedure, powers and actions of the board shall be governed and controlled by the above cited State Code of Alabama and Alabama Act No. 97-673. 
(b)  The board of zoning adjustment shall, in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, make special exceptions to the terms of the ordinance in harmony with its general purposes and interests and in accordance with general or specific rules therein contained. 
(c)  The board of zoning adjustment shall consist of seven members, each to be appointed for a term of three years, except that in the first instance, four members shall be appointed for a term of three years and three members for a term of two years, and thereafter each member appointed shall serve for a term of three years or until a successor is duly appointed; provided all members of the board, including any alternate member shall be bona fide residents and qualified electors of the city; provided further, that the six regular members appointed by the commissioners shall represent equally the six districts of the city together with the at-large member appointed by the mayor. 
(d)  In addition to the seven regular members, two supernumerary members shall be appointed to serve on such board at the call of the chairman only in the absence of regular members and while so serving shall have and exercise the power and authority of regular members. Such supernumerary members shall be appointed to serve for three-year terms and shall be eligible for reappointment. Appointed members may be removable for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges and after public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. 
(e)  In exercising the powers in Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-80(d), the board may reverse, affirm, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may enter the appropriate order, requirement, decision or determination and, to that end, shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of five members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of an administrative official or to decide in favor of the applicant on a matter upon which the board is required to pass under any ordinance or to effect any variation in the ordinance. 
(f)  Applications for initial appeals, requests for a special exception or requests for a variance shall be accompanied by cash or check made out to the City of Dothan in the amount of $35.00. This application fee shall be nonrefundable. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-95. - Proceedings per State Code of Alabama. 
    State of Alabama law on the proceedings of the board of zoning adjustment reads as follows: 
(1)  The board of zoning adjustment shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its affairs, and in keeping with the provisions of this chapter. Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. The chairman, or in their absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the public. 
(2)  The board of zoning adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be a public record and be immediately filed in the office of the board. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-96. - Powers and duties of the board per State Code of Alabama. 
    State of Alabama law on the powers and duties of the board of zoning adjustment reads as follows: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this article or of any ordinance adopted pursuant to this article; 
(2)  To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of the ordinance upon which such board is required to pass under such ordinance; and 
(3)  To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of the ordinance not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship and so that the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed and substantial justice done. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
State Law reference- Abatement of nuisances generally, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-47-117, 11-47-118. 
Sec. 114-97. - Additional powers per State Code of Alabama. 
    Powers of the board of zoning adjustment as further defined in Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-80 et seq., as amended, are adopted by reference in this section as if fully set forth. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-98. - Special exception and/or variance. 
(a)  Application required. To request a special exception and/or variance, an applicant shall complete appropriate forms provided by the administrative official, along with material required to ensure compliance with the review criteria below. Applications shall be submitted 14 calendar days prior to the next board of zoning adjustment hearing date. Refer to the board of zoning adjustment's bylaws for more specific information. 
(b)  Fee required. Applications for special exception and/or variance requests shall be accompanied by cash or check made out to the City of Dothan in the amount of $35.00. This application fee shall be nonrefundable. 
(c)  Notice required. For purposes of providing information concerning applications for special exception and/or variance requests, the board shall also cause the following notice to be given: 
(1)  Advertisement. The board shall give public notice of hearing upon each application by publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the City of Dothan; such notice shall be given seven calendar days in advance of the time set for the hearing. Such notice shall state the location and address of the property and the general nature of the question involved. The foregoing shall constitute legal notice in all respects as provided by law. Provision of further notice by the board shall be informative but not jurisdictional. 
(2)  Direct mail. Written notices shall be mailed by the secretary of the board to the applicant and to the owners of abutting property and that directly across the street from the applicant's site by first class mail. The names and addresses of these property owners shall be furnished by the applicant with their application to the board and shall be those contained in the records of the appropriate county tax assessor's office. Written notice shall be given at least ten calendar days in advance of the hearing and shall contain the time and place of the hearing. 
(d)  Action by board of zoning adjustment. The board of zoning adjustment shall hold a public hearing on the special exception and/or variance request, and, at the close of the public hearing act to approve, approve with conditions, continue, table or deny the application based on the review criteria established in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-99. - Variances, additional requirements. 
(a)  Review criteria. A variance may be granted by the board of zoning adjustment upon an affirmative finding that all of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The requested variance arises from conditions that are unique to the subject property, that are not ordinarily found in the same zoning district and that are not a result of the owner's intentional action; 
(2)  The granting of the permit for the variance will not adversely affect the rights of adjacent property owners or residents; 
(3)  The strict application of the applicable standards will constitute an unnecessary physical hardship (not economic hardship) or practical difficulty because the property cannot be used for an otherwise allowed use without coming into conflict with applicable site development standards. 
(4)  The variance is the minimum action necessary to alleviate the hardship or practical difficulty and observes the spirit of this chapter; and 
(5)  The variance desired will not adversely affect the public health, safety or general welfare or impair the purposes or intent of this chapter or the long range development plan. 
(b)  Findings of fact. Before the board of zoning adjustment shall grant a variance it shall make the following three findings of fact which shall be recorded in the permanent record of the case, and shall include the factual reasons on which they are based: 
(1)  That there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this chapter. In order to determine that there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships, the board must find that the following five conditions exist: 
a.  If the provisions of this chapter are complied with, a variance will only be granted if the applicant can secure no reasonable return from, nor make reasonable use of, the property. Merely proving that the variance would permit a greater profit to be made from the property will not be considered adequate to justify the granting of a variance. Moreover, the board of zoning adjustment shall consider whether the variance is the minimum possible deviation from the terms of this chapter that will make possible the reasonable use of the property. 
b.  That the hardship results from the application of this chapter to the property rather than from other factors such as deed restrictions, personal actions, personal circumstances or other hardship. 
c.  That the hardship is due to the physical nature of the applicant's property, such as its size, shape, or topography, which is different from that of neighboring property. 
d.  That the hardship is not the result of the actions of an applicant who knowingly or unknowingly violates this chapter, or who purchases the property after the effective date of this chapter and then comes to the board for relief. 
e.  That the hardship is peculiar to the applicant's property, rather than the result of conditions that are widespread or common to adjoining owners or the general public. If the properties were equally subject to the hardship created in the restriction, then granting a variance would be a special privilege denied to others, and would not promote equal justice. 
(2)  The variance is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter and preserves its spirit. 
(3)  In the granting of the variance, the public safety and welfare have been assured and substantial justice has been done. The board shall not grant a variance if it finds that doing so would in any respect impair the public health, safety, or general welfare. 
(c)  Conditions. In granting the variance, the board may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location, character, and other features of the proposed building and/or structure as it may deem advisable in furtherance of the purpose of this chapter. If a variance for the construction or alteration is granted, such construction or alteration shall be in accordance with the approved site plan. 
(1)  A variance, issued in accordance with this article, shall expire if a building permit, business license, etc. has not been obtained by the applicant within six months from the date of the decision. 
(2)  The board of zoning adjustment shall keep a record of all projects for which it grants a variance. 
(3)  If the application calls for the granting of a variance, and if the board of zoning adjustment decides in favor of granting the variance, the secretary to the board shall prepare a record of the hearing with all deliberations. The record of the hearing shall include: 
a.  The variance application; 
b.  Copy of hearing notices; 
c.  Copy of evidence presented; 
d.  Motions, offers of proof, objections to evidence, and rulings on them; 
e.  Proposed findings of fact with exceptions; and 
f.  Copy of meeting minutes, including all conditions proposed to be added to the permit. 
(d)  Prohibited. The board of zoning adjustment may not grant use variances, which are variances that have the effect of allowing a use within a specific zoning district that is not allowed by article VII of this chapter. The appropriate procedure for requesting any land use not allowed within a zoning district is rezoning. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-100. - Appeals of administrative officer's decision. 
(a)  Applicability. Appeals to the board of zoning adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved or affected by any zoning-related decision of the administrative officer. The administrative official shall present all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken to the board of zoning adjustment. 
(b)  Effect of appeal. An appeal shall "stay" all proceedings in furtherance of the action related to the decision which is being appealed. However, after the notice of appeal, the administrative official certifies to the board of zoning adjustment, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the board of zoning adjustment or by a court record on application and notice to the administrative official and on the cause shown. 
(c)  Procedure. 
(1)  Written request. No application is required to appeal a decision of the administrative official, but the appellant shall provide a letter to the board of zoning adjustment, describing the decision from which the appeal is sought and the specific details of appellant's request. Letters of appeal shall be submitted 14 calendar days prior to the next board of zoning adjustment hearing date. Refer to the board of zoning adjustment's bylaws for more specific information. 
(2)  Time. Appeals to the administrative official's decision shall be submitted within 30 calendar days of the decision. 
(3)  Fee. Action on an appeal shall constitute a formal request to the board which shall require public notice and shall be accompanied by cash or check made out to the City of Dothan in the amount of $35.00 or as otherwise approved by the board of commissioners. This fee shall be nonrefundable. 
(4)  Notice. For purposes of providing information concerning such applications, the board shall also cause the following notice to be given: 
a.  Advertisement. The board shall give public notice of hearing upon each appeal by publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the City of Dothan; such notice shall be given seven calendar days in advance of the time set for the hearing. Such notice shall state the location and address of the property and the general nature of the question involved. The foregoing shall constitute legal notice in all respects as provided by law. Provision of further notice by the board shall be informative but not jurisdictional. 
b.  Written notice. Written notices shall be mailed by the secretary of the board to the applicant and to the owners of abutting property and directly across the street from the applicant's site by first class mail. The names and addresses of these property owners shall be furnished by the applicant with their notice of appeal to the board and shall be those contained in the records of the appropriate county tax assessor's office. Written notice shall be given at least ten calendar days in advance of the hearing and shall contain the time and place of the hearing. 
(d)  Review and action by board of adjustment. The board of zoning adjustment shall hold a public hearing on the appeal request, and, at the close of the public hearing act on the appeal based on the review criteria established in this article. 
(1)  In exercising the appeal power, the board of zoning adjustment shall have all the powers of the official from whom the appeal is taken, and the board of zoning adjustment may reverse or affirm wholly or partly or may modify the decision being appealed. 
(2)  If the board of zoning adjustment determines that it is necessary to obtain additional evidence in order to resolve the matter, it shall remand the appeal to the official from whom the appeal is taken, with directions to obtain such evidence and to reconsider the decision in light of such evidence. 
(3)  A concurring vote of five of the members of the board of zoning adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of an administrative official. 
(4)  Every decision of the board of zoning adjustment shall be accompanied by written findings of fact specifying the reason for the decision. These findings shall be filed in the office of the board of zoning adjustment within ten calendar days after the final action. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-101. - Home occupations, specific requirements. 
    A home occupation is intended to be a use conducted in a residential property, with operations occurring entirely within a dwelling and carried out solely by the inhabitant thereof and which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the building and/or structure for dwelling purposes. Because the city recognizes that certain home occupations have greater land use impacts than others, this section is designed to establish two types of home occupations. It shall be the applicant's responsibility to clearly explain the scope of the business to ensure the proper regulations are administered. 
(a)  Qualifying home occupations are home based businesses that have no outward appearance of business activity, including business identification signage. Examples of qualifying home occupations include (but are not limited to) the following: business office for an otherwise licensed business activity, internet based business, consulting service, etc. No public hearing is required for qualifying home occupation applications, and the administrative official has authority to approve qualifying home occupation applications. Applicants for qualifying home occupations must sign an "affidavit of compliance." The affidavit outlines the minimum requirements listed below. These minimum requirements shall be conditions of approval and must be observed by the applicant. The affidavit shall be signed in the presence of the administrative official (or appointee). Any applicant who refuses to sign the affidavit or is unable to comply with the minimum requirements will be required to apply for a non-qualifying home application. The applicant will not become eligible for the issuance of a privilege license until the affidavit has been approved by the administrative official. 
(1)  The privilege license is valid only for this home occupation, this operator at this location; 
(2)  This home occupation approval is void if the privilege license is not obtained within 90 days of approval or if the license is allowed to lapse; 
(3)  The business operator obtain a five-pound ABC type fire extinguisher (Area covered by fire extinguisher will have 2A3A-30BC designation per National Fire Code-10.); 
(4)  Any work conducted in the home (e.g. bookkeeping, etc.) is confined to the principal building and/or structure; 
(5)  No more than 25 percent of the home is used for the business; 
(6)  Only residents of the home will engage in business activity at the home; 
(7)  There are no customers at the home; 
(8)  Accessory buildings and/or structures may not be used for home occupations; 
(9)  Any business-related equipment or materials are kept inside the home; 
(10)  No employees or employee vehicles are allowed at the home; 
(11)  No business-related vehicles are parked at the home; 
(12)  If business-related materials or equipment are delivered to the home, there will be no more than two deliveries per week and the delivery vehicle shall have no more than a single axle with six wheels; 
(13)  There are no signs or advertisements on the property, including on the mailbox; 
(14)  The business operator is responsible for observing any private covenants which may impact the home occupation; 
(15)  Any other restriction as may be considered appropriate by the administrative official or the board of zoning adjustment; and 
(16)  Violation of any of the aforementioned conditions could result in revocation of the approval. 
(b)  Non-qualifying home occupations are home based businesses that exhibit any outward (visible) signs of business activity, including (but not limited to) the following: lawn care business, contractor, home maintenance business, etc. Non-qualifying home occupations shall be considered special exceptions and shall be subject to board of zoning adjustment approval as outlined in this article. Unless expressly omitted by the board of zoning adjustment, the restrictions listed below shall be considered conditions of approval. However, the board of zoning adjustment may add additional conditions of approval should conditions warrant. It shall be the applicant's responsibility to clearly explain the scope of the business to ensure the proper restrictions are approved and/or omitted by the board of zoning adjustment. 
(1)  The special exception is valid only for the applicant, this home occupation and this location; 
(2)  The special exception is void if a privilege license, issued by the City of Dothan, is not obtained within 90 days of approval and subsequently if the license is allowed to lapse; 
(3)  The applicant shall obtain a five-pound ABC type fire extinguisher (Area covered by fire extinguisher will have 2A3A-30BC designation per National Fire Code-10.); 
(4)  No more than 25 percent of the home shall be used for the business; 
(5)  There shall be no noise, odors or vibrations associated with the business; 
(6)  No employees or employee vehicles are allowed at the home; 
(7)  Only residents of the home are authorized to engage in business activity at the home; 
(8)  There shall be no customers at the home; 
(9)  All work-related activities must be conducted inside the home; 
(10)  No accessory building shall be used in conjunction with the business; 
(11)  The applicant is allowed to have one business-related vehicle parked on the property, but it shall be no larger than a pickup truck or passenger van; 
(12)  No business-related vehicle may be parked in the street; 
(13)  Lawn care equipment and/or any trailer used to transport the equipment are shielded from the view of the street and adjacent properties; 
(14)  No business-related equipment or materials shall be visible from the road or from adjoining properties and shall be stored inside either the single vehicle or inside the home; 
(15)  Used and/or left over materials shall not be taken to the property. 
(16)  If business-related materials or equipment are delivered to the home, there shall be no more than two deliveries per week, and the delivery vehicle shall have no more than a single axle with six wheels; 
(17)  There shall be no signs or advertisements at the home, including on the mailbox; 
(18)  Applicant is responsible for observing any private covenants which may impact the proposed home occupation; 
(19)  Any other restriction as may be considered appropriate by the administrative official or the board of zoning adjustment; and 
(20)  Violation of any of the aforementioned conditions could result in revocation of the approval. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-102. - Letter of de minimis. 
    Violations of these regulations requiring a variance of ten percent or less of the dimensional regulations of the district may be issued upon request by a "letter of de minimis" from the administrative official. Letters of de minimis are not variances and do not legitimize any encroachment that may exist. A letter of de minimis may not be requested for encroachments exceeding 12 inches. Any alteration of the premises that results in an increase in the extent of the violation and any subsequent or additional and separate violation shall void this letter of de minimis and shall be subject to appropriate action. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-103. - Appeal from board of zoning adjustment determination. 
    Refer to the State Code of Ala. 11-52-81, which states: "Any party aggrieved by any final judgment or decision of such board of zoning adjustment may within 15 calendar days thereafter appeal therefrom to the circuit court by filing with such board a written notice of appeal specifying the judgment or decision from which the appeal is taken. In case of such appeal such board shall cause a transcript of the proceedings in the action to be certified to the court to which the appeal is taken, and the action in such court shall be tried de novo." 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Note- Acts 1935, No. 533, p. 1121; Code 1940, T. 37, § 783. 
Secs. 114-104-114-114. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CLASSIFICATION AND ESTABLISHMENT OF USES 

Sec. 114-115. - Purpose. 
    The City of Dothan, Alabama is hereby divided into zoning districts as established by this article. The purpose of this article is to achieve compatibility among land uses within the various districts, to implement the city's official zoning map, and to serve the citizens of Dothan by providing for the implementation and administration of the regulations of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-116. - Establishment of zoning districts. 
    For the purpose of this zoning ordinance, all land and water areas within jurisdiction of the City of Dothan are hereby divided into zoning districts, which shall be designated as follows: 
Agricultural-Conservation District A-C Residential Districts  Residential Single-Family, Low Density R-1  Residential Single-Family, Medium Density R-2  Residential Single-Family, High Density R-3  Residential, Attached, High Density (2-7 units) R-4  Residential, Multi-family, High Density (8+) R-A  Manufactured Home Community Park MH-1  Mobile Home Subdivision MH-2 Office and Institutional Districts  Office/Institutional O & I  Office Park O-2  Neighborhood Office O-3 Business Districts  Central Business B-1  Highway Commercial B-2  Local Shopping B-3 Manufacturing/Industrial Districts  Light Industry L-I  Heavy Industry H-I Special Districts  Planned Unit Development PUD  Downtown Overlay District (with subdistricts) DOD  Manufactured Home Community MHC  
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15; Ord. No. 2016-246, § 1, 9-6-16) 
Sec. 114-117. - Statement of purpose and intent of zoning districts. 
    The following is intended to specify the purpose and intent of the zoning districts established by this article. Illustrations are provided to assist reader understanding of the concept. 
(a)  Agricultural-conservation (A-C) district. Regulations for the agricultural district are intended to provide for development on land situated in urban areas that is intended primarily for agricultural uses. Very low density residential uses are also permitted. District dimensional regulations require a minimum of one acre lots for site-built, stand-alone residential uses in this district. Structures not built in a subdivision must comply with the dimensional requirements outlined in the Table of District Dimensional Regulations (article VIII, section 114-132). However, if located in an approved subdivision, lot sizes shall be a minimum of 15,000 square feet and shall comply with R-1 district dimensional regulations other than lot size. 


The types and intensity of uses and required areas permitted in this district are designed for both rural character and very low density residential development. In certain cases, agricultural activities, which may not be considered as compatible uses when adjacent to residential uses, are permitted as a "use by-right" in this district. It is not the intention of this chapter to restrict agricultural activities because of residential uses in the immediate area. 
(b)  Residential districts. Regulations for residential districts are designed to protect the residential character of areas so designated from the noise, congestion, and heavy traffic that is typically associated with commercial, industrial and other non-residential activities. These regulations are also designed to encourage a suitable environment for family life by providing for open space and associated yet compatible neighborhood facilities. Permitted uses are designed to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of each district and permit certain home occupations as set forth in this chapter. 
(1)  R-1, Residential single-family, low density. This district is intended to provide for low density urban residential development, which is designed to provide quiet, low density areas for single-family living with related recreational facilities protected from intrusion of non-residential activity. Lot sizes in R-1 districts are 12,000 square feet or greater. 

(2)  R-2, Residential single-family, medium density. This district is intended to provide for medium density urban residential development, containing single-family dwellings along with related recreational facilities protected from intrusion of commercial and industrial activity. Lots sizes in R-2 districts range from 8,400 square feet to 11,999 square feet. 

(3)  R-3, Residential single-family, high density. This district is intended to provide for high density urban residential development, containing single-family dwellings along with related recreational facilities protected from intrusion of non-residential activity. Lots sizes in R-3 districts range from 4,000 square feet to 8,399 square feet. 

(4)  R-4, Residential, attached multi-family, 2-7 dwelling units, high density. This district is intended to provide for high density urban residential development, containing at least two attached dwelling units but not more than seven attached dwelling units, along with related recreational facilities protected from the intrusion of non-residential activity. Single-family dwellings are permitted in R-4 districts utilizing R-3 dimensional regulations as part of the overall mix of housing uses but not independently. Lot sizes in R-4 districts range from 4,800 square feet to 16,800 square feet, but lots can be larger if so desired. The chart below illustrates the minimum and maximum number of dwelling units as well as the minimum lot area for developments in R-4 district. When approved by the building official and the planning commission, zero lot lines are permitted along common walls of attached dwelling units. However, a minimum separation is required between all unattached buildings and/or structures; see the Table of District Dimensional Regulations for standards. This definition is intended to include townhouses as modified by this chapter. 

  
  
R-4 Density Table # of DUs Min. lot area Min # DUs 2 4,800 sf 3 7,200 sf 4 9,600 sf 5 12,000 sf 6 14,400 sf Max # DUs 7 16,800 sf  
  
(5)  R-A, Residential, apartments, 8+ dwelling units, high density. This district is intended to provide for high density multi-family urban residential development, as illustrated in the following table, with related recreational facilities protected from intrusion of non-residential activity. The minimum number of dwelling units in R-A districts is eight; there is no maximum number of dwelling units. Single-family dwellings existing at the time of adoption of this chapter are permitted uses. New single-family dwelling units are not permitted in R-A districts. Minimum lot size in R-A districts is 29,200 square feet. This number is based on the methodology of requiring 7,200 square feet for the first unit plus 4,000 square feet for the next four units and 2,000 square feet for each additional unit. Larger lots are permitted if so desired. As the Table of District Dimensional Regulations illustrates, zero lot lines are permitted along common walls, when approved by the building official and the planning commission. Setbacks are required between buildings; see the Table of District Dimensional Regulations (article VIII, section 114-132) for standards. Permitted uses are designed to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of the area and permit certain home occupations as set forth in this chapter. 
R-A Density Table # of DUs Min lot area (in sf/lot) 8 29,200 9 31,200 10 33,200 11 35,200 12 37,200 13 39,200 14 41,200 15 43,200 16 45,200 add'l per DU 2,000  
  
(6)  MH-1, Manufactured home community. This district is intended to provide for lower cost housing units in a medium density urban residential development, which is designed for individual manufactured homes, located in an approved mobile home park and additional areas where similar residential development will be a viable land use, with related recreational areas protected from intrusion of non-residential activity. The minimum size of the tract of land for the park shall be three acres. Sites may contain buildings and/or structures owned by the property owner or by tenants. Permitted uses are designed to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of the area and permit certain home occupations as set forth in this code. Development and/or redevelopment of these areas are subject to the development plan regulations and review by the planning commission. See article X, section 114-158 for specific standards. 
(7)  MH-2, Manufactured home subdivisions. This district is intended to provide for urban residential development, which is designed for medium residential density for manufactured homes, located in an approved subdivision and areas where similar residential development will be a viable land use, with related recreational areas protected from intrusion of non-residential activity. This district is further intended to provide lower cost housing units for residents desiring to live in an urban subdivision with permanent manufactured housing units. Lot sizes shall be a minimum of 5,000 square feet and shall meet the minimum dimensional regulations as required by this chapter. Permitted uses are designed to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of the area and permit certain home occupations as set forth in this code. Development and/or redevelopment of these areas are subject to the development plan regulations and review by the planning commission. 

(c)  Office districts. Regulations for office districts are intended to provide areas for business offices and professional offices as well as related activities. These districts are also designed to meet the community's needs for professional services and related activities. 
(1)  O & I, Office/institutional. This district is intended to provide areas for business and professional offices as well as more intensive office uses such as public buildings, banks, pharmacies (when adjunct to medical facilities), and television and radio station offices (without towers or aerials). It is further intended to provide appropriate land use regulations for major public and private nonprofit institutions serving the public, such as universities, colleges, public schools, hospitals, parks, fairgrounds, and large state, federal and municipal facilities. Since these institutions operate in the public interest and are generally inoffensive in character, this chapter places principal reliance upon the voluntary cooperation of institutional authorities with municipal officials rather than upon detailed land use regulations. It is intended that the conversion of excess institutional land to non-institutional purposes should be preceded by cooperative planning between the planning and development department and the planning commission and should take place under appropriate controls to ensure that the future use of the excess land conforms to the long range development plan. Development and/or redevelopment of these areas are subject to the development plan regulations and review by the planning commission. 
(2)  O-2, Office park. This district is intended to provide areas for groups of offices for uses such as offices for business and professional services, public buildings, banks, pharmacies (when adjunct to medical facilities), and television and radio station offices (without towers or aerials.) Development and/or redevelopment of these areas are subject to the development plan regulations and review by the planning commission. 
(3)  O-3, Neighborhood office. This district is intended to serve as a transitional district between residential districts and/or uses and more intensive non-residential activities. This district is further intended to avoid traffic onto residential streets or become an intrusion into a residential district. Development and/or redevelopment of these areas are subject to the development plan regulations and review by the planning commission. 
(d)  Business (commercial) districts. Regulations for the business districts are designed to encourage stable and efficient commercial areas to meet the needs of various trade areas for commercial goods and services. The regulations are also designed to minimize the adverse effects of commercial uses on other land uses and provide opportunities for investment. 
(1)  B-1, Central business district (CBD). The CBD is intended for personal and business services and general retail trade of the core business center of the community. It is designed to accommodate a wide variety of commercial uses in the traditional downtown business area and related areas of mixed commercial enterprises. It is designed to maintain, support and facilitate compatible redevelopment of existing and new uses with the core area. Residential uses may be appropriate above the ground floor of commercial or other uses within the CBD district. Development or redevelopment of the CBD is subject to all regulations as established in article V, development Plans, and is also subject to regulations and design guidelines as established for the downtown overlay district. 
(2)  B-2, Highway commercial. The B-2 district is intended for major retail and service activities removed from the CBD, with major thoroughfare access and with adequate open space and parking. Landscaping and aesthetic considerations are important to this area with regional significance. The district is intended to serve residents, non-residents and transient traffic using major thoroughfares that run through and around the city. Development or redevelopment of these areas is subject to all regulations as established in article V, development plans, and is also subject to regulations and design guidelines as established for the downtown overlay district. 
(3)  B-3, Local shopping. The B-3 district is intended to serve as a transitional district between commercial districts and residential districts. It is designed for local retail and personal services of limited size and service that provide for the regular needs and convenience of those residing in the adjacent residential neighborhoods. These are generally small in area and contain businesses that deal in "convenience goods" such as groceries, prescription drugs, and household supplies, and the furnishing of personal services. It is intended that local shopping uses be developed as a unit with adequate off-street parking for customers and employees and with appropriate landscaping and screening. Development or redevelopment of these areas is subject to all regulations as established in article V, development plans. 
(e)  Manufacturing (industrial) districts. Regulations for the manufacturing districts are designed to make available a range of suitable sites for all types of manufacturing and related activities while protecting residential areas by separating them from manufacturing activities and prohibiting the use of industrial space for new residential development. Industrial parks may be either light or heavy industrial in nature, and therefore shall be permitted in either district. 
(1)  L-I, Light industry. The L-I district is designed to provide a location for industries that do not, by their nature, create any public nuisance. It is intended to preserve land for industry in a location beneficial to industries. Single-family residential uses are prohibited. Due to the traffic generated and other potentially objectionable influences created by the nature of the L-I district, special buffer and/or setback considerations may be required. The environmentally protective nature of this district is designed to limit uses to those that produce a minimum of gaseous emissions, noise and objectionable external effects. Development or redevelopment of these areas is subject to all regulations as established in article V, development plans, and is also subject to regulations and design guidelines as established for the downtown overlay district. 
(2)  H-I, Heavy industry. The H-I district is intended to provide for the competitive location for manufacturing and related industries that may, by nature, create nuisances. The intent is to preserve land for such industry in locations with access to major streets as designed on the thoroughfare plan, as well as locations generally accessible to railroad transportation and to prohibit residential uses. Due to the objectionable impacts that may be created in this district, special buffer requirements and/or setback areas will be required. Development or redevelopment of these areas is subject to all regulations as established in article V, development plans, and is also subject to regulations and design guidelines as established for the downtown overlay district. 
(f)  Special districts. Regulations for special districts are intended to be applied to an area that is rezoned to include a special district. Special districts generally require further development standards within a zoning district. Development in a special district must conform to the base district as well as the overlay zoning requirements. 
(1)  Planned unit development (PUD). The PUD district is established to allow for the planned and unified development of a tract of land that is three acres of land or larger. Said land shall be described by ordinance and rezoned as required by this chapter. Areas zoned PUD shall allow for design flexibility of development as the PUD district is intended to encourage efficient use of the land and public services and to promote high quality design that will provide a variant of dwelling types as well as support services and open space for residents of the development. These regulations are intended to permit integration with adjacent non-residential uses and to promote compatibility with existing and emerging patterns of development. Development and/or redevelopment of these areas are subject to the development plan regulations and review by the planning commission. Rezoning's to PUD are subject to all regulations established in article IV, amendment and rezoning procedure. 
(2)  Downtown overlay district (DOD). The purpose of the DOD is to foster a strong viable downtown as a commercial, civic, residential, and cultural art center with its own unique identity and to provide a mechanism to establish special land use regulations, standards, or procedures in a defined area with unique land use, site planning, building design, or environmental resource issues. Specifically: 
a.  Implement the city's downtown master plan to achieve specific land use and design objectives. 
b.  Accommodate mixed-use buildings and parcels with neighborhood-serving retail, service and other uses on the ground floor and residential units above the non-residential space. 
c.  Encourage rehabilitation and re-use of existing historic buildings. 
d.  Promote new infill residential and non-residential development in a planned format. 
e.  Encourage development that exhibits the physical design characteristics that promotes pedestrian oriented storefront-style shopping, and 
f.  Promotes the health and well-being of residents by encouraging physical activity, alternative transportation modes and greater social interaction. 
Development or redevelopment of these areas is subject to all regulations as established in article V, development plans, and is also subject to regulations and design guidelines as established for the downtown overlay district. The DOD is divided into three subdistricts as described in article X, special districts, section 114-157. Land uses for properties in the DOD must comply with the Table of Permitted Uses in article X. 
(3)  Manufactured home community district. The purpose of these regulations is to provide supplemental standards and procedures specifically relevant to the development of a manufactured home community in a MH-1 district. The standards contained in this section allow the development of this housing type while providing adequate public facilities and support services, protection of natural resources; provision of parks and open space, establishes spacing of structures for purposes of privacy and fire protection, provides adequate off-street parking and allows for safe and effective traffic circulation. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-118. - District boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of the districts listed in section 114-116 are established as shown on the official zoning map of the city, as described in section 114-1 of this chapter. Unless otherwise shown on the zoning map, the boundaries of districts are lot lines, the centerlines of streets or alleys or such lines extended, the centerlines of bodies of water or such lines extended, railroad right-of-way lines, or the corporate limit lines as they existed at the time of enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. Questions concerning the exact location of district boundary lines shall be decided by the administrative official. Appeals to boundary determination decisions shall be forwarded to the board of zoning adjustment as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  If a drafting error is made in the location of a district boundary line of the official zoning map of the city, as adopted in section 114-1, the administrative official shall research the origin of the error and make necessary corrections. Requests for interpretation or appeal of the administrative official's interpretation shall be heard by the board of zoning adjustment at a public hearing and shall follow the same administrative process as other appeals to the board. After a public hearing, the board of zoning adjustment is authorized to direct the correction of the error in order to show the correct location of the district boundary line as established by the ordinance in question. Any corrections to previously adopted zoning maps shall be made in accordance with procedures established prior to adoption of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Secs. 114-119-114-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 114-130. - Land uses. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Land uses that are allowed "by-right" in each zoning district will be identified as permitted by the letter "P" in the Table of Permitted Uses. Said uses shall be permitted when an applicant or representative makes application to, and obtains an official signature of, the administrative official. 
(1)  Special exceptions. Land uses that are specified as "special exceptions" in each zoning district will be identified as such by the letter "S" in the Table of Permitted Uses. Said uses are exceptions, and no permit shall be issued for such uses except those with the written approval of the board of zoning adjustment and subject to such conditions as the board may require to preserve and protect the character of the district in which the use is located. The process for making application for a special exception is outlined in article VI of this chapter. 
(b)  Prohibited uses. If a land use is listed in the Table of Permitted Uses but is not either a permitted use or a special exception, then the land use is prohibited. Land use variances are prohibited under the terms of this chapter. When an applicant desires to pursue a prohibited land use, then the applicant would be required to request rezoning of the subject property. The process for making application for rezoning is outlined in article IV of this chapter. 
(c)  Unlisted uses. If a land use is not listed in the Table of Permitted Uses, the administrative official shall be authorized to make an interpretation about whether or not the land use should be allowed by-right or as a special exception, based on land uses that are in the Table of Permitted Uses that have similar land use impacts. If the administrative official is unable to make a determination then the land use shall be prohibited in that district. The administrative official shall provide a letter to the applicant regarding land use interpretation decisions and maintain an official written file of all such interpretation decisions. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-131. - Tables of permitted uses. 
Sec. 114-131.1. - Table of permitted accessory and agricultural uses. 
Residential Districts Non-Residential District Legend 
P = Permitted 
S = Special Exception 
Blank = Not Permitted Single-Family Districts Multi- 
Family 
Districts Manu- 
factured Home Districts Business Districts Office/Institutional Districts Manufac- 
turing Districts AC R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-A MH-1 MH-2 B-1 B-2 B-3 O-1 O-2 O-3 L-I H-I Accessory Uses/Structures Accessory Dwelling Unit (For Family Member) S S S S Accessory Dwelling Unit for Owner/Operator P P P S S S S S S S S Accessory Structures (Sheds, Garages, etc.) P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Accessory Non-residential Use P P P P P P P P Amenity Center/Clubhouse P P P P P P P P P P P S Billboards S P P P Private Cemetery (accessory to a church) S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S Daycare, Child/Adult (In-Home less than 6) S S S S S S S S Fences, Walls P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Home Occupation, Non-qualifying S S S S S S S S S Home Occupation, Qualifying P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Open Outdoor Storage of Goods or Materials S P Portable Signs P P P P P Shelter for Livestock (Stables) P Truck/Trailer Rental (Accessory use) S P S P Agricultural Uses Aircraft Landing Field S Agriculture/Poultry/Livestock Raising (As Primary Use) P 1 Private Animal Shelter or Rescue P 1 S P Auction (Livestock/Equipment) P 1 Aviary/Apiary P 2 S S S S S S S Community Garden P S S S S S S S S S S S S S S Forestry P Gardening (As Accessory Use) P P P P P P P P General Farming/Horticulture P Hatchery, Aquaculture P 1 Mining (Natural Resources Indigenous to Area) P 1 S Nursery/Plant Sales (Wholesale) P 2 P P Poultry/Livestock (As Accessory Use) P S 3 S 3 S 3 S 3 Riding Academy P 2 Roadside Stand (Farm Produce) P Stable P 2 P P Taxidermy P 1 P Temporary/Seasonal Use P 2 P P S P P P P  
1 Not allowed in a platted residential subdivision. 
2 Permitted on appeal to BZA in a platted residential subdivision. 
3 A minimum lot size of 1/2 acre is required regardless of zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-131.2. - Table of permitted commercial uses. 
Residential Districts Non-Residential District Legend 
P = Permitted 
S = Special Exception 
Blank = Not Permitted Single-Family Districts Multi- 
Family 
Districts Manu- 
factured Home Districts Business Districts Office/Institutional Districts Manufac- 
turing Districts AC R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-A MH-1 MH-2 B-1 B-2 B-3 O-1 O-2 O-3 L-I H-I Commercial Uses Accessory Building Sales S S Adult Entertainment P Alcohol Beverage Establishment (primary use) 1 P P P Amusement Commercial (Inside) P P P Amusement Commercial (Outside) S S P P Animal Boarding S S P P ATM P P P P P P P P Automobile Parking (Lot or Structure) P P S S S P P Automobile Repair/Service P P P P Automobile/motorvehicle sales, new or used S P P P Automobile/Motorvehicle Rental S S S S Automobile Wash P P S P P Bank/Financial Institution P P P P P P Bed and Breakfast Inn S S S S P P Bus Station P S S Butcher (retail) P P P P Campground/RV Park P P S S Caterer P P S P Club (Fraternal) S P P Commissary (Health Dept. approval required) P P S P P P Contractor Office/Yard (building, plumbing, electrical, etc.) S P P Convenience Store P P S P P P P Country Club P P Curb Market P P P P P Custom Assembly P P S P  
1 Establishments serving alcoholic beverages as the primary activity and operating with extended hours shall not be located adjacent to a residential district. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15; Ord. No. 2016-246, § 1, 9-6-16; Ord. No. 2018-19, 2-6-18) 
Sec. 114-131.3. - Table of permitted commercial uses (cont'd). 
Residential Districts Non-Residential District Legend 
P = Permitted 
S = Special Exception 
Blank = Not Permitted Single-Family Districts Multi- 
Family 
Districts Manu- 
factured Home Districts Business Districts Office/Institutional Districts Manufac- 
turing Districts AC R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-A MH-1 MH-2 B-1 B-2 B-3 O-1 O-2 O-3 L-I H-I Commercial Uses Donation Center, Drop-Off Box P P P P P P P Distribution Center (UPS, FedEx, Newspaper, etc.) P P P P Driving Range S P P Dry Cleaning and Laundry Pick-up Station P P S P P S P Dry Cleaning & Laundry Establishment < 3,000 sq. ft. P P P Flea Market S P P Funeral Home S S P S P P P Golf Course P P Grocery Store P P P 1 P Gymnasium/Health Club P P S P P P Home Improvement Sales P P S P Hotel/Motel P P P S S Kennel P S S P P Live/Work P P P P P P P Lodges, Summer Camps P Major Appliance Repair P P Manufacturing Incidental to Retail on Premises S S P P Manufactured Home Sales P P Microbrewery P P Mobile Accessory Storage Containers (sale or rent) 3 S S P Mobile Vendor 1 P P S P P P P Automobile/Motorvehicle Rental S S S S Moving Truck & Trailer Rental (principal use) 3 S P P Multi-Media Production (TV or radio station) P P P P P P Museum/Art Gallery (private or semi-public) S P P P P Office (General) P P P P P P P Pawn Shop P Personal Care Services P P P P P P Personal Instruction P P P P P P Printing and Publishing P P S S P P  
1 Not exceeding 20,000 square feet, GFA. 
2 With approved access and off street parking. Does not include commissary. 
3 Display areas for exterior merchandise shall be shown on the development plan. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15; Ord. No. 2016-246, § 1, 9-6-16; Ord. No. 2018-212, § 2, 8-21-18) 
Sec. 114-131.4. - Table of permitted commercial uses (cont'd). 
Residential Districts Non-Residential District Legend 
P = Permitted 
S = Special Exception 
Blank = Not Permitted Single-Family Districts Multi- 
Family 
Districts Manu- 
factured Home Districts Business Districts Office/Institutional Districts Manufac- 
turing Districts AC R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-A MH-1 MH-2 B-1 B-2 B-3 O-1 O-2 O-3 L-I H-I Commercial Uses (Continued) Racetrack S Restaurant, Carry-out/Take-Out/Delivery P P P P P Restaurant, Fast-Food P P P Restaurant, full service 1 P P S P P P Retail, other 2 P P S P P P Retail, Indoor Sales Only P P P P P P Self-Service Laundry P P P P Self-Service (Mini) Storage P P P Shooting Range (indoor) S P P Shooting Range (outdoor) S S Small Appliance Repair P P P Specialty Retail P P P P Stadium/Arena/Convention Center S P P P P P Taxi Dispatch, Excluding Garage P P S P Telecommunications Tower S P P S S P P Temporary/Seasonal Use 3 P P P S P P Theater (Indoor) P P S P Theater (Outdoor) S S S S Title Loans, Payday Lender, Check Cashing (deferred presentment) P Utility Trailer Sales or Rental 2 S P P P Wrecker Service S P Zoo S  
1 Full service restaurants with extended hours shall not be located adjacent to a residential district. 
2 Display areas for exterior merchandise shall be shown on the development plan. 
2 With approved access and off street parking. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15; Ord. No. 2018-115, § 2, 5-15-18) 
Sec. 114-131.5. - Table of permitted industrial uses. 
Residential Districts Non-Residential District Legend 
P = Permitted 
S = Special Exception 
Blank = Not Permitted Single-Family Districts Multi- 
Family 
Districts Manu- 
factured Home Districts Business Districts Office/Institutional Districts Manufac- 
turing Districts AC R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-A MH-1 MH-2 B-1 B-2 B-3 O-1 O-2 O-3 L-I H-I Industrial Uses Airport/Heliport S P S Building Contractor Supply S P Construction/Demolition Landfill, Private S S Food Processing Excluding Vinegar and Yeast S Food and Beverage Production Including Rendering S Hazardous Operation S Heavy Equipment Sales and Service P P Laundry/Dry Cleaning Plant, Dyeing, etc. < 3,000 sq. ft. S P Manufacturing, Heavy P Manufacturing, Light (with incidental retail) P P Meat, Fish, Poultry Processing Excluding Slaughter S P Mineral Extraction S S Motor Freight P P Nursery/Plant Sales/Landscape Materials (retail) S S P S S Nursery/Plant Sales/Landscape Materials (Wholesale) P Office Warehouse P P Railroad Station P Railroad Yard P P Recycling Collection Center P P P P P P P Recycling Facility S P Scrap Operation (Junk Yard) S Slaughterhouse S Transit Garage (Bus, Van, Taxi, etc) S S P Tank Farm S Warehouse P P  
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15; Ord. No. 2018-212, § 3, 8-21-18) 
Sec. 114-131.6. - Table of permitted institutional uses. 
Residential Districts Non-Residential District Legend 
P = Permitted 
S = Special Exception 
Blank = Not Permitted Single-Family Districts Multi- 
Family 
Districts Manu- 
factured Home Districts Business Districts Office/Institutional Districts Manufac- 
turing Districts AC R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-A MH-1 MH-2 B-1 B-2 B-3 O-1 O-2 O-3 L-I H-I Industrial Uses Cemetery/Masoleum S S S S S S Correctional Facility P Community Center S S S S S S S S P P S P Daycare Center More than 6 (child or adult) P P S P Fraternity/Sorority House (off campus) P P P S Group Home/Shelter Home P P P P P P P P P Halfway/Transitional Housing P P P P Crematory S S S S S Public Uses (Police, Fire, Utilities, Public Works, etc.) P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Religious Institution S S S S S S S S S S S S School, College/University P P P School, Technical/vocational/business P P P P P Semi-public land use P P S P S Transient (Homeless) Shelter P P P  
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15; Ord. No. 2016-246, § 1, 9-6-16) 
Sec. 114-131.7. - Table of permitted medical and residential uses. 
Residential Districts Non-Residential District Legend 
P = Permitted 
S = Special Exception 
Blank = Not Permitted Single-Family Districts Multi- 
Family 
Districts Manu- 
factured Home Districts Business Districts Office/Institutional Districts Manufac- 
turing Districts AC R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-A MH-1 MH-2 B-1 B-2 B-3 O-1 O-2 O-3 L-I H-I Medical Uses Animal Hospital/Veterinarian P P 4 P 4 P 4 P 4 P Assisted Living Facility S S S P P S S Detoxification Clinic S S S Hospital P P P Medical Office P P P P P S Medical or Scientific Lab P P S P P S Nonresidential Drug Treatment Facility S S S Nursing Home S S S S S P Outpatient Clinic (including surgery) P P P P Rehabilitation Facility P P P Residential Uses Apartments (8 or more units) P P 6 P P Live/Work P P P P P P P Manufactured Single-Family Home S S S S S S P P Single-Family Dwelling P P P P P 2 P 1 P Two-Family Dwelling P P Three-, Four-, Five-, Six-, Seven-Family Dwelling P P 5 P 3  
1 Existing single-family dwellings are permitted uses in the R-A District. 
2 Single-family dwellings shall comply with R-3 dimensional regulations, except minimum living area. 
3 In compliance with R-4 dimensional regulations. 
4 Special Exception is required if non-medical boarding is included. 
5 Any combination of multifamily buildings containing minimum of 8 units is allowed. 
6 Any number of apartments permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15; Ord. No. 2016-246, § 1, 9-6-16) 
Sec. 114-132. - District dimensional regulations. 
(a)  Purpose and general provisions. 
(1)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to establish appropriate standards relating to the size and placement of buildings within each of the zoning classifications created by this title in order to assist in the achievement of the goals established in the long range development plan for the city. 
(2)  General provisions. The required specifications for lot area, residential density, setbacks, building heights and separation between buildings are specified in this chapter on the basis of zoning district classification. Lots shall be created, and building permits and/or zoning compliance approval shall only be issued for properties in compliance with these bulk regulations. 
(b)  District dimensional regulations table. 
Table of Dimensional Regulations 
Residential Districts Non-Residential District Single-Family Districts Multi-Family Districts Manufactured Home Districts Business Districts Office/Institutional Districts Manufacturing Districts Zone District AC R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-A MH-1 C MH-2 B-1 B-2 B-3 O-1 O-2 O-3 E L-I H-I Minimum lot area, sq. feet 1 acre or 15,000 G 12,000 8,400 4,000 4,800 29,200 3 acres 5,000 sq ft = 6 du/acre n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Lot area per additional DU, sq. feet n/a n/a n/a n/a 2,400 B 2,000 B n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Min. lot width @ building line, feet 100 85 65 40 24 65 n/a 50 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Min. corner lot @ building line, feet 135 100 85 50 54 85 n/a 70 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Min. depth of front yard, feet 50 30 25 15 30 20 50 D 20 25 25 25 25 25 40 20 20 Min. depth of rear yard, feet 40 35 30 15 15 20 50 D 10 10 10 10 20 20 40 35 10 Min. width of each side yard, feet 15 10 10 5 7.5 A 20 A 50 D 15 5 A 5 A 5 A 5 A 20 20 20 10 Side yard abutting a street, feet 50 30 25 15 30 20 50 D 20 25 25 25 25 25 40 20 20 Max. building area, % of gross lot area 25 25 40 50 60 60 50 n/a n/a 50 40 50 30 30 50 60 Max. building height:  Feet n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 55 n/a n/a 145 145 35 145 35 35 n/a n/a  Stories n/a 3 3 3 3 3 n/a n/a 10 10 3 10 2 2 n/a n/a Buffer required - see Sec. 114-188 No No No No Yes F Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Off-street parking requirements: See Section 114-182, Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements Min. living area, sf per family 1200 1200 1200 1000 750 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Development Plan approval No No No No No See Art. V See Art. V See Art. V See Art. V See Art. V See Art. V See Art. V See Art. V See Art. V See Art. V See Art. V  
Notes:  A Unless located in common wall development which is approved by the planning commission and building official, no side yard required for interior units. Ten-foot separation between structures is required for maintenance and access. Setbacks shall increase 20 feet for each additional story if adjacent to existing single-family residentially used or zoned property except in the B-1 and MH-1 districts. Single-family dwellings comply with R-3 dimensional regulations. 
B Refer to the charts in section 114-117(a)(5) and (6). The minimum lot area for R-4 and R-A zoning districts is based on the minimum number of attached units required for the district. 
C Dimensional standards shown for MH-1 district apply to a manufactured home park and not to each lot within a manufactured home park. Refer to section 114-158. 
D At least 20 feet of separation shall be maintained between all structures including but not limited to manufactured homes, patio covers, carports, awnings and other attached additions shall be included in determining separation between homes. Fifty-foot perimeter setback required. 
E No change of use shall be allowed in the O-3 district which does not provide for the erection of a six-foot tall (minimum height) solid masonry wall along any side or rear property line directly abutting residentially zoned property, or property used for residential purposes, except any portion of such property line, which in the judgment of the City of Dothan Planning Director, or designee, should remain unobstructed for traffic or life safety reasons. Said wall shall conform in its design and materials to the design standards maintained on file in the office of the building official. 
F Buffer is required with three dwellings or greater. 
G One acre per unit required when not in a platted subdivision. Single-family residential in platted subdivisions shall comply with R-1 dimensional regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Secs. 114-133-114-139. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - TOWNHOUSE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 114-140. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide for the construction of townhouse dwellings in the city and to set forth the requirements for the construction of townhouse dwellings. It is the further intent of this article that dwelling units constructed under this article will: 
(1)  Encourage the provisions of usable open space and a desirable living environment. 
(2)  Be located primarily in areas near or adjacent to single-family use areas. 
(3)  Be located near such services as major thoroughfares and collector streets. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-141. - General requirements. 
    In addition to the standards established in the Table of District Dimensional Regulations, the following general requirements will apply to townhouse dwellings constructed in R-4 districts: 
(1)  No townhouse building shall contain less than two or more than seven townhouses, and no townhouse building shall exceed 250 feet in length including any space between townhouses making up the townhouse building. No more than four consecutive townhouses shall have the same front line. 
(2)  No portion of a townhouse or accessory building and/or structure in or related to one townhouse building and/or structure shall be closer than 15 feet to any portion of a townhouse or accessory building and/or structure related to another townhouse building and/or structure or to any building and/or structure outside the townhouse development. 
(3)  Off-street parking shall be provided at the rate of two spaces per townhouse. Insofar as practicable, off-street facilities will be either provided on the individual townhouse lots or grouped in bays in the interior of blocks. In any case, parking arrangements will be made so as to discourage on-street parking on public streets. No off-street parking space shall be more than 100 feet by the most direct pedestrian route from a door of the dwelling unit it is intended to serve. 
(4)  If a townhouse development contains any common area, common building, common off-street parking area, or common recreation facility, provisions satisfactory to the board of commissioners and approved by the city attorney shall be made to ensure that common areas, common buildings, common off-street parking areas, and common recreational facilities for the use and enjoyment of occupants of townhouses shall be maintained in a satisfactory manner without expense to the city or the general public. In addition, the developer of a townhouse development or homeowners association created by the developer, by recorded covenants and restrictions, shall preserve for the owners and occupants of the development such common areas, common buildings, common off-street parking areas, and common recreational facilities established for the development. 
(5)  All lots must front or have access (via legal document) to a dedicated public right-of-way. 
(6)  Attached townhouse dwellings shall be separated from each other by a firewall which complies with building, fire, and other applicable codes adopted by the city. 
(7)  Sidewalks shall be provided for each townhouse development to promote safe pedestrian movement throughout the entire development. 
(8)  All streets constructed in connection with any townhouse development shall comply with the requirements set forth in the subdivision design criteria for minor residential streets in the City of Dothan Code of Ordinances, chapter 90, subdivision regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-142. - Approval of development plans required. 
(a)  Development plans are required for any proposed townhouse development and shall be submitted in accordance with development plan regulations as established in article V of this chapter. Approval is required prior to submittal of construction plans for issuance of a building permit. 
(b)  The planning commission has the authority to grant deviations from certain standards in the subdivision regulations. The developer must illustrate justification for the planning commission to grant a subdivision deviation. Procedure for obtaining a subdivision deviation shall be as described in City of Dothan Code of Ordinances, section 90-197. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-143. - Townhouse subdivisions and condominiums. 
    Townhouse developments that are to be sold as fee-simple lots shall be considered residential subdivisions and shall be subject to, and comply with, the City of Dothan Code of Ordinances, chapter 90, subdivision regulations. Townhouse developments that are to be sold as condominiums shall be subject to condominium laws as established by the State of Alabama Code. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Secs. 114-144-114-154. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - SPECIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 114-155. - Purpose. 
    Three (3) special districts are created and shall be known as a planned unit development (PUD) district, downtown overlay district (DOD) and manufactured home community. A PUD may be established in any district provided the use(s) intended to be established are permitted in the underlying district; depending on location, rezoning may be required. The DOD is established as a fixed geographic area as defined in section 114-157. Modification to permitted uses are listed in that section. A manufactured home community may be established only in an MH-1 district. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-156. - Planned unit developments (PUD). 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this section is to provide flexibility to a unified development proposal which provides a public benefit by encouraging the best use of land resources, protecting valuable natural features, providing more open space, promoting economical public services, providing a mix of housing types and land uses and mobility options within a development that conventional zoning would not otherwise allow. This section is further intended to increase the desirability and convenience to the residents or occupants of the PUD without causing adverse effects on adjoining properties. 
    The purpose of a PUD is to encourage the unified development of tracts of land. This is achieved by permitting, within the confines of an overall density limitation, much more creative and flexible concepts in site planning than would otherwise be possible through the strict application of minimum and maximum requirements of zoning districts established in this chapter. For example, a development zoned PUD could, by design, decrease the minimum setbacks and lot area while providing a larger, more desirable area for open space. Where such flexibility is permitted as established in this chapter and the City of Dothan Code of Ordinances, chapter 90, subdivision regulations, PUD project design and construction shall follow a carefully devised plan of development which shall be prepared in accordance with the development procedures and approvals prescribed in this chapter. Where PUDs are permitted, regulations adapted to the unified development are intended to accomplish the purposes of zoning and subdivision regulations and other applicable regulations to the same degree as in cases in which those regulations are intended to control development on a lot-by-lot rather than unified basis. A PUD shall be treated as an overlay district, which, unless otherwise amended through the rezoning process, shall be subject to the minimum requirements of the base zoning district. 
(b)  Definitions. Refer to article II of this chapter for definitions. 
(c)  General requirements. The general requirements in this section shall apply to all PUDs. 
(1)  A homeowners association shall be created and incorporated for the purpose of providing for the maintenance of any common elements identified on the approved plan of the development. Covenants shall be created and recorded establishing the conditions and responsibilities of all parties. 
(2)  The planned unit development shall be in conformity with the long range development plan or portion thereof as may apply. 
(3)  The PUD shall be consistent in all respects with the purposes and intent of this chapter. 
(4)  Three acres in area in single ownership, with adequate frontage serving as the principal means of access to the property, shall be the minimum for development. 
(5)  The planned unit development will provide, through desirable arrangement and design, benefits which justify the deviations from subdivision development standards which would otherwise apply. 
(6)  All land proposed in the project for residential use, including outdoor use of space, off-street parking, interior drives and other circulation ways, community facilities such as schools, recreation centers, libraries, shopping, and public safety facilities, may be counted in computing the density requirements. 
(7)  All open space not assigned to public use or to private occupancy as set forth in this section shall be assigned to the common use of all residents of the development with such use ensured in perpetuity. Assignment and development of such open spaces shall provide for the common enjoyment of all residents. 
(8)  Minimum open space shall be ten percent of the development with permanent useable open space determined by the nature of the development and of the site. 
(9)  The open space between buildings shall be so designed as to provide adequate privacy, safety and aesthetic value. 
(10)  Every dwelling or ground floor dwelling unit shall be accessible to service and emergency vehicles. 
(11)  Private and public streets shall comply with the intent of the PUD and as approved by the planning commission. 
(12)  On-street parking shall be permitted only along easements or streets adequate in size internal to the project, and not along a peripheral street or major thoroughfare serving other uses. 
(13)  The outside perimeter building line setback is recommended to be 40 feet. 
(14)  The planning commission may modify these requirements for cause. 
(d)  Uses permitted. 
(1)  Principal uses. Permitted principal uses in a PUD include the following: 
a.  Dwelling units of a permanent nature for ownership or rental. 
b.  Public parks and specialized recreation centers (maybe counted toward the useable open space requirement). 
c.  Commercial, office, institutional, industrial. 
(2)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses permitted in a PUD include the following: 
a.  Home occupations. 
b.  Facilities for the use of residents of the development for recreation, children's nursery, kindergarten, laundry or similar services, or any similar facility. 
c.  Off-street parking or garages. 
d.  Commercial, office, industrial or other uses dependent on design and service area. 
(e)  PUD approval process. 
(1)  Generally. The developer of a PUD shall schedule an initial planning meeting with the planning staff to discuss the scope and intent of the concept. 
(2)  Fees required. Fees shall be as required for each individual application type (rezoning, preliminary plat, final plat, etc.) 
(3)  Rezoning. For properties not zoned with the PUD overlay or which require rezoning to implement the PUD plan, rezoning shall be required and shall follow the rezoning process as described in article IV of this chapter. Application procedures and public notice shall be given according to article IV of this chapter. Rezoning public hearings shall be held subsequent to final PUD plan public hearing and approval. 
(4)  Sketch plan. A sketch plan of the proposed project shall be submitted to the planning commission by the developer, showing existing conditions within the site and its vicinity and the proposed layout and development of the PUD. 
(5)  Preliminary plan. After receiving general approval of the planned unit development sketch plan and the review and recommendations from the administrative staff, the developer shall prepare and submit a preliminary plan for review, before submission of the final plan. 
a.  The plan shall be accompanied by a written statement attesting the following: 
1.  The proposed development, as shown on the plans and as set forth in the specifications, will be completed in substantial detail within such time period as may be agreed upon by the planning commission. 
2.  Provision shall be made for maintenance of common areas. 
3.  Public easements, rights-of-way and publicly dedicated land, as indicated in the final plan, may be accepted in concept by the planning commission, but final approval of the concept does not constitute acceptance by the board of commissioners of the dedication. 
4.  An explanation of why the project would be more beneficial as proposed than under by-right zoning standards. 
5.  A list of modifications required to implement the proposed project shall be provided including, but not limited to, setbacks, lot area, percentage of building coverage, parking regulations, buffer requirements, etc. 
b.  Maps and a written statement setting forth the conditions of the proposed development shall be included in the preliminary plan. The maps must show enough of the area surrounding the proposed development to demonstrate the relationship to the adjoining uses, both existing and those proposed by the developer. The maps shall be in a general schematic form and shall contain the following information, based on the scope, intent, size, and location of the proposed PUD. Maps are to include the following information: 
1.  Proof of ownership. 
2.  Boundary lines of the property, including dimensions. 
3.  Location and names of all public streets adjoining or traversing the site. 
4.  Name of the project. 
5.  Vicinity map showing the relationship to the surrounding area. 
6.  Topography at a minimum of five-foot intervals at an appropriate scale. 
7.  Principal physical characteristics such as streams, floodplains, wetlands, wooded areas, rock outcroppings. 
8.  Total acreage. 
9.  Overall gross density. 
10.  General location, approximate acreage and density/intensity of each use area, including single-family, multi-family, recreation, open space, educational, commercial and any other. 
11.  Proposed connection to existing water, drainage and sewer facilities. 
12.  Development staging (proposed). 
13.  Circulation plan (proposed). 
14.  Buffers and landscaping (proposed). 
15.  Easements, rights-of-way and land intended to be publicly dedicated. 
16.  Location of streets. 
17.  Names of all streets and alleys. 
18.  Ratio of off-street parking for each land use area as required. 
19.  The number of each lot as determined by the public works director. 
20.  Conceptual drainage, water, sewerage, street plans and specifications of proposed improvements prepared in sufficient detail to prove that the final plan will be in substantial compliance with the preliminary plan. Subdivision construction regulations do not necessarily apply. Design criteria shall be determined by necessity but in any event shall be approved by the public works director. Construction plans and specifications of proposed improvements not conforming to subdivision design standards or as otherwise approved by the public works director, shall not be accepted by the city for maintenance. 
c.  A public hearing before the planning commission shall be held for preliminary plans. 
d.  Eight copies of the required preliminary plan, accompanied by an application signed by the developer or their authorized representative, shall be submitted to the planning commission secretary not less than 21 calendar days prior to the public hearing date at which the applicant wishes to present the plan. 
e.  When a PUD includes the subdivision of land, a preliminary plat shall be required and shall be submitted in accordance with the City of Dothan Code of Ordinances, chapter 90, subdivision regulations. 
f.  When possible, required preliminary plan public hearings will be held concurrently with preliminary plat public hearings. Application procedures and public notice shall be given as for preliminary plat. 
(6)  Final plan. After receiving general approval of the preliminary plan and the review and recommendations of the administrative official and planning commission, the developer may prepare and submit a final plan for review. Such submittal shall consist of a complete set of construction plans for review and approval by the public works director. 
a.  A public hearing before the planning commission may be required. 
b.  If approval is required by the planning commission, eight copies of the required final plan shall be accompanied by an application signed by the developer or their authorized representative and submitted to the planning commission secretary on or before the first business day of the month preceding the public hearing date at which the applicant wishes to present the plan. 
c.  Provided the final plan is substantially in compliance with the preliminary plan and construction plans have been approved, the administrative official may waive the public hearing. If required, application procedures and public notice shall be given as for final plat. 
d.  If the developer wishes to develop the planned development project in stages, the final plan submitted for review and approval may cover only the first stage to be developed. Subsequent stages will be submitted in the same manner. 
e.  The final plan is the permanent public record of the planned unit development and will be the manner in which the development is constructed as provided in this article. 
f.  If a final plan covering at least a portion of the area in the preliminary plan has not been filed within one year, the approval shall expire. The approval may be extended for additional periods not in excess of six months each when, for good cause, such extension is necessary. 
g.  The final plan provides a specific and particular plan by which development and construction will take place. 
h.  When a PUD includes the subdivision of land, a final plat shall be required and shall be submitted in accordance with the City of Dothan Code of Ordinances, chapter 90, subdivision regulations. 
(7)  Modifications to approved PUD. 
a.  Minor. Minor modifications of the approved plan during construction may be permitted upon consultation with the administrative official who, in turn shall consult with other city departments as appropriate. Minor modifications shall not include the following: the removal of primary roads, reduction of open space, alteration of pedestrian facilities, or the reallocation of land uses. 
b.  Major. If a substantial amendment to the preliminary or final plan is submitted after approval of the preliminary plan or final plan, the requirements will be the same as if submitting the entire PUD for approval and shall comply with the City of Dothan Code of Ordinances, 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-157. - Downtown overlay district (DOD). 
    The DOD, described on the following pages, focuses on the preservation and rehabilitation of historic buildings and/or structures and their elements, where feasible, and enables new development in a creative manner where appropriate. The goal for alterations to noncontributing buildings and new construction in the DOD is to ensure compatibility with existing and new development. Underlying details are specifically addressed in the DOD design manual developed as a companion document to this chapter. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the DOD is to foster a strong viable downtown as a commercial, civic, residential and cultural art center with its own unique identity and to provide a mechanism to establish special land use regulations, standards or procedures in a defined area with unique land use, site planning, building design or environmental resource issues. Specifically: 
(1)  Implement the city's downtown master plan to achieve specific land use and design objectives. 
(2)  Accommodate mixed-use buildings and parcels with neighborhood-serving retail, service and other uses on the ground floor and residential units above the non-residential space. 
(3)  Encourage rehabilitation and re-use of existing historic buildings. 
(4)  Promote new infill residential and non-residential development in a planned format. 
(5)  Encourage development that exhibits the physical design characteristics that promotes pedestrian oriented storefront-style shopping, and 
(6)  Promotes the health and well-being of residents by encouraging physical activity, alternative transportation modes and greater social interaction. 
(b)  Applicability of zoning overlay. The DOD is established to serve as an overlay to the established base zoning district. Base districts within the DOD include B-1, B-2, L-I and H-I. Except as modified by the DOD regulations, the provisions of the base district shall apply to all development within the boundary of the DOD. In the event the regulations conflict, the applicable DOD regulations shall prevail. 
(c)  Applicability of DOD design guidelines. Design guidelines for the DOD are hereby adopted by reference. Commercial and residential design guidelines adopted by the historic preservation commission apply within the downtown historic district. To the extent that the DOD design guidelines conflict with the commercial or residential design guidelines adopted by the historic preservation commission, the guidelines adopted for the historic district shall prevail. 
(d)  Establishment of DOD boundaries. A Downtown Overlay District (DOD) is established as follows: 
Beginning at the intersection of the south right-of-way of West Crawford Street and the west right-of-way of South Oates Street; thence easterly along West Crawford Street and East Crawford Street to the West right-of-way of South Saint Andrews Street; thence South along the West right-of-way South Saint Andrews Street a distance of 275 feet more or less; thence northeasterly to the intersection of the East right-of-way of South Saint Andrews Street and the South right-of-way of East Crawford street; thence along the South right-of-way of East Crawford Street to the projected East right-of-way of Holman Street; thence northerly along Holman Street to a projected intersection with the northerly right-of-way of the Norfolk South Railway; thence northeasterly along said Railway right-of-way a distance of approximately 1150 ft. to a projected intersection of the east right-of-way of Brundidge Street; thence north along said projected right-of-way to the right-of-way of Brundidge Street to the north right-of-way of East Adams Street; thence west along East Adams to the east right-of-way of North College Street; thence north along North College Street to a projected intersection with the south side of the right-of-way of the CSX Railroad; thence westerly along the south right-of-way of the CSX Railroad to the east right-of-way of North Foster Street, thence south along North Foster Street to the north right-of-way of West Powell Street; thence west along the north right-of-way of West Powell Street to west right-of-way of North Oates Street; thence southerly along North Oates Street and South Oates Street to West Crawford Street and the point beginning. The district shall include property having frontage on the streets forming the boundary but shall not include property on the north side of the CSX Railroad and shall not include property on the north side of West Powell Street west of North Foster Street. 
(e)  Subdistricts. The DOD is further divided into three distinct subdistricts. Each subdistrict is specifically described below and is intended to foster certain land uses as prescribed in the following land use chart. 
(1)  The entertainment (E) district. 
(2)  The historic core/government (HC/G) district. 
(3)  The contemporary/redevelopment (C/R) district. 
(f)  Establishment of subdistrict boundaries. The DOD is further divided into three sub-districts; The Entertainment District, the Historic Core/Government District and the Contemporary/Redevelopment District. 
Entertainment District: The Entertainment District is established as follows: Beginning at the intersection of West Crawford Street and South Oates Street; then easterly along West Crawford Street and East Crawford Street to South Saint Andrews Street; thence South along South Saint Andrews Street a distance of 275 feet more or less; thence north to East Crawford street; thence east to Holman Street; then northerly along Holman Street to East Main Street; then west along Main Street to South Oates; then south along South Oates to West Crawford Street and the point of beginning. The district shall include property having frontage on the streets forming the boundary of the sub-district except those on East Main Street. Only properties on the south side of East and West Main Street are included in the sub-district. Only properties on the west side of South Saint Andrews Street south of Crawford Street shall be included in the Entertainment District. 
Historic Core and Government District: The Historic Core and Government District is established as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of East Main Street and North Oates Street; then east along East Main Street to Holman Street and to the projection of the Norfolk South Railway right-of-way; then northeasterly for a distance of approximately 1,150 feet following a projection of said right-of-way to the projection of Brundidge Street; then north along Brundidge Street to East Adams Street; then west along East and West Adams Street to North Oates Street; then south on North Oates Street to East Main Street and the point of beginning. The district shall include property having frontage on the streets forming the boundary of the sub-district except those on East Adams Street. Only properties on the south side of East and West Adams Street are included in the sub-district. No properties on the south side of the Norfolk Southern Railway are included. 
Contemporary and Redevelopment District: Beginning at the intersection of East Adams and North College Street; then north along North College Street to East Powell Street; then north along the projection of North College Street to the south side of the right-of-way of the CSX Railroad; then westerly along the south side of the right-of-way of the CSX Railroad to the east right-of-way of North Foster Street, thence south along North Foster Street to the north right-of-way of West Powell Street; thence west along the north right-of-way of West Powell Street to west right-of-way of North Oates Street; then southerly along North Oates Street to West Adams Street; then east along East and West Adams to the point of beginning. The district shall include property having frontage on the streets forming the boundary except only those properties on the north side of East and West Adams Street are included in the sub-district. No properties on the north side of the CSX Railroad are included and shall not include property on the north side of West Powell Street west of North Foster Street. 
(g)  Map of DOD with subdistricts. 

(h)  Land use principles. In order to accomplish the general purpose of promoting residential and mixed use development in downtown and to implement the downtown master plan, special consideration is given to establishing new land uses in addition to the established uses in the area. 
(1)  A diverse mix of land uses shall always be permitted in the downtown area; 
(2)  Downtown shall be promoted as a viable and vital residential area and residential uses are an acceptable land use anywhere in the downtown area; 
(3)  The market place, not regulations, should be the primary force driving the mix of land uses; 
(4)  Appropriate overlay zone standards and design review criteria shall be the principal tools to ensure compatible, high quality development; 
(5)  Quality public spaces such as streets, sidewalks, parks, and squares where citizens come to know each other and watch over their collective security shall be provided; 
(6)  Overlay zone standards may vary within downtown districts in order to achieve long-term planning objectives; 
(7)  Development regulations shall promote the continued use and/or redevelopment of historical and older buildings and/or structures; 
(8)  Except as provided for in section 114-182, off-street parking space requirements shall be eliminated or reduced. 
(9)  Parking garages shall incorporate active uses on the ground floor in order to engage pedestrians and surface parking lots shall be discouraged unless landscaping and architectural treatments are incorporated to soften their appearance; and 
(10)  Parking minimums and maximums shall be established to promote the use of peripheral parking. 
(i)  Land uses. The following table modifies the land uses that are permitted, permitted as a special exception or not permitted in each district. Uses otherwise permitted by-right or by special exception in the base district may also be established. To the extent that the DOD land uses conflict with the land uses allowed in the base zoning district, the land uses in the following table shall apply. 
(1)  Nonconforming uses. Any land use existing at the time of enactment of this chapter, from which this chapter is derived or of subsequent amendment to, but not in conformity with its provisions, may be continued in perpetuity unless: 
a.  The use or structure is discontinued for a period exceeding three months after which it may not be re-established without rezoning approval. 
b.  The use is extended, expanded or altered except in conformity to this chapter. 
c.  Legal nonconforming uses may be changed to another nonconforming use of a similar classification and character provided no alterations to the site or structure are required. Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a less nonconforming use or to a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a less conforming use or nonconforming use, respectively. 
DOD - Table of Permitted Uses Overlay Districts P = Permitted Use; S = Special Exception; X = Not Permitted E HC/G C/R Animal clinic, animal hospital, kennel or pet store S S S Bank (with or without drive-through teller window) P P P Dwellings, multi-family (including apartments, lofts, or condominiums for any number of families as regulated by the R-A district) S P P Dwellings, single-family S P P Dwellings, developed as Urban Traditional Neighborhood Development (UTND) X S P Grocery store, curb market P P P Hospital/clinic X X P Hotel X P P Indoor assembly with alcohol sales (including but not limited to lounge, bar, tavern, night club, etc.) P S S Indoor assembly and place of amusement (including but not limited to church, indoor/outdoor private recreation facility, etc. where no alcohol is served) P P P Indoor automobile repair shop S X S Laundry and/or dry cleaning facility S S S Manufacturing incidental to retail business where articles are sold at retail on premise S S S Manufacturing or industrial use (with no retail sales) X X S Mixed-use development (Urban Planned Unit Development - UPUD) X S P Motel X X X Office (professional, medical and business) P P P Outdoor advertising building and/or structure X X X Public use (including but not limited to post office, substation, office, public recreation, etc.) P P P Restaurant, traditional (includes cafeteria, delicatessen, ice cream shop, outdoor dining, establishments with alcohol sales, etc. - 51% minimum food sales required) P P P Restaurant, fast-food (with drive-through) P S S Restaurant, mobile (mobile food vendor) P P P Retail sales with gasoline/diesel facility (convenience store) P P P Retail sales with interior display of goods P P P Retail sales or wholesale business or service not specifically listed (including retail with exterior display of goods) S S S Self-storage warehouse (mini-storage) X X P Service use (such as barber/beauty shop, shoe repair shop, laundromat, dry cleaning pick-up and similar personal services) P P P Specialty Manufacturing, limited S S S Temporary use (seasonal use) P P P Warehouse and distribution facility X X S Wholesale business S S S  
(j)  Commercial development. 
(1)  Generally. The following regulations apply to only new development in the DOD and are not intended to apply to existing buildings and/or structures. 
(2)  Commercial establishment size limits. The gross floor area of new commercial establishments shall not exceed 15,000 square feet in the E or HC/G districts. 
(3)  Indoor/outdoor operations. All permitted uses must be conducted within completely enclosed buildings unless otherwise expressly authorized. This requirement does not apply to off-street parking or loading areas, automated teller machines or outdoor seating areas. 
(4)  Floor-to-floor heights and floor area of ground-floor spaces. 
a.  All commercial floor space provided on the ground floor of a mixed-use building must have a minimum floor-to-ceiling height of ten feet. 
b.  All commercial floor space provided on the ground floor of a mixed-use building must contain the following minimum floor area: 
1.  At least 800 square feet, or 25 percent of the lot area (whichever is greater) on lots with street frontage of less than 50 feet. 
2.  At least 20 percent of the lot area on lots with 50 feet or more of street frontage. 
c.  Lot area per unit (density). The minimum lot area per unit shall be 1,000 square feet for mixed-use buildings and 1,500 square feet for all other buildings. 
(5)  Setbacks. 
a.  The entire building façade must be located within ten feet of the front and/or street side yard lot lines. 
b.  The minimum rear yard setback is 20 percent of the lot depth. 
c.  No interior side yard setbacks are required except where overlay zoned property abuts residentially zoned property, in which the minimum side yard setback shall be the same as required for the abutting residentially zoned property. 
(6)  Building height. 
a.  Building heights in the E or HC/G Districts shall not exceed 75 feet or five stories. 
b.  Building heights in the C/R shall not exceed 145 feet or ten stories. 
(7)  Transparency. A minimum of 75 percent of the street-facing building façade between three feet and eight feet in height must be comprised of clear windows that allow views of indoor space or product display areas unless such transparency is not in keeping with the form and function of the building whether new construction or a remodel. 
(8)  Doors and entrances. Buildings must have a primary entrance facing the public sidewalk. Entrance at building corners may be used to satisfy this requirement. 
(9)  Vehicle and driveway access. No curb cuts are allowed for lots that have public access via an alley. 
(10)  Signage. 
a.  Design. The overall design of all signage including the mounting framework shall relate to the design of the principal building on the property. Buildings with a recognizable style such as Greek Revival, Italianate, Victorian, Queen Anne, Neo-classic, Craftsman, et al., should use signage of the same style. For buildings without a recognizable style, the sign shall adopt the decorative features of the building, utilizing the same materials and colors. 
b.  Purpose. Signs shall be for the purpose of identifying businesses. No permanent signs displaying advertising or promotions are permitted (exempting historic wall paintings), other than those relating to the primary use of a property. Lettering describing a business's general goods or services may be permitted if it conforms to other guidelines as to size and quality. 
c.  Permit required. A permit for the placement, erection or installation of any sign in this district shall be required before placement, erection or installation. 
d.  Prohibited signs. 
1.  Off premise signs are prohibited. 
2.  Portable signs of any kind are prohibited. 
3.  Roof top signs are prohibited unless historic in nature. 
e.  Mounting and placement. 
1.  Signs shall be mounted or erected so they do not obscure the architectural features or openings of the building. 
2.  Signs shall not be located in the right-of-way unless projecting from building in conformance with this chapter. 
3.  Sandwich board signs shall be allowed in the E and HC/G districts but shall not be an impediment to pedestrian traffic. 
4.  Freestanding signs are permitted in the C/R district and shall not be taller than eight feet or located closer than ten feet to the public right-of-way. 
5.  Under canopy mounted signs shall be permitted subject to the standards contained in section 114-219(f). 
6.  No sign or portion of a sign shall extend above the cornice line at the top of the building face. 
7.  Ground-floor businesses in multi-story buildings cannot mount signs higher than 14 feet above grade. 
f.  Size and area. 
1.  Size of the sign shall be determined by measuring the area within each face of a geometric shape enclosing all elements of informational or representational matter including blank masking. Structural supports not bearing information shall not be included in the computation of display area. For double faced signs, provided only one side can be seen from the public right-of-way at any location, only one side shall be counted toward the maximum allowable square footage. 
2.  The total maximum allowable sign area for all wall-mounted signs is two square feet per linear front foot of the principal building on a public right-of-way including multi-tenant buildings. Permitted area may be divided up between a maximum of three signs. No single sign shall exceed 125 square feet. Signs affixed to awnings shall be considered a wall-mounted sign. 
3.  The total allowable square footage of display area, per side of a monument sign is 36 square feet. 
4.  The total allowable square footage of display area, per side for a pole mounted sign is 24 square feet. 
5.  Signs projecting from the building face shall not exceed 15 square feet or project farther than eight feet or one-half the distance to the street curb, whichever is less, and shall not be lower than ten feet above grade. 
6.  Changeable copy message boards shall not exceed 25 square feet and shall be counted toward the maximum square footage allowed for on-site signs. 
g.  Materials. The structural materials of the sign shall match the historic materials of the building. Wood, metal, stucco, stone or brick is allowed. Plastic, vinyl or similar materials are prohibited. Resin simulating the appearance of wood, and fabric may be used as appropriate. 
h.  Lighting. 
1.  Internally lighted signs are prohibited. 
2.  Signs incorporating lighting (back illuminated, neon, etc.) shall be reviewed for appropriateness regardless of the above-mentioned size limitations. 
3.  Lighted signs shall use focused, low intensity illumination. Such lighting shall not shine into or create glare at pedestrian or vehicular traffic, nor shall it shine into adjacent areas. Light fixtures mounted on the ground shall be screened by landscaping. 
4.  Flashing, blinking, revolving or rotating lights are not permitted. 
5.  Exposed neon may be used but only if appropriate to the context as decided by the appropriate authority. 
i.  Window signs. Signs painted directly on window glass or hung in windows are permitted. They shall be counted toward the maximum size requirement and shall not exceed 25 percent of the window area. 
Multi-tenant buildings. 
1.  Owner shall submit an overall sign plan addressing placement, materials, and design. Signage for the building and for the tenants shall be consistent. 
2.  Square footage allocation between various tenant spaces shall be the responsibility of the owner and identified on the sign plan. 
3.  Multiple individual freestanding signs are prohibited. 
4.  Building identification signs or signs describing the historical context of the building not exceeding six square feet are permitted. 
j.  Special purpose signs. Special purpose signs are not reviewed except as noted. 
1.  On site construction signs or signs giving information about the construction or renovation of a building on the same site must be removed at the completion of the project. 
2.  Directional signs, real estate signs or incidental signs such as "entrance" or "exit" or that give non-commercial information but do not contain advertisements are exempt from this section. 
k.  Building codes. All signs must comply with building code requirements. 
l.  Non-conforming signs. A nonconforming sign is any sign permanently affixed to the ground or a building within the DOD on the effective date of this article which is prohibited by, or does not conform to the requirements of these regulations. Temporary or portable signs shall not be afforded nonconforming status. Qualifying nonconforming signs may continue provided: 
1.  The sign provided it is properly maintained, 
2.  It is not structurally altered except as required to meet building code requirements, 
3.  It is not expanded except for a change of copy, whether copy presentation is by traditional or electronic means, and 
4.  Any damage does not exceed 50 percent of the estimated replacement cost. 
(11)  Parking requirements. 
a.  Residential uses do not require off-street parking. 
b.  No off-street parking is required for existing non-residential uses or new non-residential uses containing less than 5,000 square feet of useable space (including outdoor seating areas). 
c.  Off-street parking for new non-residential construction exceeding 5,000 square feet shall be provided at one space per 200 square feet. 
d.  Off street parking for new non-residential uses requiring less than 100 parking spaces may be reduced 50 percent. 
e.  Off-street parking for existing non-residential uses exceeding 5,000 square feet and requiring 100 or more spaces shall provide all required spaces. 
f.  Any required off-street parking spaces must be located to the rear of the principal building or otherwise be screened from view of the public right-of-way or adjacent residential developments. 
g.  Off-site parking. Required parking may be located off-site but must be within 660 feet of the property. 
h.  Building additions. No additional parking shall be required for structural alterations, repairs or additions providing 1,000 square feet or less of publicly accessible floor space is involved. 
i.  Change of use. A change in the use of an existing building shall not require the provision of additional parking unless: 
1.  The new use requires 100 spaces or more or 
2.  The new use requires 25 percent more parking spaces than the most recent use of the building. 
(12)  Streetscape design and landscaping. Whenever any building or building and/or structure is erected in the downtown overlay district or whenever a building and/or structure undergoes major renovation impacting the existing streetscape, any elements damaged or removed shall be replaced as follows: 
a.  Trees. 
1.  Elm trees shall be planted in the streetscape unless otherwise specified by the City of Dothan horticulturist. 
2.  Trees shall be a minimum of 16 feet in height or shall have a minimum of four-inch caliper with seven feet of clear trunk. Liriope ground cover shall be used as the tree planter cover. 
3.  Irrigation systems shall be installed underground to service all trees and other landscape material. The irrigation system shall be maintained in operable conditions at all times. The size and type of irrigation system shall be specified by the City of Dothan horticulturist. 
4.  Installed trees shall be inspected six months after planting to ensure viability. Trees found to be in declining condition shall be replaced within 30 days of notice thereof. Subsequent reinspection after replacement shall occur six months from the date of replacement. 
b.  Streetlights. The type, number and spacing of streetlights shall comply with the standards and requirements adopted by the City of Dothan Utilities for the downtown core. 
c.  Paving. Paving shall be installed in the streetscape that is consistent with the pattern, color and texture of existing materials in the streetscape. 
d.  Pedestrian traffic. During construction or renovation, pedestrian traffic must be maintained through covered protected walkways. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15; Ord. No. 2017-348, § 1, 11-7-17; Ord. No. 2018-235, §§ 1, 2, 9-4-18; Ord. No. 2019-17, § 1, 2-5-19) 
Sec. 114-158. - Manufactured home communities. 
(a)  Community plan. 
(1)  Development plan approval required (refer to article V for requirements). In addition to the requirements in article V, the following information shall be included on the plan. 
a.  The site plan of the community showing streets, street widths, corner radii, driveways, open areas, parking spaces, service buildings, location of water courses, flood hazard areas, easements, the number, location and size of all mobile home lots. 
b.  The location of service buildings and other improvements constructed or to be constructed within the mobile home park. 
c.  The location of recreational vehicles and other transient spaces to provide for temporary travel trailers, RV's etc. 
d.  Any engineering design information including topographic survey as required by engineering services staff necessary to review the construction plans. Construction plans shall be certified by a professional engineer. 
e.  Recreation areas shall be provided in all parks designed to accommodate at least 40 units and be located as to allow ease of access to all park residents. Recreation areas may be incorporated into unit sites or established as a separate space. 
f.  Sidewalks shall be provided in accordance with section 90-141 in the City of Dothan Subdivision Regulations. 
(2)  Before construction permits are issued for the proposed improvements, the community plan shall be reviewed by the planning commission. 
(b)  Setbacks, lot area and auxiliary buildings. 
(1)  Total minimum area shall be three acres (see Table 114-132). 
(2)  Perimeter setbacks shall be 50 feet (see Table 114-132). 
(3)  Along community streets, there shall be a minimum distance of 15 feet between the manufactured home and any abutting community street. 
(4)  Minimum lot/site size. Manufactured home lots/sites shall have a minimum lot width of 50 feet and containing at least 5,000 square feet minimum area. 
(5)  Units shall be separated from each other and from other buildings or structures by at least 20 feet. Small on-site storage buildings are permitted within ten feet. 
(c)  Permits, application and plans; manufactured home community construction. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, maintain or operate any manufactured home community within the city unless he holds a valid business license issued by the city. All units shall display the state issued tax sticker. All required permits shall be acquired from the building permits office prior to installing any manufactured home. Manufactured home communities are permitted only in zones or districts as provided in sections 114-131.1 through 114-131.6. 
(2)  No person shall construct or alter a manufactured home community in the city unless the plans and specifications for such park have been submitted and approved by the planning commission in accordance with article V of this chapter. 
(d)  Environmental, open space and access requirements. 
(1)  Site location . The location of manufactured home community shall comply with chapter 42, floods and chapter 83, stormwater. 
(2)  Site drainage requirements . Stormwater runoff shall not be shed onto any adjacent land, either as surface runoff or via an outfall structure, unless contained in an existing drainage easement, ditch, structure or right-of-way or as otherwise approved by the public works director. 
(3)  Soil and ground cover requirements . Park grounds except paved areas shall be maintained with vegetation or other natural cover that is capable of preventing soil erosion and the emanation of dust during dry weather. 
(4)  Manufactured home stands, skirting and tie downs. 
a.  Each mobile home shall be placed on a foundation, except transient homes. The foundation may consist of piers at least eight inches thick and spaced no more than 120 inches on center under framework. The piers may be of concrete or concrete block, as provided by the manufacturer or installation standards of the Alabama Manufactured Housing Commission. 
b.  All manufactured homes shall be required to install skirting in accordance with the manufacturers installation instructions. Acceptable materials may include masonry, metal, vinyl or other materials manufactured for that purpose. 
c.  All manufactured homes shall be required to install tie-downs or other devices acceptable to the building official to secure the manufactured home to the ground. Installation shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions or installation standards of the Alabama Manufactured Housing Commission. 
(5)  Driveway construction and design standards . Street construction and design standards for mobile home parks are as follows: 
a.  All parks shall provide safe, continuous and convenient vehicular access from abutting public streets or roads to each mobile home space. 
b.  All driveways shall be paved with plant mixed asphalt or similar materials. Driveways shall be maintained free of holes and other hazards by the owner. 
c.  Grades of all driveways shall be sufficient to ensure adequate surface drainage. 
d.  All manufactured home spaces shall abut an interior driveway. All interior driveways shall be no less than 22 feet in width. Community driveways shall have unobstructed access to a public street or highway and be adequately maintained by the owner of the manufactured home community. 
e.  In manufactured home communities where parking is permitted on interior drives, the width of such drives shall be sufficient to allow for parking cars. 
f.  Minimum pavement radius in a cul-de-sac shall be forty feet, unless otherwise required by the fire marshal. "T" or "L" type turnarounds may be permitted. 
g.  Streets shall be designed with a horizontal and vertical alignment which meets a 20 mph design speed. 
h.  Streets shall have traffic control and street name signs as approved by the public works department and E911. 
(6)  Required parking . Parking shall be provided in all communities for the use of park occupants and guests. Parking bays shall contain a minimum of 400 square feet. and be located as to provide direct access to the manufactured home space. No direct driveway access shall be permitted to any exterior public street. 
(7)  Pedestrian access . All communities shall provide safe, convenient, all-season pedestrian access between individual mobile homes and community facilities provided for park residents. 
(8)  Required illumination of park street systems . All communities shall be furnished with electrical systems and lighting units so spaced and equipped as to provide for the safe movement of pedestrians and vehicles at night. 
(9)  Existing parks . Licensed communities with spaces in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may not be expanded or renovated unless such expansion or renovation meets the standards imposed by this chapter. Waiver of these provisions may be granted by the planning commission based on demonstrated need. 
(e)  Service buildings and other community service facilities. 
(1)  The space separation requirements of this article shall apply to accessory structures and community service facilities which are required for management and servicing for community residents. Such accessory structures may include, but are not limited to, service buildings or other community structures containing one or more of the following uses: 
a.  Park management offices, repair shops and storage. 
b.  Community sanitary facilities. 
c.  Community laundry facilities. 
d.  Indoor community recreation areas. 
e.  Commercial uses supplying essential goods or services primarily for the use of park residents. 
(2)  All mobile structures used as accessory service or community facilities must meet the standards set by this code. 
(f)  Water supply requirements. Every community shall be connected to a municipal water supply and provide the infrastructure necessary to maintain a sufficient supply of potable water, under adequate pressure, to required fire hydrants, individual manufactured homes, service buildings and other accessory community facilities. The water system shall be maintained by the community owner. 
(g)  Sewage disposal requirements. Every park shall have a sewer disposal system adequate for conveying and disposing of sewage from mobile homes, service buildings and other accessory facilities. Such system shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with state and local laws and shall conform to the regulations of the health authorities having jurisdiction. If available, the system will be connected to the city sewer system. Provisions shall be made for sealing the sewage connection inlet when a mobile home does not occupy the lot. 
(h)  Garbage, trash and refuse disposal. 
(1)  All garbage, trash and refuse shall be collected by a public or private operator and disposed of in an approved landfill. 
(2)  The storage, collection and disposal of refuse shall be provided and managed to prevent health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accidents, fire hazards or air pollution. 
(3)  All refuse shall be stored in fly-tight, watertight, rodent-proof containers at designated locations for each manufactured home space. Containers shall be provided by mobile home owners in sufficient number and capacity to properly store all refuse. 
(4)  Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of debris that would create habitat for vermin such as insects and rodents. The growth of brush, weeds and grass shall be controlled to prevent noxious weeds or heavy undergrowth not otherwise part of a buffer. 
(i)  Electrical and fuel gas distribution system requirements. Lots and sites in communities shall have all electrical, natural and liquefied petroleum gas or fuel oil supply appurtenances designed, constructed and maintained in compliance with the City of Dothan Building Codes. 
(j)  Building, plumbing and electrical alterations and additions. All building, plumbing and electrical alterations, repairs or additions shall require a permit and be made in accordance with applicable local regulations. 
(k)  Registration of occupants. Every mobile home park owner or operator shall maintain a register containing a record of all mobile homes and occupants using the mobile home park as provided by state law. 
(l)  Compliance with regulations; supervision of park. The person to whom a permit for a mobile home park is issued shall at all times operate the park in compliance with this article and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. 
(m)  Inspection. The health officer and/or building official are hereby authorized and directed to make inspections to determine the condition of any unit or structure located within the community in order that the health and safety of occupants and of the general public may be safeguarded. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-159. - Individual manufactured homes parked on a private lot. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any manufactured home to be parked in any residential zone other than a mobile home park complying with the provisions of this section without a special exception granted by the board of zoning adjustment. 
(b)  The temporary parking of mobile homes may be allowed by the building official for office use in any district during the period of construction activity. 
(c)  After a special exception has been granted by the board of zoning adjustment, the building official will issue a permit in accordance with the special exception. 
(d)  Any mobile home parked for any purpose on a single lot prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be legally nonconforming until such time as the mobile home is moved. Thereafter, it must be in compliance with this chapter. 
(e)  The undercarriage of any unit parked outside a manufactured home community or subdivision, other than mobile homes parked for display on a mobile home sales lot, shall be screened with a material manufactured for that purpose, unless the mobile home has been placed on a permanent foundation which conceals the undercarriage. 
(f)  In a manufactured home sales lot, temporary screening shall be provided for the undercarriage of any mobile home parked for display along any public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Secs. 114-160-114-169. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 114-170. - Purpose. 
    The regulations contained in this article supplement or modify the district regulations appearing elsewhere in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-171. - Nonconforming uses. 
    Any land use existing at the time of enactment of the ordinance, from which this chapter is derived or of subsequent amendment to, but not in conformity with its provisions, may be continued in perpetuity unless: 
(1)  The use or structure is discontinued for a continuous period exceeding six months or for an aggregate of 18 months during any 36-month period after which it may not be re-established without rezoning approval. Discontinuance of use shall be evidenced by disconnection of utilities or forfeiture of a business license. 
(2)  The use is extended, expanded or altered except in conformity to this chapter. 
(c)  Legal nonconforming uses may be changed to another nonconforming use of a similar classification and character provided no alterations to the site or structure are required. Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a lesser nonconforming use or to a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a less conforming use or nonconforming use, respectively. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-172. - Nonconforming buildings and/or structures. 
(a)  Generally. Any building and/or structure existing at the time of enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or of subsequent amendment to this chapter, but not in conformity with its provisions, will be considered a nonconforming building and/or structure. The use of a nonconforming building and/or structure may continue in perpetuity subject to the provisions of section 114-171. 
(b)  Additions or alterations. Additions or alterations to any nonconforming building and/or structure, whether residential or non-residential, must be made in conformity to this chapter. 
(c)  Residential buildings and/or structures. Nonconforming residential buildings and/or structures may be rebuilt after fire or damage in residential districts within the limits of the existing foundation, provided the yard space and other requirements conform as closely as possible, in the opinion of the building official, to the requirements of the district in which it is located. No building need be set back more than the average of the setbacks of the existing buildings within 100 feet of each side thereof. Neither side yard shall be reduced to less than five feet in width. 
(d)  Non-residential buildings and/or structures. Nonconforming non-residential buildings and/or structures shall not be rebuilt after fire or other damage if said damage exceeds the full value above the foundation for tax purposes except in conformity to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-173. - Nonconforming lots of record. 
    Any lot existing at the time of enactment of this chapter, September 1, 1966, but not in conformity with its provisions, will be considered a nonconforming lot of record. Where the owner of a lot of record does not own sufficient adjacent land to enable construction of a building and/or structure which conforms to the dimensional regulations of this chapter, one primary building and/or accessory buildings and/or structures may be built. The owner is required to meet said dimensional regulations unless a variance, as outlined in article VI, is granted by the board of zoning adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-174. - Building lots, yards and open spaces. 
(a)  In each zoning district, each building and/or structure erected extended or altered shall comply with the dimensional regulations set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  Open spaces that are required in conjunction with any city approval shall be kept as such in perpetuity. Furthermore, these areas shall not be counted as required open space for any other building and/or structure. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-175. - Reduction in lot area prohibited. 
    No lot area shall be reduced in area so that yards and other spaces total less than the minimum area required under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-176. - Corner visibility in residential and local business districts. 
(a)  Fences, walls, shrubbery, signs, marquees, or other obstruction to vision shall comply with the sight distance standards referenced in City Code chapter 98, section 10. 
(b)  Accessory structures on a corner lot shall be set back the minimum front yard depth required on each street. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-177. - Swimming or wading pools. 
    Swimming pools or wading pools not located within a permanently and completely walled structure shall be constructed so that the water line is no closer than ten feet of any property line and shall be completely enclosed by a fence in accordance with the adopted swimming pool code, and gates shall be locked at all times when the pool is not in use. Fences and gates shall be so constructed and of such materials so as to prevent the entry of children and usual household pets into the pool area. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-178. - Storm shelters. 
    Storm shelters are permitted as principal or accessory uses and structures in any district, subject to the yard and lot coverage regulations of the district. Such shelters may contain or be contained in other structures or may be constructed separately and in addition to shelter use may be used for any principal or accessory use permitted in the district, subject to the district regulations on such use, but shall not be used for principal or accessory uses prohibited expressly or by implication in the district. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-179. - Future street lines. 
    At the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or at the time this chapter is changed by amendment, on any lot which may be reduced in area by widening a public street to a future street line as indicated on the duly adopted major street plan, as amended, the minimum required yards, the minimum required lot area, the minimum required lot width and the maximum building area shall be measured by considering the future street right-of-way lines as the lot line of such lot. Along streets where the future street right-of-way line has been widened as indicated on the duly adopted major street plan, as amended, all buildings or structures to be constructed shall be set back to the future right-of-way line as indicated on the major street plan. In districts where no setback from the street right-of-way line is required, the existing street right-of-way line may be considered the building line, except where the major street plan provides for a wider future street right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-180. - Height. 
(a)  In each zoning district, each structure erected or altered shall not exceed the heights specified in the district requirements in article VIII of this chapter, except upon approval of the board of zoning adjustment. 
(b)  Height limitations shall not apply to church steeples, hospitals, sanitariums, barns, silos, farm structures, chimneys, flagpoles, public utility poles, radio and television towers and aerials, cooling towers, water tanks, and industrial structures when required by the manufacturing process utilized, but not to exceed 25 percent of the area of the lot. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-181. - Area modifications for lots of record. 
    Where a lot of record at the time of the effective date of this chapter had less area or less width than herein required for the district in which it is located, said lot may nonetheless be used as a building site provided the yard space and other requirements conform as closely as possible in the opinion of the planning commission to the requirements for the district in which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-182. - Off-street automobile parking and loading requirements. 
(a)  Purposes. The requirements of this section are intended to provide off-street parking, queuing and loading facilities in proportion to the need created by each land use in a functionally and aesthetically satisfactory manner that minimizes external effects on adjacent land uses. In each zoning district, each structure erected or altered after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived or any amendment thereof shall be provided with off-street automobile parking as outlined in this section. No off-street automobile parking space required for a building or structure shall, during its life, be occupied or counted as off-street automobile space for another building or structure or used for any purpose other than for automobile parking. The purposes for the regulation of off-street parking and loading are as follows. 
(1)  Ensure that each development accommodates the safe and convenient movement of vehicles, bicycles, pedestrians, and transit throughout the proposed development to and from surrounding areas; 
(2)  Create a healthful built environment in which individuals have opportunities to incorporate physical activity, such as walking, into their daily routine; 
(3)  Create a safe, attractive, pedestrian-friendly environment where the risk of pedestrian injuries or fatalities is minimized through the application of appropriate development standards; where residents have increased opportunities to interact with neighbors; and where the elderly have safe convenient pedestrian routes; 
(4)  Create a circulation system that contributes to the attractiveness of the development and the community as a whole; 
(5)  Establish standards for the review of development plans; and 
(6)  These requirements shall in no way negate the requirements set forth in the downtown overlay district, section 114-157. 
(b)  Applicability. The requirements of this section shall apply to all parking and loading areas in all districts. No certificate of occupancy shall be provided unless and until the appropriate motor vehicle parking and loading facilities are provided. 
(c)  Responsibility for provision of facilities. The provision for and maintenance of off-street parking and loading facilities herein required shall be the joint responsibility of the operator and owner of the land, building, structure or use on which is located the use for which off-street parking facilities are required. 
(d)  Size, location and design. 
(1)  Each off-street parking space shall be not less than nine feet by 18 feet, exclusive of access or maneuvering area, ramps and other appurtenances. 
(2)  With the exception of vehicles loading and unloading, being used for temporary work that has been contracted by a resident, or are "on-call" pick-up trucks or vans, commercial vehicles exceeding 6,000 pounds shall not be parked or stored in any residentially zoned area. 
(3)  Parking lot design shall follow approved engineering standards promulgated by the Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE) or a similar professional organization. 
(e)  Construction and maintenance. 
(1)  Off-street parking facilities shall be constructed, maintained and operated in accordance with the following specifications: 
a.  All commercial parking areas, vehicle maneuvering areas and driveways shall be paved with concrete, asphaltic concrete, asphalt, brick or interlocking paving blocks, or other durable and all-weather material acceptable to the planning commission. 
b.  Boundary or perimeter areas shall be provided with wheel guards or bumper guards, so located that no part of a parked vehicle will extend beyond the property line of the parking area. 
c.  Lighting facilities shall be arranged so that they do not unreasonably disturb occupants of the site or of adjacent residential properties or interfere with traffic. 
d.  Parking areas shall be provided with entrances and exits so located as to minimize traffic congestion. 
e.  Required parking spaces shall not be used for any business involving the sale, repair, dismantling or servicing of any vehicles, or the sale of any equipment, materials, or supplies. 
f.  To the maximum extent feasible, site plans for proposed developments shall separate movement of pedestrians from movement of vehicles and bicycles, and protect bicyclists from conflicts with vehicles. 
g.  Driveway and parking areas for a single family dwelling may be paved with asphalt, concrete, or another durable and all-weather material acceptable to the administrative official. 
h.  Parking lots shall be kept in good repair and periodically resurfaced, seal coated and/or striped. 
(f)  Calculating parking requirements/allowances. The minimum number of parking spaces required is based on the type of use. To determine the minimum number of parking spaces required, locate the applicable standard based on the uses in table 1 below. 
(1)  Unless a specific use is listed, the required number of parking spaces shall be the sum of the combination of uses on the lot. 
(2)  If the calculation of required spaces results in a fraction of a parking space, the number shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. 
(3)  Handicapped parking shall be provided in accordance with standards set forth in the Americans with Disabilities Act and shall be counted as part of the total. 
(4)  Floor area shall equal the gross floor area (GFA) including outdoor dining areas less all area used for kitchen, hot/cold storage, office space and other non-customer areas. 
Table 1 
Minimum Parking Spaces Required Use Spaces Required per unit specified Queuing Space Other Standard Automobile Repair/Maintenance 1 per 400 sf office/seating area - 1 space per service bay Assembly (Churches, Movie Theaters, etc.) 1 space per 4 seats maximum capacity (Based on permanent seating) - 1 space per 40 sq. ft. floor area accommodating moveable seats Bank/Financial w/o Drive-in 1 per 200 sf GFA - 1 per employee Bank/Financial w/ Drive-in 1 per 200 sf GFA 3 per service lane 1 per employee Bar, Lounge, Nightclub 1 per 100 sf GFA - 1 per employee Bowling Alley 2 spaces per alley - Plus 1 space per 100 sf used for associated amusement activities Convenience Store w/ Gas Sales 1 per 150 sf GFA 2 per car wash queue Pump spaces shall not be included. Day Care Center 1 per employee on largest shift 5 per lane 1 loading space per 10 children. Parking or loading spaces designated for children shall be located so that direct pedestrian access is provided into the facility without crossing streets or driveways. Drug Store/Pharmacy 1 per 200 sf GFA 3 per lane - Grocery Store (stand-alone) 1 per 250 sf GFA - 1 per employee Home Improvement Warehouse 1 per 200 sf GFA - Space designated for seasonal/outdoor storage of merchandise Medical Clinic 1 per 150 sf GFA - - Health Club 1 space per 200 sf exercise area - 1 per employee Hospital 1 per 1.5 beds - 1 per 300 sf of office space Gymnasium 1 space per 200 sf floor area 1 space per 4 fixed seats or 1 space per 8 ft. of bench seating Hotel/Motel 1 space per room plus 1 per employee - Parking for accessory uses (restaurant, lounge, etc.) in accordance with the applicable standard. Industrial, Manufacturing, Processing, Wholesale 1 space per 1,000 sf manufacturing or warehousing area, plus 1 per 300 sf office - 1 space per company vehicle stored on site. Library, Club or Lodge 1 space per 350 sf GFA - - Mini-storage 1 space per 10 units - 1 per employee Nursery 2 spaces per 1,000 sf of outdoor display area - 1 per employee, 1 per company vehicle Nursing Home/Group Care 1 space per 4 beds - 1 per employee Office Uses 1 spaces per 200 sf GFA - - Residential, Multi-family 1 and 2 bedroom units - 1.4 spaces; all others 2 spaces - 1 space per employee Residential, Single-family 2 spaces per single-family dwelling unit - - Restaurant, Fast Food 1 space per 40 sf of public floor area 3 from the menu board 1 per employee on the largest shift Restaurant, Sit Down 1 space per 4 seats - 1 per employee on the largest shift Self-storage Warehouse 6 spaces plus 1 space per 200 sf of office - 24 ft. minimum building separation Shopping Center, General Retail/Service Not Specified up to 50,000 sf 1 space per 200 sf GFA - - Shopping Center, General Retail/Service Not Specified 50,000-90,000 sf 1 space per 225 sf GFA - - Shopping Center, General Retail/Service Not Specified over 90,000 sf 1 space per 250 sf GFA - - High Bulk Retail 1 space per 300 sf GFA - - Veterinary Office/Clinic 1 space per 500 sf GFA - 1 per employee. Warehousing/Industrial Processing 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per company vehicle stored on the property.  
GFA - Gross Floor Area 
(g)  Shared parking. In meeting the requirements of this section, adjacent land uses, lots, or sites may share parking under the following conditions and standards: 
(1)  With an approved shared parking agreement and/or development plan approval, required parking may be reduced 15 percent from the cumulative amount of the uses sharing the parking on that lot. 
(2)  For either a major or minor development plan, any developer desiring to provide shared parking shall request approval to do so from the administrative official prior to submitting for development plan approval. 
(3)  If individual landowners agree to share parking, a written agreement between the various property owners providing for cross-access easements and stipulating that only those buildings, structures or units shown on the development plan may share parking. 
(4)  In the case of a single owner, an overall shared parking plan for the properties or development sites may be submitted with the application for development plan approval. Only those buildings, structures or units shown on the development plan may participate in the shared parking arrangement. The location of the balance of required spaces shall be noted on the development plan. 
(5)  Should there be a change in the number of structures or units within any individual structure or location which is bound by a shared parking agreement or plan, the shared parking agreement shall be subject to the review and approval of the planning director, or at his/her discretion, the review and approval of the planning commission. 
(6)  The agreement shall be executed and recorded in the appropriate county recording office and be binding on subsequent purchasers, inheritors or assigns and a copy provided to the planning and development department. 
(7)  All shared parking spaces shall be within 660 feet of the main entrance of any building sharing the parking. Pedestrian access to the entrance(s), either by way of pedestrian alleys, passages or public sidewalks in the streetscape shall be provided. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-183. - Conforming buildings and/or structures. 
(a)  Principal buildings and/or structures. It is the intent of this section that there shall be but one main building and/or structure plus any permitted accessory buildings and/or structures on any lot used for single-family residential purposes. Upon development plan approval, lots in other zoning districts may contain more than one main building and/or structure. 
(b)  Residential accessory buildings and/or structures. It is the intent of this section that accessory buildings and/or structures may be permitted on any lot used or zoned for residential purposes. The following standards apply to residential accessory buildings and/or structures: 
(1)  Accessory buildings. 
a.  Are permitted in rear yards; no accessory building and/or structure shall be permitted in a regulatory front or side yard. 
b.  Shall be located a minimum of ten feet from any building and/or structure and a minimum of five feet from any property line. 
c.  Shall be permitted only in compliance with standards for distance between buildings, and setbacks, if any, from property lines. 
d.  Shall not be used for storage of hazardous, incendiary or noxious materials and shall not be located nearer than 100 feet from any property line. 
e.  Shall be included in calculations for impervious surface, lot coverage, floor area ratio, or any other site design requirements applying to the principal use of the lot. 
f.  Vehicles, including recreational vehicles, and travel trailers, shall not be used as temporary or permanent living quarters, storage buildings, utility buildings, or other such uses. 
g.  Mobile storage units are limited to 60 days on site front, back or side. After 60 days, the unit must be positioned as required for accessory buildings. 
(2)  Swimming pools, wading pools, hot tubs, and similar buildings and/or structures. 
a.  Swimming pools or wading pools shall be constructed no closer than ten feet from the waterline to any property line and shall be completely enclosed by a fence or wall at least four feet in height and maintained in accordance with any adopted swimming pool code. All gates shall be locked at all times when the pool is not in use. Fences and gates shall be so constructed and of such materials so as to prevent the entry of children and usual household pets into the pool area. 
b.  Enclosures for pools shall not be considered a part of the principal building and/or structure unless roofed with any material other than transparent screening and shall not be enclosed on any side other than where it is attached to the principal structure. Pool enclosures shall not be located closer than five feet to any property line. 
(3)  Fences. 
a.  All fences require a permit and shall comply with the building code. 
b.  Fences may be located along all front, side and rear yards and may be constructed on any common property line. However, no fence or hedge located in a required front yard shall exceed four feet in height unless it meets the minimum required front yard setback for the zoning district in which it is located. 
c.  In areas where the property faces two roadways or is located in any other area construed to be a corner lot, no opaque fence or hedge exceeding two feet in height shall be located in the line of sight. 
d.  No fence shall generally exceed six feet in height; however, fences may be approved by the building official of a maximum of eight feet in height if designed to withstand the current wind-load. 
e.  No fence shall be constructed or installed in such a manner as to interfere with drainage on the site. 
f.  Any fence located adjacent to a public right-of-way or private road shall be placed with the finished side facing that right-of-way or private road. 
g.  A fence required for safety and protection of hazards by another public agency may not be subject to the height limitations above. Approval to exceed maximum height standards may be given by the administrative official upon receipt of satisfactory evidence of the need to exceed height standards. 
h.  Fences must be constructed of a permanent weatherproof material such as wood, vinyl or masonry. Fabric, plastic sheeting or metal attached to a fence constructed of approved materials (unless specially designed and created as a fence) is not permitted. 
i.  Fences in residential, office or commercial districts may not contain barbed wire or a similar product unless otherwise approved by the board of zoning adjustment. 
(4)  Awning, carport or porch. An unattached awning, carport or porch, open on three or more sides, may be constructed or erected on the side of or behind any principal building and/or structure in any district, provided that: 
a.  No such awning, carport or porch shall be constructed closer than five feet to any property line. 
b.  Any such awning, carport or porch located on a corner lot shall be set back at least the minimum front yard setback for the district in which it is located. 
c.  Attached carports constructed of fire resistant materials may be approved within five feet of the property line following notification to adjacent property owners. Any written objections filed within five business days shall cause the application to be forwarded to the board of zoning adjustment for review and determination according to the procedures in section 114-98. In no case shall the carport be located closer than five feet to the property line nor shall any variance be granted. Stormwater runoff collected by gutters and downspouts shall not be directed onto adjacent property. 
(5)  Accessory dwelling units in single-family residential districts. 
a.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for inexpensive housing units to meet the needs of families and making housing available to family members who might otherwise have difficulty finding homes. This section is also intended to protect the property values and residential character of neighborhoods where accessory apartments are located. 
b.  Standards. Accessory apartments may be allowed in single-family residential areas provided that all of the following requirements shall be met: 
1.  Any accessory apartment must be located on the same lot, tract and/or development parcel as the primary residential building and must be clearly subordinate and incidental to the primary building and/or land use. The lot tract or parcel must contain at least 12,000 square feet. 
2.  No more than one accessory apartment shall be permitted on any residential lot. 
3.  An accessory apartment shall not exceed 800 square feet. 
4.  The accessory apartment shall be located and designed not to interfere with the appearance of the principal building as a single-family dwelling unit. 
5.  Any one story accessory apartment shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from any property line and ten feet from any existing buildings. Any two story accessory apartment shall be required to meet the minimum setbacks of the district in which it is located. 
6.  One (1) parking space shall be provided for the accessory apartment, and must be located on the same lot on which the accessory apartment is located. 
7.  A manufactured home may not be used as an accessory apartment. 
8.  Recreational vehicles and travel trailers shall not be used as accessory apartments. However, they may be used for temporary living quarters in times of danger or emergency. 
9.  No existing building and/or structure may be converted to an accessory apartment unless it complies with all other minimum district dimensional regulations and the building code. 
10.  No variations, adjustments, or waivers to the requirements of this code shall be allowed in order to accommodate an accessory apartment. 
(c)  Nonresidential accessory buildings and/or structures. Accessory structures not initially identified on the development plan may be approved by the administrative official regardless of development size in accordance with section 114-183(b)(1). 
(1)  Canopy. Any canopy must be set back a minimum of 15 feet from any property line. 
(2)  Accessory apartments. 
a.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for housing units to allow for an owner, operator or manager to reside on the premises of non-residential developments, apartment complexes and/or manufactured home parks. 
b.  Standards. Accessory apartments may be allowed provided that all of the following requirements shall be met: 
1.  Any accessory apartment must be located on the same lot, tract and/or development parcel as the primary building or contained wholly within the primary building and must be clearly subordinate, incidental and in connection with the primary building and/or land use. 
2.  No more than one accessory apartment shall be permitted on any lot. 
3.  An accessory apartment shall not exceed 800 square feet. 
4.  The accessory apartment shall be located and designed not to interfere with the appearance of the principal building. 
5.  The accessory apartment shall not be available for commercial short-term or long-term rental to any person who is not employed by the owner and/or lessee of the property. 
6.  Any one story accessory apartment shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from any property line and ten feet from any existing building. 
7.  One parking space shall be provided for the accessory apartment. 
8.  A manufactured home may not be used as an accessory apartment. 
9.  Recreational vehicles and travel trailers shall not be used as accessory apartments. However, they may be used for temporary living quarters in times of danger or emergency. 
10.  Storage and other buildings regulated by this section shall be included in calculations for impervious surface, lot coverage, floor area ratio, or any other site design requirements applying to the principal use of the lot. 
11.  No existing building and/or structure may be converted to an accessory apartment unless it complies with all other minimum district dimensional regulations and the building code. 
12.  No variations, adjustments, or waivers to the requirements of this code shall be allowed in order to accommodate an accessory apartment. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-184. - Regulations applying to all districts. 
(a)  Condominium buildings. Any unit in any zoning district may be converted into a condominium in accordance with condominium laws as established by the State of Alabama. This allowance does not preclude the district dimensional regulations as set forth by this chapter. 
(b)  Dimensional regulations. Refer to the standards established in this chapter (district dimensional regulations). However, no building need be set back more than the average of the setbacks of the existing buildings within 100 feet each side thereof, but in no case shall it be less than 15 feet for residential lots. 
(c)  Improvements in flood hazard areas. No permit shall be approved or issued for any construction or development, unless the proposed construction or development complies with City of Dothan Code of Ordinances, chapter 42, floods. 
(d)  Driveways on public right-of-way of major thoroughfares. Except for single-family residential developments, no driveway shall be constructed on the right-of-way of any major thoroughfare, except under the condition that access to such driveway is made available to other properties and developments. The planning commission shall not approve any development plans with a driveway on a public right-of-way unless the property owner and the developer provide written assurance that access to the driveway will be made available to other properties and developments. This shall apply only to that portion of a driveway located on the public right-of-way. 
(e)  Landscaping. Developments in all districts shall comply with the landscaping requirements as established in article XIII. 
(f)  Recreational vehicles, travel trailers, boats, utility trailers (open or closed), etc. Recreational vehicles and travel trailers shall not be used as residential dwellings or as accessory apartments unless located in an approved RV park or campground. Such vehicles shall not be parked in the street, located forward of the principal structure or in the street side yard unless being prepared for relocation or transit. However, they may be used as temporary living quarters in times of danger or declared emergency. 
(g)  Governmental/public/utility uses. Governmental/public/utility uses are permitted in all zoning districts subject to development plan review. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-185. - Street address standards. 
    E-911 addressing standards and guidelines promulgated by the board as may be amended or modified from time to time, upon approval of the board of commissioners, is adopted by reference in this section as if fully set forth. 
(a)  Exceptions. This division section shall not apply to official traffic control devices erected by the state, the county or the city. 
(b)  Display of numerals or characters. 
(1)  All buildings, residences, mobile homes or other fixed structures, within the corporate limits and the city police jurisdiction, shall have address numerals/characters permanently and visibly displayed in accordance with the adopted City of Dothan E-911 Addressing Standards and Guidelines. 
(2)  For the purposes of this division section, an address for display is defined as the numerals and a character assigned, in compliance with this section, to a specific location but does not contain the street or road name. 
(3)  The actual complete address consists of the following: street number, pre-directional, primary street name, suffix and secondary number, if any, as defined by the United States Postal Addressing Conventions DM940-89-03. 
(4)  All numerals shall be Arabic numerals. 
(c)  Coordination of assignment of addresses. 
(1)  The public works department, engineering services division, shall coordinate the assignment of addresses with the Dothan-Houston County Communications District, and both entities shall keep the addresses assigned on file. The engineering services division shall assign addresses within the city. 
(2)  All city-maintained data must reflect the addresses and addressing criteria assigned within this section or the E-911 Addressing Standards and Guidelines. 
(3)  City of Dothan Public Works Department, Dothan-Houston County Communications District E-911 Board, and city postmaster shall have the authority to promulgate additional rules and regulations regarding addressing within the city consistent with the United States Postal Addressing Conventions DM-940-89-03. 
(4)  Violation of any promulgated rule shall be considered to be a violation of this section. 
(d)  New structures. 
(1)  As soon as initial construction of a new structure has begun, a clearly visible freestanding sign, as specified in the E-911 Addressing Standards and Guidelines, is required until the permanent address numerals/characters are attached or otherwise displayed when the structure is completed or occupied. 
(2)  Business structures must have addresses properly displayed before occupancy and use. 
(3)  Single-family residential structures must have addresses properly displayed within 30 days of occupancy. 
(e)  Existing structures. The resident or current occupant of any dwelling, the manager or occupier of any business structure or the owner of any structure that is not occupied is responsible for compliance with this section. 
(f)  Violations. 
(1)  It shall be a violation of this section to display any address in any manner other than that prescribed in this section or to display any address not officially assigned, as specified in this section. 
(2)  It shall be a violation of this section to publish, broadcast, disseminate or utilize any address, within the city and its police jurisdiction, not in compliance with this section, or to utilize in any manner any address not officially approved or officially issued, as specified in this section. 
(3)  Failure to comply with this section or any portion of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. The police department may cause to be issued an arrest warrant or summons to appear before the municipal court to answer such alleged violation. A summons to appear may be served upon an alleged violator either in person or by first class mail. 
(4)  The minimum fine for violation of this section shall be $25.00, plus court costs. The maximum sentence for violation of this section shall be six months in the city jail or a maximum fine of $500.00 or both. 
(g)  Confidentiality of emergency data. 
(1)  Under this section, all data collected by any agency related to the enhanced E-911 system shall be confidential and not released to any member of the public or any government agency, except to facilitate an emergency response. 
(2)  This information may be used in the creation and maintenance of maps, the E-911 database, and for confirmation of public records during the normal course of operations of the United States Post Office, the engineering services division, the city police department, and the Dothan-Houston County Communications District. 
(3)  Nothing in this section shall prevent or hinder the operations of the city, any city department or the Dothan-Houston County Communications District, nor shall this prevent the release of this information, when any part of such information is contained in other sources that are a public record. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-186. - Joinder of lots. 
(a)  Unity of title declaration. Wherever it is necessary that two or more lots or portions thereof be added or joined, in whole or in part, to meet minimum lot or parcel area or dimensional requirements of this chapter, or when a structure is proposed for erection across a lot line, the application for building permit shall be accompanied by evidence of recording a unity of title declaration as herein described, in the public records of Houston, Dale or Henry Counties in Alabama. The filing of a copy of the recorded unity of title declaration is a prerequisite to final approval of the application and the issuance of a building permit. Land joined pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be known as a "zone lot" which shall remain indivisible except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(b)  Zone lot to be indivisible. On a form provided by the administrative official, a unity of title declaration shall state unequivocally that the entire property created by a combination of recorded lots or portions thereof shall be regarded as unified under one title as an indivisible building site; that the said property shall be henceforth considered as one lot and that no portion thereof shall be sold, assigned, transferred, conveyed or devised separately except in its entirety as one lot or parcel of land. The sale, assignment, transfer, conveyance or devise of a condominium parcel created by a recorded declaration of condominium subjecting the same property to the condominium form of ownership shall not be deemed a breach of the unity of title declaration; however, the entire property shall continue to be regarded as unified and as a single building site for all applicable code purposes. The parties to the declaration shall agree that the unity of title declaration shall constitute a covenant to run with the land, as provided by law, and shall be binding upon the parties thereto, their successors and assigns, and all parties claiming under them until such time as the declaration may be released, in writing, by the administrative official. The administrative official is authorized to release a unity of title declaration when such declaration is no longer necessary due to the discontinuance or abandonment of the proposed construction giving rise to its issuance, and may approve changes or amendments to a unity of title declaration when necessary to correct errors, mistakes or changes in circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Secs. 114-187-114-206. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS 

Sec. 114-207. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  Provide uniform sign standards and regulations in order to protect the health, safety and welfare, convenience, enjoyment of the general public. 
(b)  Promote a positive city image reflecting order, harmony and pride, and thereby strengthening the economic stability of the City of Dothan's business, cultural, historical, and residential areas. 
(c)  In the consideration of these regulations, it is determined that signs with a commercial or non-commercial message are a proper use on private property having the function of identifying businesses, services, residences, events and other matters of public interest. 
(d)  Signs shall be regulated according to standards for the number, size, height, spacing and illumination in the interest of the public safety and welfare and promote a higher aesthetic and visual character in all areas of the city. 
(e)  Nothing in these regulations is intended to inhibit an individual's right to express non-commercial messages protected by the First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States. 
(f)  The requirements of these regulations shall apply to all signs, sign structures, awnings, and other types of sign devices located in the City of Dothan except: 
(1)  Signs that cannot be seen from the public roadway and are located entirely on private property, 
(2)  Signs that are located in any existing or future overlay district or planned unit development are subject to the requirements or restrictions established in those ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-208. - Severability clause. 
    Should any part, section subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this article be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect any other part, section subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-209. - Administration and enforcement. 
    Administration of these regulations shall follow the procedures outlined in article III. The administrative official may implement procedures and policies, create forms and applications for the purpose of implementing these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-210. - Definitions. 
    Definitions specific to signs and billboards may be found in article II of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-211. - Signs not needing a permit. 
    The following signs may be erected without a sign permit and are not included in the determination of allowable numbers, type, area, illumination of signs, etc. Nothing in this section shall exempt an individual, who desires to erect a sign from the necessity of obtaining a building permit, should such be required by the adopted building code. Signs permitted by this section must conform to the standards enumerated and shall not be placed or constructed in a way that creates a hazard of any kind. Exemption from permitting shall not relieve the owner of the sign from the responsibility for ensuring its erection, placement and maintenance in accordance with all other provisions of this chapter. Signs allowed without a permit shall be limited to the following: 
(1)  Any sign required to be maintained or posted by law or governmental order, rule or regulation. 
(2)  Public warning signs which indicate a dangerous or hazardous condition or trespass warning so long as they do not contain logos or text advertising a commercial product or activity. 
(3)  Address numbers complying with section 114-185 of this chapter. 
(4)  Flags or insignia of any government, religion, association, fraternal order, charitable organization, academic, corporate, sporting or civic organization except when displayed in connection with commercial promotions. Flags of the United States must be flown in a manner that meets U.S. Congressional protocol (see United States Code, Title 36, Chapter 10). 
(5)  Normal servicing of previously permitted sign structures, including a change of copy for billboards and a panel change in structures designed to allow changeable copy. 
(6)  Memorial signs or tablets, historical markers, name of building signs and dates of erection when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other such durable and noncombustible materials and attached to the surface of the building. 
(7)  Directory signs listing the businesses, tenants, or activities conducted within a building or group of buildings may be erected so long as they do not exceed 20 square feet and are limited to one sign per building. 
(8)  Window signs not exceeding 25 percent of the glass area (pane) to which they are applied. Window signs shall be included in the total area allowed. 
(9)  Changing the copy, announcement or message on a manual reader board. 
(10)  Cleaning, painting or maintaining a sign that does not otherwise alter the size, or height of the sign. 
(11)  Murals or other forms of public artwork provided any sponsorship information or logo does not exceed one and one-half square feet. 
(12)  Time and temperature signs are permitted on non-residential parcels notwithstanding a general prohibition on animated signs. These signs may only display numerical information related to the time of day and/or temperature and must be kept accurate. They may be freestanding or attached to a building and are subject to any other applicable regulations. They shall not be counted as part of the occupant's allowable sign area. 
(13)  Vehicle signs. Signs attached to a vehicle or trailer that is used in the normal day to day operation of the business being advertised and serves a useful function in the transportation of persons or commodities from one place to another. Signs attached to a vehicle or trailer and parked at a location other than the registered place of business are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-212. - Prohibited signs. 
    It shall be unlawful to erect, cause to be erected, maintain or cause to be maintained, any sign not expressly authorized by, or exempted from, these regulations. Unless indicated elsewhere, the following signs are expressly prohibited in all zoning districts of the City of Dothan. 
(a)  Signs erected without a permit. 
(b)  Window signs exceeding 25 percent of the glass area (pane) to which they are applied. 
(c)  Signs attached or affixed to any tree, building, or other structure other than a frame for which it was designed. 
(d)  Any sign or sign structure identifying a previous use or activity that has not occupied the site for a period greater than 60 days, does not maintain a current business license or pertains to a time, event or purpose which no longer applies shall be deemed abandoned and a violation of the ordinance. 
(e)  Signs in violation of the building code or electrical code adopted by the City of Dothan. 
(f)  Beacons, or strobe lights; 
(g)  Searchlights in operation exceeding three consecutive days per year. 
(h)  Any sign that, in the opinion of the administrative official, does or will constitute a safety hazard. 
(i)  Signs with visibly moving, revolving, or rotating parts or visible mechanical movement of any description or other apparent visible movement achieved by electrical, or mechanical means or that emit audible sounds, vapor, smoke, steam or involves the use of live animals (see section 114-220). 
(j)  Signs consisting of moving, rotating or flashing lights or that otherwise contain animated displays by either mechanical or electronic means. 
(k)  Freestanding signs which project into the public right-of-way except as otherwise permitted by these regulations [see section 114-219(e) and (f)]. 
(l)  Signs in the public right-of-way. Such signs are subject to removal without notice. 
(m)  Signs that are of such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or impair the vision of motorists, cyclists, or pedestrians or that illuminate adjacent residential areas (see section 114-222). 
(n)  Signs mounted to the structure of the roof and that project above the roof line. 
(o)  Signs placed or painted or displayed on a motor vehicle or trailer parked or towed with the primary purpose of providing advertising for a product, service, business or activity not established at that location. 
(p)  Posters or handbills affixed to any structure or natural object in the right-of-way. 
(q)  Temporary signs such as portable signs, A-frame signs, wind signs, captive balloons or banners except as permitted under the temporary signs provisions below. 
(r)  Pursuant to Code of Ala. 1979, § 23-1-6, signs, markers, and advertising on the rights-of-way of state controlled highways are prohibited except those official signs or markers placed thereon by the State Department of Transportation or under its authority. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-213. - Permit required. 
    Permanent signs require a permit and are to be located, placed, constructed, erected or modified on a lot or parcel as described on the permit application. 
(a)  No new permit shall be issued until all signs on the site comply with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Applicability. No person shall erect, alter, relocate, repair, or change a sign without first obtaining a permit unless a permit is not required in accordance with section 114-211. 
(c)  Permit contents. It shall be the applicant's responsibility to submit a complete application to the planning and development department on a form provided for that purpose signed by the property owner and/or sign owner and the sign contractor including all submission materials as described below. 
(d)  Signs requiring electrical service, foundation work, etc. shall obtain a building permit conforming to the adopted building code and inspection requirements and the standards contained in this article. The building permit shall also be the sign permit. A permit application shall be required for each sign and accompanied by: 
(1)  Payment in the amount of $50.00 per sign per trade inspection shall be made to the inspections services office when the permit is issued. 
(2)  Two copies of a site plan, drawn to scale, indicating the location of all existing and proposed signs, both freestanding and wall-mounted relative to public right-of-way, lot lines, easements and buildings on the site. Design drawings for each sign including the dimension of any supporting structures including the maximum height of the sign as measured from finished grade. 
(3)  Construction data shall be provided for signs exceeding a height of 20 feet including but not limited to; electrical load, wind load, anchorage or footing details certified by a registered engineer licensed to do business in the State of Alabama. The building official may require construction data for any sign. 
(4)  Plans and specifications and methods of construction, electrical connections and attachment to the building or the ground for any freestanding sign or projecting sign. 
(5)  Front façade with linear dimensions and calculation of sign size. 
(6)  The type of illumination to be used. 
(7)  A general description of materials to be used (metal, plastic, wood, etc.). 
(8)  Any other data that the administrative official considers necessary to adequately review the application. 
(e)  Signs not requiring electrical service, foundation work, etc., shall first obtain a sign permit conforming to the standards contained in this article. A permit application shall be required for each sign and accompanied by: 
(1)  Payment in the amount of $25.00 shall be made when the sign permit application is submitted. 
(2)  Two copies of a site plan, drawn to scale, indicating the location of all existing and proposed signs, both freestanding and wall-mounted relative to public right-of-way, lot lines, easements and buildings on the site. 
(3)  Front façade with linear dimensions and calculation of sign size. 
(4)  A general description of materials to be used (metal, plastic, wood, paint, etc.). 
(5)  Any other data that the administrative official considers necessary to adequately review the application. 
(f)  A placement permit is required for temporary signs as defined in section 114-220. There is no charge for a placement permit. Placement permits are required to establish the beginning and end dates that a temporary sign will be on display. Permit forms are available online and may be emailed or faxed to the planning and development office according to the instructions on the form. Placement permits are valid for 30 days prior to installation. 
(g)  Procedures. Sign permits shall be processed as follows: 
(1)  Complete applications shall be submitted to the department of planning and development for review. 
(2)  The application shall be reviewed for conformance with these regulations and approved or denied based on the information provided. If denied, the applicable provisions of these regulations shall be specified. 
(3)  A determination shall be given within five business days on a complete application. If a building permit is also required, the permit application shall be forwarded to the inspections services office for processing. The building permit shall also be the sign permit. 
(4)  The permit shall be valid for 180 days after issuance. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-214. - General provisions for permanent on-premise signs. 
(a)  Permanent on-premise signs are allowed in all zoning districts. 
(b)  All signs or sign structures must be erected and attached totally on or within the site or property to which the message refers. 
(c)  Unless specified elsewhere in these regulations, no portion of any type of sign shall project or be located closer than three feet from the nearest right-of-way line or property line. 
(d)  The owner of any sign projecting into the right-of-way or placed on or over a public sidewalk shall be liable for damage to any property or injury to any person caused by the placement or failure of any supporting structure. 
(e)  A-frame signs may be used in the E and HC/G subdistricts in the Downtown overlay district but shall not impede or obstruct a pedestrian zone of at least six feet in width, be located in the street or be larger than ten square feet in area. 
(f)  The height and location of the sign shall not create any traffic or visual obstructions as defined in section 98-10 in the Dothan Code of Ordinances. 
(g)  Multiple signs may be placed on the same parcel frontage but shall be a minimum of 300 feet apart. 
(h)  Signs must be kept in good repair and properly maintained including all electrical elements, paint, and condition of the support structure. Failure to do so is a violation of this chapter. 
(i)  Billboards located on a parcel and are being used to advertise a good or service located on that parcel is considered on-premise and must comply with all applicable provisions of these regulations. 
(j)  Signs must be constructed with and be composed of permanent, durable, weatherproof material that are not consumed or destroyed in use and can be used for a period of time, usually three or more years. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-215. - General provisions for permanent off-premise signs. 
    Permanent off-premise signs (billboards) are allowed in certain zoning districts as indicated in the Table of Uses (section 114-131.1) provided that all permits are obtained and the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The maximum size of each off-premise sign located 500 feet or more inside Ross Clark Circle shall not exceed 400 square feet. Off-premise signs located elsewhere in the city shall not exceed 675 square feet. 
(2)  The height of off-premise signs may not exceed 65 feet from the base of the sign. 
(3)  The lowest portion of sign may not be less than be 16 feet above adjacent road grade. 
(4)  The required setback from any property line (including right-of way) for each off-premise sign shall be ten feet from the edge of the board. 
(5)  Spacing shall be 500 feet between off-premise signs located on the same side of the street. 
(6)  Off premise signs shall not be located one above the other or side by side. 
(7)  All off-premise signs shall be of all-metal single-pole construction except for the sign face and trim which may be of other durable materials. 
(8)  All construction and clearing debris shall be removed from the site upon completion of construction. 
(9)  Off premise signs shall be located no closer than 100 feet to any residentially zoned district. 
(10)  Off premise signs may contain digital or electronic displays but; 
a.  Shall not contain or appear to contain any movement such as animation, flashing, scrolling, intermittent, rotating or moving lights or full motion video. 
b.  The entire message shall remain on for at least eight seconds. 
c.  Transition time to the next image shall be no greater than two seconds. 
d.  Spacing between structures with digital displays, whether single face or back to back, shall be a minimum radius of 2,000 feet from the center of the display. 
e.  Must be located within a 1,000 feet radius of intersecting state highways and arterial streets as defined in article II as a "major thoroughfare." 
f.  No digital billboard may be erected at the intersections of Main St. and Park Ave., Main St. and Woodland Dr., and Woodland Dr. and Fortner St. 
g.  Brightness of the display shall be controlled automatically to reduce light levels at night or under cloudy or other darkened conditions and shall not be brighter than is necessary for clear and adequate visibility, or that might impair the vision of a driver, or interferes with traffic control and comply with section 114-222, illumination standards. 
h.  Digital displays may not be located nearer than 250 feet from any residential district. 
i.  Subject to normal permitting procedures and structural capabilities, existing conforming billboards and structures may be converted to accommodate electronic or digital technology subject to compliance with all other provisions and requirements of this chapter (setbacks, spacing criteria, etc.). 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-216. - Measurement standards. 
(a)  Signs with integral background. The area of a sign with a clearly defined background shall be the area of the smallest standard geometric shape capable of encompassing the sign copy and background. Where the sign copy is contained with multiple background areas separated by open space, the sign area shall be expressed as the sum of the separate areas of each background and without regard to the open space between the separate background areas. 

(b)  Signs without integral backgrounds. Where a sign consists of individual elements such as letters, symbols, or graphic objects that are painted on, attached to or otherwise affixed to a surface that is not specifically designed to serve as a sign background, the sign area shall be the sum of the areas of the smallest standard geometric shape capable of encompassing the sign copy. 
(c)  Multi-faced signs: The sign area for a sign with more than one face shall be computed by adding together the area of all sign faces visible from any vantage point. 
(d)  The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign to the top of the highest attached component of the sign exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. Where a freestanding sign is mounted along a roadway, height shall be measured from the grade of the road to the highest attached component of the sign. 
(e)  The addition of cladding covering the support structure is encouraged and shall not be considered in the calculation sign area unless the cladding exceeds 25 percent of the width of the sign face. The cladding shall not to exceed 30 inches total width. 
(f)  Monument signs, including embellishments, shall not exceed 12 feet in width or eight feet in height. 
_____ 
(g)  Illustrations. 



(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
_____
Sec. 114-217. - Sign standards in residential districts. 
    Unless specified elsewhere in this article, sign standards for on-premise signs in a residential district are described below and in Table 1. 
(a)  Residential development signs may be placed on two separate structures flanking the entrance, each face being of equal size (32 square feet max.) or may be on one double faced structure, each face being of equal size (48 square feet max). 
(b)  All signs shall be maintained perpetually by the developer, the owner of the sign, a pertinent homeowners association or some other person who is legally responsible. 
(c)  Non-residential uses located in a residential district may have one sign per street front but shall maintain a separation distance of 300 feet between signs. 
Table 1 - Signs in Residential Districts Types of Signs Number of Signs Permitted Sign Area Maximum Height Lighting Individual Residential Properties 
Single-Family Detached or Attached, Townhomes Freestanding or Wall 1 per street front 6 SF 6 ft. None Residential Developments 
Single-Family Subdivisions, Apartment/Condominium Complexes Monument 1 per street front 32/48 SF see A above 8 ft. Internal or External Wall 1 per facade 5% of façade area N/A Internal or External Incidental or Directional NA - but not visible from public R/W N/A N/A None Permitted Non-Residential Uses in Residential Districts Monument 1 per street front 48 SF 8 ft. Internal or External* Wall 1 per facade 5% of façade area N/A Internal or External* Incidental or Directional N/A - but not visible from public R/W N/A N/A None *Illumination (including EMC signs) of signs for non-residential uses in residential districts requires Special Exception approval. See sections 114-221 and 114-222 for standards.  
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-218. - Sign standards for office and institutional districts. 
    Sign standards for on-premise signs in an office or institutional district (O-1, O-2 and O-3) are described below and in Table 2. 
(a)  Any sign permitted in a residential district where that use is also permitted in an office or institutional district. 
(b)  Freestanding signs for an office building or institutional uses may be placed on two separate structures flanking the entrance, each face being of equal size (32 square feet max.) or may be on one double faced structure, each face being of equal size (48 square feet max). Signs may be placed at secondary entrances not exceeding nine square feet or be taller than eight feet. Wall signs are permitted as described in Table 2. 
(c)  Freestanding signs for an office park development with multiple buildings may be placed on two separate structures flanking the entrance, each face being of equal size (32 square feet max.) or may be on one double faced structure, each face being of equal size (64 square feet max). Signs may be placed at secondary entrances not exceeding nine square feet or be taller than eight feet. Wall signs are permitted as described in Table 2. 
(d)  Wall signs for office or institutional uses shall be as specified in Table 2. 
(e)  Freestanding signs are not permitted for a neighborhood office development or building. Wall signs may not exceed five percent of the façade area or 24 square feet whichever is smaller. 
Table 2 - Signs in Office and Institutional Districts Type of Signs Number of Signs Permitted Sign Area Maximum Height Individual 
Properties Freestanding 1 per street front 32/48 SF 
See B above 8 ft. Wall 1 per side Less of 10% of façade area or 42 sq. ft. N/A EMC allowed - see section 114-221 and 114-222 for standards. Special Exception required when located in a residential district. Office Parks or Multiple Occupancy 
Buildings Freestanding 1 per street front 32/64 SF 12 ft. Wall 3 per façade Less of 5% of façade area or 42 SF per sign N/A Incidental or Directional N/A - but not visible from public R/W N/A N/A EMC allowed - see section 114-221 and 114-222 for standards.  
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-219. - Sign standards for commercial or industrial districts. 
    Sign standards for on-premise signs in commercial or industrial districts are described below. Area and height dimensional standards are provided in Table 3 for freestanding signs and Table 4 for wall-mounted signs. 
(a)  Freestanding signs generally. Signs may be placed in a freestanding location on a commercial or industrial zoned parcel subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  All freestanding signs must comply with wind load criteria established for this region. 
(2)  Multiple frontages. For a parcel having frontage on two or more public streets, each frontage shall be considered separately for the purposes of determining compliance with the provisions for freestanding signs. 
(3)  If the property has multiple frontages, the permitted sign area for one frontage may not be combined with that permitted on another frontage to increase the permitted sign area on one frontage. 
(4)  On the same parcel, no freestanding sign on one frontage may be closer than 100 feet to a sign on another frontage. 
(5)  Allowable sign area may be divided among multiple signs provided they are at least 300 feet apart. 
(6)  Signs at secondary entrances shall be permitted for shopping centers or industrial parks but shall not exceed nine square feet or be taller than eight feet. 
(7)  Except as modified above, buildings containing multiple units are limited to one freestanding sign regardless of unit ownership. 
(b)  Freestanding sign size by posted speed limit. Sign size is recognized to be a function of legibility, reaction time and reaction distance. The following table establishes sign size and height given the posted speed limit. Unless specified elsewhere, the area and height above grade of any freestanding sign shall not exceed the amounts specified in Table 3. 
Table 3 - Freestanding Signs in Commercial and Industrial Districts 
Values indicated are maximum limits on a sign size and height. 
A = Sign Area in Square Feet; H = Sign Height in Feet Zoning District B-1 B-2 B-3 L-I or H-I Speed Limit A H A H A H A H >25 24 14 78 26 50 22 78 26 30 28 16 112 30 72 26 112 30 35 32 18 153 36 98 30 153 36 40 200 42 128 34 200 42 45 253 42 162 38 253 42 50 312 42 200 42 312 42 55 378 42 378 42  
(c)  Building signs. Unless expressly prohibited or modified elsewhere in this article, signs may be attached to a wall, fascia, or awning or permanently applied to a window of a building subject to the following standards: 
(1)  The total area of all signs affixed shall not exceed an area computed as a percentage of the building façade facing the public right-of-way including window and door areas subject to the limitations in Table 4 below. 
(2)  In the case of a shopping center or a group of stores held in single and separate ownership, the provision of this section relating to the total area of signs permitted on the premises shall apply with respect to each building or separate store. Only building signs shall be permitted for individual stores. 
Table 4 - Building Sings Distance of sign from Road Percentage of Façade Area 1 to 100 ft. 10% with no individual sign exceeding 100 sq. ft. 101 to 300 ft. 15% with no individual sign exceeding 125 sq. ft. Over 300 ft. 20% with no individual sign exceeding 150 sq. ft.  
(3)  Each multiple occupancy complex may display one building sign on each side of the principal building or buildings in the complex, not to exceed the sign face area calculated from Table 4. 
(4)  Each occupant located in a multiple occupancy complex may display two signs on any exterior portion of the complex that is part of the occupant's unit, not including common or jointly owned portions, not to exceed the sign face area calculated from Table 4. 
(d)  Signs on awnings or canopies. 
(1)  Canopy signs, marquee signs and signs on architectural projections are signs mounted or affixed to either a structure that projects off the face of a building at least 18 inches or is mounted to a freestanding structure not attached to a building that effectively covers an area below. 
(2)  Signs shall be affixed in an essentially flat plane to the face of the canopy, marquee or architectural projection and are permitted in commercial and industrial zones but shall not exceed 40 percent of the area of the mounting surface. The area of any sign shall count towards the total façade area in Table 4. 
(3)  Signs may be affixed or applied to the face of sides of an awning provided the copy area does not exceed 40 percent of the area to which it is affixed or applied. The area of any sign shall count towards the total façade area in Table 4. 
(e)  Projecting signs. Notwithstanding the general prohibition of signs in the right-of-way, signs attached to the face of a structure that project over the right-of-way are permitted in the B-1 district only subject to the following standards: 
(1)  Projecting signs shall be limited to one per façade except for uses that front on more than one street in which case, one sign shall be permitted per façade. For buildings with a façade exceeding 200 linear feet, one sign shall be permitted for each 200 linear feet. 
(2)  The area of a projecting sign shall not exceed one square foot per two linear feet of building facade. No projecting sign shall exceed the area indicated in Table 3 for the speed limit on which the façade fronts. 
(3)  Projecting signs may not extend above the highest point on the façade or occupy a vertical dimension greater than 25 percent of the total façade height. 
(4)  Projecting signs may not extend over a public sidewalk greater than one-half the distance to the street curb or eight feet, whichever is less. 
(5)  Projecting signs shall be no lower than ten feet above the sidewalk. 
(6)  Projecting signs shall not be permitted in addition to any permitted freestanding sign on that street front. 
(f)  Under canopy/awning signs. Notwithstanding the general prohibition on signs in the right-of-way, signs attached to the underside of a permitted canopy or awning that project over the right-of-way are permitted in the B-1 district only subject to the following standards: 
(1)  No more than one under canopy/awning sign shall be permitted per establishment per façade. 
(2)  There shall be a minimum of eight feet of clearance below the bottom edge of the under canopy/awning sign. 
(3)  No under canopy/awning sign shall exceed four square feet in size. 
(4)  An under canopy/awning sign shall be limited to a maximum of two feet in height and four feet in length but may not exceed the projection of the awning or canopy. 
(5)  Under canopy/awning signs shall be oriented perpendicular to the adjacent wall, located directly adjacent to the business entrance and attached in a manner acceptable to the administrator that prevents swinging. 
(6)  The area of under canopy/awning signs shall count towards the total façade sign area permitted in Table 4. 
(7)  Under canopy mounted signs shall be securely attached as approved by the building official. 
(8)  Under canopy/awning signs may be illuminated with an indirect or external light source not otherwise attached to the sign; internally illuminated and/or neon signs are specifically prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-220. - Temporary signs. 
    Temporary forms of advertising may be used by commercial establishments subject to the limitations below. For the purpose of these regulations, temporary signs include commercial banners, portable signs on fixed legs or wheels and wind signs (see definition). The permittee shall be directly responsible for the condition of the sign. 
(a)  A placement permit for a temporary sign is required [see section 114-213(e)]. 
(b)  No temporary sign shall be used as a permanent sign. 
(c)  Temporary signs may only be used for on-premise advertising. 
(d)  Temporary signs shall not be located on the public right-of-way, in the sight triangle of any intersection, or attached to natural object, utility appurtenance or traffic control device. 
(e)  Temporary signs shall comply with any regulations applying to signs in general such as setback, sight distance requirements, etc. as all other signs. 
(f)  Commercial banners and wind signs may be displayed at any commercially or industrially zoned location, for the purpose of announcing a grand opening, sale or special event provided: 
(1)  Commercial banners may not be displayed for longer than 15 days per address no more than eight times per year. Display periods may not be consecutive with at least 15 days in between display periods. 
(2)  No banner or wind sign may be illuminated. 
(3)  Only one banner or wind sign per address. 
(4)  Only used for on-premise advertising. 
(5)  Banners and wind signs containing date or time information shall be removed at the conclusion of the event. 
(6)  Banners and wind signs must be kept in good condition and legible or replaced or removed as conditions warrant. 
(7)  Banners may not be attached to any traffic control device or utility appurtenance. 
(g)  Portable signs shall be allowed at locations approved in the Table of Permitted Uses (section 114-131.1) provided: 
(1)  Portable signs may not be displayed for longer than 30 days per address no more than three times per year. Display periods may be consecutive. 
(2)  Portable signs may be illuminated but may not contain flashing, intermittent, rotating or moving lights. 
(3)  Portable EMCs shall adhere to the provisions in sections 114-221 and 114-222. 
(4)  The electrical power supply to portable signs shall comply with the adopted electrical code and the power cord is protected from vehicle traffic. An electrical permit is required. 
(5)  Portable signs must be properly anchored to the ground as approved by the building official. 
(6)  Portable signs shall not occupy a required parking space. 
(7)  Messages displayed on portable signs shall be complete and legible. 
(8)  Portable signs must be kept in good condition and repair including the letter backing material, frame, cabinet and legs. 
(9)  Portable signs without any message for longer than 30 days shall be deemed abandoned. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-221. - Standards for electronic message centers (EMCs). 
    Signs using electronic, digital or video technology are permitted in all zoning districts subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  An EMC may occupy a portion or all of the area for a building sign or freestanding sign permitted for that district. 
(2)  There shall be no effects of movement, blinking, scrolling, flashing, spinning, flying in/out, scintillation, animation or similar effects of the individual images displayed. 
(3)  Approved EMCs shall have a minimum display time of 12 seconds with at least a two-second transition time. 
(4)  EMC signs are permitted in office, commercial and industrial districts provided: 
a.  Transitions between messages may include fade, dissolve or other similar effects but may not include continuous scrolling, traveling, flashing, spinning, rotating or other similar moving effects. 
b.  Full motion video is prohibited. 
(5)  EMC signs shall not display color that interferes with or mimics a traffic control device. 
(6)  No EMC sign shall use the words "stop," "danger," "go," or any other word which imitates or approximates any official traffic instruction or traffic control sign or be illuminated in any manner which imitates or approximates any official traffic directional or traffic control device. 
(7)  If at any time the programming or technology that controls the brightness, time on message, or visual display characteristic fails or malfunctions and is determined to be a hazard to the safety of the traveling public, the sign shall be immediately turned off, disconnected or disabled. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-222. - Illumination standards. signs may be illuminated consistent with the following standards. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided, signs located on residentially zoned property may not be illuminated at night. Signs for approved non-residential uses in a residential district may be illuminated with special exception approval. 
(b)  Lighting fixtures for signs externally illuminated shall be fully shielded to prevent glare or light leak. 
(c)  Brightness of the display shall be controlled automatically to reduce light levels at night or under cloudy or other darkened conditions and shall not be brighter than is necessary for clear and adequate visibility, or that might impair the vision of a driver, or interferes with traffic control. Either of the following options may be used to measure brightness. 
(1)  All digital billboards and/or EMC signs shall have automatic dimming technology to adjust the brightness of the sign relative to ambient light conditions so that sign brightness does not exceed three-tenths footcandle (lux) above ambient light as measured using a footcandle (lux) meter in conformance with the following process: 
a.  Ambient light levels shall be measured between the period of one hour after sunset and one hour before sunrise as determined by the National Weather Service with the sign turned off (black screen). 
b.  Light measurements shall be taken with a lux meter aimed directly at the sign face displaying full white. 
c.  Measuring distance shall be determined using the following equation: the square root of the product of the sign area and 100. (Example using a 12 square foot sign: v [12x100] = 34.6 feet measuring distance). 
d.  If brightness measurement by the above methodology is impractical, certification using option 2 shall be provided. 
(2)  The maximum level of brightness for digital billboards and/or EMC signs shall not exceed 5,000 nits when measured from the sign's face at its maximum brightness, during daylight hours. The maximum level of brightness for digital billboards and/or EMC signs shall not exceed 500 nits when measured from the sign's face at its maximum brightness, between sunset and sunrise as determined by the National Weather Service. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-223. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Existing signs prohibited by this code shall be regarded as illegal signs upon the effective date this chapter. All illegal signs shall be removed immediately. 
(b)  Existing signs not conforming to the provisions stated in this chapter shall be regarded as nonconforming signs. 
(c)  Permanent signs and sign structures that are moved, removed, replaced or structurally altered must be brought into conformance with these regulations. 
(d)  Nonconforming signs that have been removed may be replaced within six months in compliance with these regulations. 
(e)  Nonconforming signs required to be moved resulting from the acquisition of right-of-way may be re-established in conformance with other provisions of these regulations. 
(f)  Removable faces or sign panel inserts in a cabinet style sign may be changed by right and does not constitute a structural alteration or cause the loss of nonconforming status. 
(g)  The status of a nonconforming sign is not affected by ownership. 
(h)  Within 30 days, existing digital signs permitted prior to October 1, 2013 shall comply with the sections of this chapter pertaining to brightness if they are able to comply. If existing digital signs do not have the ability to comply with the ordinance (i.e. if they do not come equipped with automatic dimming technology, ability to dim, etc.) they shall either retrofit their sign so as to comply with the ordinance, adjust their brightness to six percent of maximum brightness daily between dusk and dawn or they shall be turned off daily between dusk and dawn. 
(i)  Owners of existing temporary signs (banners, wind signs and portable signs) are subject to sections 114-220, 114-221 and 114-222 must send in a placement permit within 90 days of the effective date of these provisions or become nonconforming and be subject to the applicable provisions. 
(j)  Loss of nonconforming sign status. 
(1)  When a sign or sign structure is destroyed or intentionally removed, the replacement sign and sign structure must comply with the standards in these regulations. 
(2)  Signs or sign structures that are damaged or in need of repair to the extent of 50 percent or more of its replacement value must comply with the standards in these regulations. 
(3)  If the business or operation to which the sign pertains has ceased to operate for a period of 60 consecutive days, or has otherwise changed, the sign is considered abandoned. 
(4)  The sign is erected without a permit. 
(5)  Once a sign is altered to conform or replaced with a conforming sign, the nonconforming sign may not be re-established. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-224. - Variances. 
    It is the explicit intent that this section be enacted to accomplish the purposes set forth in section 114-207. Variances to these provisions shall be granted only in the case of a hardship connected to the physical features of the site. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-225. - Master signage plan. 
(a)  Master signage plan (MSP) is designed to benefit the community in administering its sign regulations. The purpose of such a plan is twofold: (1) It provides a master plan for all signs on premises; and (2) it provides a master record of all signs on a premises. This provides the staff with information about existing signs on a site when considering a permit application for a new sign and also eliminates the need to recompute permitted sign area and numbers for a property every time a sign administration or enforcement question arises. By requiring planning and coordination of signs on a property, the streetscape will improve, though strict and detailed substantive requirements are not imposed. It is, in a sense, a PUD for signs and imposes minimum area requirements so that it will only apply to large developments where a large number of signs will be present. It can be used as an incentive by rewarding developers who prepare and follow coordinated signage plans for the property. The provisions of the plan impose no maximum amounts of signage on the Premises as a whole. The standards for signage in the applicable zoning districts shall be used as a guideline during the approval process, but certain deviations may be made depending upon the intensity and scope of the development if it is determined by the Planning Commission that the deviations are in keeping with the intent of this Section. The intent of the MSP is to develop a creative approach to satisfying reasonable sign needs and not simply a means of requesting or receiving greater signage entitlements. 
(b)  Criteria for Consideration of a MSP. The provisions as set forth in this section may be used in lieu of the provisions for signage in all Zoning Districts only when all of the following criteria apply: 
(1)  The development area for which a MSP is filed shall be at least ten acres. 
(2)  The use for which a MSP is filed shall be characterized as either, a campus, industrial park, office park, amusement park, shopping center, Mixed-use development, planned residential community, public or semi-public use, or a phase thereof. 
(3)  The premises has at least 200 feet of lot frontage along a public thoroughfare. 
(c)  Sign permits. No sign permit shall be issued for any signs within a proposed MSP designated area or a phase thereof unless and until a MSP for the premises has been submitted to the planning commission and approved as conforming with this section. 
(d)  MSP submission requirements. For any project or property wishing to take advantage of this section, the owner(s) shall submit to the planning commission an MSP application containing the following: 
(1)  An accurate plot plan of the premises at such a scale as the planning commission may reasonably require, showing: 
a.  Location of buildings, parking lots, driveways and landscaped areas; 
b.  An accurate indication on the plot plan of the proposed location of each present and future sign of any type, whether requiring a permit or not, unless exempted by the planning commission; 
c.  Computation of the total sign area, the area of each individual sign, the height of signs, and an outline of the building façades for which signs will be mounted. This shall include all signs permitted for the applicable district and any additional signage area requested through the MSP. 
(e)  Master signage plan review. A master signage plan application may be submitted with any site plan, PUD plan, or other official plan required by the city (excluding building permits, land disturbing activity permits, etc.). For the proposed development and shall be processed simultaneously with such other applications. For developments containing more than one phase, site or premises, a MSP shall be required for each site or premises upon development. Nothing in this section shall preclude any existing development meeting the criteria of subsection (b) from filing an application for a MSP. 
(Ord. No. 2017-348, § 2, 11-7-17; Ord. No. 2017-349, § 1, 11-7-17) 
Secs. 114-226-114-235. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERS 

Sec. 114-236. - Tree protection and landscaping. 
(a)  Purpose. The purposes of this article are to protect and enhance the natural environment by: 
(1)  Providing for the preservation of protected trees as defined in this article; 
(2)  Providing for the replacement of protected trees that may be removed; 
(3)  Aiding in the conservation of energy by encouraging the planting of canopy (shade) trees and vegetation which provide for a more pleasant and relaxing urban environment; 
(4)  Reducing the impact of development on the community's storm drainage system and reduce flooding; 
(5)  Establishing landscaping standards for property to be developed; 
(6)  Encouraging the selection of native plant species for vegetation; 
(7)  Reducing the impact of urban and suburban development on remaining stands of natural vegetation; 
(8)  Enhancing the appearance of the city; 
(9)  Protecting public and private investment by enhancing property values; 
(10)  Buffering incompatible land uses as well as providing relief from traffic noise, heat, glare, and the spread of dust and debris; and 
(11)  Providing for enforcement of the provisions contained in this article. 
(b)  Administration. The planning and development department shall have the primary responsibility for the administration of this article. The planning commission may adopt policies and procedures to be followed by the planning and development department in administering this article. 
(1)  Enforcement and penalties. Violation of the provisions of this article shall be a class C misdemeanor and shall be punishable as such. Employees of the planning and development department shall be authorized to issue stop work orders and citations for violations of this article. 
(2)  Applicability to city and other governments. The provisions of this article shall apply to the City of Dothan and to any other government entities owning property within the City of Dothan Corporate Limits. 
(3)  Public utilities. This article shall not prohibit public utilities from removing or pruning trees or clearing other vegetation from street rights-of-way or utility rights-of-way. However, such removal or pruning should be coordinated with the city horticulturist. 
(4)  Local street rights-of-way and easements. Except as otherwise provided for in this article, trees of eight inches or greater DBH shall not be removed from any local street right-of-way, utility easement or public easement unless such removal is in accordance with an approved tree removal plan or landscaping plan. Failure to follow this provision shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-4 of this Code. 
(c)  Definitions. Definitions specific to buffer and landscaping may be found in article II of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-237. - Tree preservation and removal. 
(a)  Tree preservation. 
(1)  Forestry activity (silviculture). Harvesting trees being cultivated for forestry purposes from A-C zoned property shall be permitted as an agricultural activity. 
(2)  Forestry activity (non-silviculture). No trees, including non-protected trees or other vegetation, shall be removed from any residential buffer, except on A-C zoned property, prior to the issuing of a building permit or the approval of a tree removal plan. 
(3)  Tree preservation credit. To encourage the preservation of existing trees on development sites, credit is available as follows: 
a.  Credit for any protected tree preserved during building development will be given on a one for one basis required for the site as defined in section 114-238(e). 
b.  Credit will be given on a one to one basis for each additional six inches up to a maximum of 36 inches total caliper above the minimum for any protected tree required for the site as defined in section 114-238(e) (i.e. preserving a 36-inch tree is worth four canopy trees, 36 - 12 = 24/6 = 4). 
c.  Credit may only be applied towards canopy trees. 
(4)  Exceptions. This section shall not prohibit the removal of a tree: start 
a.  That constitutes a safety hazard or a threat to property or other trees, provided that the planning commission may adopt procedures for demonstrating that such a safety hazard or a threat to property exists. 
b.  That creates a sight obstruction for public streets, provided, however, that the planning commission may adopt procedures for demonstrating that such a sight obstruction exists. 
c.  That, by virtue of harboring insects, vermin or other animals, constitutes a public health hazard, provided, however, that the planning commission may adopt procedures for demonstrating that such a public health hazard exists. 
d.  Whose removal is necessary to accommodate public infrastructure or public easements. 
e.  Necessary for a public street or public right-of-way. 
f.  Necessary to perform a boundary or topographical survey. However, only the minimum number of trees necessary to accomplish such a survey shall be removed. 
g.  That is located on a lot or parcel in an R-1, R-2, R-3, or R-4 (three attached dwelling units or less), zoning district on which a residential structure has been constructed or for which a permit to construct a residential structure has been issued. 
(b)  Tree removal. 
(1)  No tree, including non-protected trees or other vegetation, shall be removed from the residential buffer on any lot or parcel unless the property is zoned A-C or a tree removal plan has been approved in accordance with article V, development plans, of this code. 
(2)  No tree of 12 inches or greater DBH, including non-protected trees, shall be removed from the portion of the tree protection area on any lot or parcel unless the property is zoned A-C or a tree removal plan has been approved in accordance with article V, development plans, of this code. 
(3)  Non-protected trees may be removed from the core area of a lot or parcel. 
(4)  Except as provided for in section 114-237(a)(3) of this article, no protected tree shall be removed from the core area of any lot or parcel unless a tree removal plan has been approved in accordance with article V, development plans, of this code. 
(c)  Tree removal plan. Tree removal plans shall be submitted to the planning commission in the same manner as major development plans as provided for in article V of this code. The planning commission shall consider a tree removal plan in the same manner as major development plans. The planning commission may approve a tree removal plan, disapprove it, or approve it with amendments or conditions. Tree removal plans may be approved by staff for minor development plans in accordance with section 114-76 of this Code. A tree removal plan shall include the following information: 
(1)  An accurately drawn map on 24 inches by 36 inches paper showing any residential buffers and any tree protection areas on the lot or parcel; 
(2)  Inventory of all existing trees of 12 inches or greater DBH located within any residential buffer, tree protection area, adjacent street right-of-way, utility right-of-way or public easement and any protected trees located in the core area. The inventory shall show: the approximate location of each tree, the size (expressed in DBH), and species of each tree; 
(3)  Description of other vegetation in any residential buffer; 
(4)  Identification of trees of 12 inches or greater DBH to be the removed from any residential buffer, tree protection area, street right-of-way, utility right-of-way or public easement and any protected trees to be removed from the core area of the property; 
(5)  Names and addresses of owners of adjacent properties, including across any abutting streets; 
(6)  An accurately drawn map on 24 inches by 36 inches paper showing any proposed re-plantings or other proposed screen; 
(7)  A description of the size, species, and number of any proposed replanting materials and a description of any other proposed screen; and 
(8)  The clearing limits of the proposed project. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-238. - Landscaping. 
(a)  Application. This section shall apply to any new development or construction in any R-A, MH-1, O & I, O-2, O-3, B-1, B-2, B-3, L-I, H-I, and R-4 (over three attached dwelling units) districts and for property on which public and semi-public uses or buildings are located. 
(1)  For any development or construction that increases the gross floor area, lot area, or parking area of an existing structure or development located in any of the districts listed above by 25 percent or more. 
(2)  For any new development or construction for which development plans are required. 
(3)  For any development or construction that increases by 25 percent or more the gross floor area, lot area, or parking area of an existing structure or development for which development plans were required. 
(4)  If trees of eight inches DBH or greater are removed from any street right-of-way or any tree protection area in order to accommodate the erection of a billboard, the site shall be landscaped according to the planting requirements in this article. 
(5)  Property for which development plans approved by the planning commission or staff prior to the effective date of this article shall not be subject to its provisions. However, any property for which development plan approval has lapsed will be subject to the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Landscaping plan required. A landscaping plan shall be required as follows: 
(1)  Landscaping plans submitted must be designed only by an architect, civil engineer, landscape architect, or a professional landscape designer certified by the State of Alabama. 
(2)  For developments or structures for which development plans are required to be reviewed, a tree removal/landscaping plan shall be included as part of the development plans. The approved landscaping plan, as approved or amended, shall be included as part of any subsequent submittal for a building permit. 
(3)  For any other property, development, or construction to which this article applies, a landscaping plan shall be included as part of the submittal for a building permit. 
(4)  At a minimum, landscaping plans shall include the following information. Additional information may be required by the planning commission. 
a.  Any tree removal plan previously approved for the property. 
b.  Location of any tree protection areas and residential buffers on the property. 
c.  A tree survey showing the location, species, and size of any existing trees of 12 inches DBH or greater located within any residential buffer, tree protection area, adjacent street right-of-way, utility right-of-way or public easement and any protected trees in the core area and indicating any such trees that are proposed to be removed as part of the development of the property. 
d.  Information showing the location, type of tree (see section 114-239) and sizes of all proposed landscaping materials, including existing trees and other plant materials that will be incorporated into the landscaping. 
e.  Calculations showing that the proposed plant materials will satisfy the planting requirements as described in this article. 
f.  Information about the type and coverage of the irrigation system. 
g.  The location of any existing or planned power lines or other utilities located on the proposed development or on any adjacent rights-of-way. 
h.  Measures to be taken to prevent damage to any existing trees that are to be incorporated into the landscaping plan. 
i.  Buffers shall be shown in plan view and cross section view. 
(d)  Modifications. The planning commission may modify the strict application of this section for major development plans and staff may modify the strict application of this section for minor development plans when: 
(1)  The required plantings or planting area would conflict with utilities, easements, overhead power lines, or as otherwise recommended by staff. 
(2)  A proposed roadway improvement constructed for public purposes will encroach into the landscaping area. 
(3)  Topographical conditions warrant special consideration of the site design. 
(e)  Plant diversity. Diversity of plantings should be strived for in all required landscape plantings, and in no case should one species constitute more than 50 percent of total plantings on site. Landscaping shall largely utilize native or non-competing exotic plant species. Landscaping shall not utilize any exotic vegetation which is likely to out-compete or otherwise displace native vegetation, or require excessive use of fertilizers and water to maintain growth. In addition, the use of existing native species of plant material is strongly encouraged. Existing natural ground cover should be retained where possible by avoiding scraping, grading and sodding. Where the planting requirements require additional trees or shrubs to be installed in an existing natural area, it should be done in a manner which minimizes disturbances to native species. 
(f)  Existing landscaping. To encourage the preservation of existing vegetation on development sites, the following credit is available: Existing non-pine trees 12 inches or greater DBH and pine trees 18 inches or greater DBH may be credited on a one for one basis for trees required by this article. 
(g)  Canopy (shade) trees. Canopy (shade) trees are required for all development sites under the following schedule: 
(1)  At a minimum, one canopy (shade) tree shall be provided per acre or any portion thereof for all industrial projects. 
(2)  At a minimum, two canopy (shade) trees shall be provided per acre or any portion thereof for all commercial projects. 
(3)  In addition to the above, to encourage the use of canopy (shade) trees on development sites, canopy (shade) trees may be substituted for understory trees at two understory trees for one canopy (shade) tree. 
(h)  Foundation (building) landscaping. Though not required as part of this article, it is strongly encourage that foundation (building) landscaping be utilized on all development sites. 
(i)  Required landscaped areas. All developments shall include a perimeter landscaped area of at least ten feet in depth adjacent to any public right-of-way unless a shallower depth is approved by the planning commission in its approval of the landscaping plan and subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  At a minimum, four trees and eight shrubs for each 100 feet of linear foot frontage along the right-of-way shall be preserved or planted. The remaining area within the perimeter strip shall be landscaped with grass, ground cover, or other landscape treatment. 
(2)  Trees and other landscaping required in the perimeter strip shall be maintained to assure unobstructed visibility between three and nine feet above the average grade of the adjacent street and the driveway intersections through the perimeter strip. 
(3)  Understory trees shall be utilized when placing trees in the vicinity of power lines. 
(4)  The landscaping should be evenly spaced throughout the perimeter strip; however, nothing in this article shall prohibit the clustering of this material. 
(5)  A berm may be utilized in the perimeter landscaped area next to vehicular use areas and must be consistent with section 98-10 of the City of Dothan Code of Ordinances for sight triangles. If plantings are to be utilized as part of the berm, the berm should be terraced in a manner that retains water for these plantings. 
(j)  Interior planting areas. All vehicular use areas having 40 or more parking spaces shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Interior planting areas are to be located within or adjacent to the parking area as tree islands at the end of parking bays. Interior planting areas shall be located to most effectively accommodate stormwater runoff and provide shade in large expanses of paving and contribute to orderly circulation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. Interior planting areas shall incorporate pedestrian refuges as appropriate. 
(2)  No more than 15 parking spaces shall be permitted in a continuous row, excluding spaces fronting buildings, without being interrupted by an interior planting area with the following provisions: 
a.  The interior planting area shall include, at a minimum, one tree and four shrubs. 
b.  Required trees and shrubs shall be selected from section 114-239(a) and trees shall be at least eight feet in height and 1.25 inches in diameter measured at six inches above grade after planting. The remainder of the interior planting area shall be landscaped with ground cover or other approved material not to exceed three feet in height. 
(3)  In no case shall the minimum planting area contain less than 150 square feet. The planted area of the island must be at least nine feet in width, measured from back of curb to back of curb and the full length of the parking space. The minimum width of any channeling or canoe type island shall be six feet. All interior planting areas must be curbed to prevent vehicular encroachment. 
(4)  Compacted subgrade soil in parking islands shall be removed to a depth of 24 inches and refilled with topsoil. Additional soil depth may be achieved by mounding. 
(k)  Detention areas. The bottom of detention areas may be either seeded or sodded. The sides of detention areas may be either seeded with an erosion control blanket, hydro-seeded or sodded. However, for detention areas located adjacent to the public right-of-way of major thoroughfares, the sides must be sodded. Detention areas must be maintained as landscaped areas. If the seeding option is utilized, no certificate of occupancy will be issued for the project until such time as that seeding has taken root and grass is growing. A cash or surety bond may be utilized if necessary to ensure growth. 
(l)  Irrigation. Irrigation for landscaping is required. A temporary system is allowable, but must remain functional for the first eight months after planting. Proof of intent to water all new plantings is required. Landscape islands surrounded by pavement are required to have a permanent system. If a landscaped area contains primarily species native to the immediate region, or plants acceptable for xeric landscaping, the planning commission or staff may waive the requirement for installation of an irrigation system. Consideration of a waiver of the irrigation requirements shall be supported by appropriate documentation provided by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-239. - Plant list. 
(a)  Recommended plants. This list is not meant to be all inclusive. It is the responsibility of the applicant to select species that are appropriate to the location in which they will be planted. Alternate species may be used as determined by the city horticulturist. A landscape architect licensed by the State of Alabama or a landscape designer licensed by the State of Alabama may recommend other species for consideration to the city horticulturist that are suited to the soils and climate of Dothan, Alabama. 
(1)  Recommended canopy (shade) trees. 
Red Maple Leyland Cypress (buffer only) Chinese Pistache 2 Bald Cypress (wet areas only) Oak (all varieties) 1 Elm (all varieties) 1, 2 Ginkgo 2 Zelkova Tulip Poplar 1 Southern Magnolia 1 River Birch Sycamore 1 Pine (all varieties) (mass planting only in buffers) Palms (height a minimum of twenty (20) feet at maturity) (2 palms = 1 canopy tree) 1 Deodar Cedar 2 Canopy (shade) trees shall be a minimum of 1.5 inches in caliper measured at six inches above grade, eight feet in height or 15 gallons.  
1 Not recommended for buffers. 
2 Recommended for parking lots. 
(2)  Recommended understory trees. 
Flowering Dogwood 2 Crepe Myrtle (excessive pruning not permitted) Holly (all varieties) Grancy Graybeard Japanese Mapl 2 Lilac Chaste Sourwood Purple Leaf Plum Yaupon (weeping, etc.) Loquat 1 Magnolia (except Southern Magnolia) Althea 1 Carolina Silver Bell 2 Red Bud 2 Cherry Laurel 2 Southern Wax Myrtle Ligustrum Understory trees must be a minimum of 1.25 inches in caliper measured at six inches above grade, eight feet in height or 15 gallons for a single trunk or eight feet in height with a minimum of three trunks or 15 gallons for a multiple trunk.  
1 Not recommended for buffers. 
2 Recommended for parking lots. 
(3)  Recommended shrubs. 
Abelia Deutzia 1 Leucothoe Ligustrum Anise Elaeagnus Loropetalum Almond, Flowering Fatsia 1 Mahonia 1 Arborvitae Forsythia Nandina 1 Azalea Holley Fern 1 Oleander Banana Shrub Indian Hawthorn 1 Osmanthus, Tea Olive Barberry 1 Hardy ferns 1 Pittsoporum Bottlebrush Gardenia 1 Roses Boxwoods 1 Hydrangeas Spiraea (all varieties) Camellia Hollies Viburnum Sasanquas 1 Junipers 1 Yew Chinese Quince Italian Cypress 1 Shrubs shall be a minimum of 18 inches or three gallons and ground cover shall be a minimum of three one-gallon or nine four-inch diameter cups.  
1 Not recommended for buffers. 
(4)  Prohibited plants. The following plants shall not be installed as a landscape material: 
a.  Bamboo. 
b.  Cogon grass. 
c.  Kudzu. 
d.  Popcorn or Chinese Tallow trees (Sapium Sebiferum). 
e.  Water grass. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-240. - Maintenance and bonding. 
(a)  Maintenance of landscaping. 
(1)  All required plant material shall be maintained in good condition at all times. Landscaping materials, including preserved trees that die or become diseased or damaged shall be replaced. The replacement plants shall have size equal to or greater than those being replaced. Replacement plants shall also be the same type as those being replaced unless the city horticulturist determines that one or more alternate species would be more likely to thrive, in which case one of the alternate species may be used. A landscape architect licensed by the State of Alabama or a landscape designer licensed by the State of Alabama may recommend other species for consideration to the city horticulturist that are suited to the soils and climate of Dothan, Alabama. All plant material shall be kept free of weeds, refuse and debris. 
(2)  Fences, walls, berms and other structures that deteriorate or are damaged by any cause shall be repaired and/or replaced. 
(3)  Buffers that are altered by erosion, construction, or other causes shall be restored. 
(4)  Commercial landscaping operations are required to remove all debris associated with these operations including grass trimmings, tree trimmings, shrub trimmings, etc. 
(5)  Failure to maintain landscaping materials, replace landscaping materials that have died or become diseased or damaged or remove debris from commercial landscaping operations shall be a violation of this article and shall be punishable as provided for in section 114-236(b). 
(b)  Completion of landscaping or bond required. No certificate of occupancy, for any building or development covered by this article shall be issued unless the required landscaping, including any required commercial or industrial landscape buffers has been completed. A certificate of occupancy may be issued if a cash or surety bond for the completion of the required landscaping is provided to the city as outlined below. In addition, no final subdivision plat approval will be granted unless the required landscaping, including any required residential landscape buffers has been completed. Final approval may be granted if a cash or surety bond for the completion of the required landscaping is provided to the city as outlined below. 
(1)  Performance bond. A performance bond shall be provided to the city to ensure installation of the required landscaping. The performance bond may be in the form of cash or check equivalent to 100 percent of the estimated cost of installation or a contract for that amount. The timing of installation of required plant materials shall be designated by the city horticulturist. Estimates shall be from a licensed landscape contractor and good until installation is authorized. If a contract for the work is submitted, the contract time shall extend to the period so authorized for installation. A surety bond equivalent to 125 percent of the cost may be utilized instead of a cash bond accompanied by the submission of an estimate from a licensed contractor. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-241. - Buffers/buffer-yards. 
(a)  Purpose. This section requires landscaped buffers to be provided and maintained when certain land uses are adjacent to or directly across from each other in order to protect uses from the traffic, noise, glare, trash, vibration and odor likely to be associated with a more intensive land use. Landscaped buffers are also required to conserve the values of land and buildings and to provide adequate light and air. The width of the buffer and the required plantings within the buffer vary depending upon the relative intensities of the abutting or adjacent uses. Understory trees shall be utilized when placing trees in the vicinity of power lines. 
(b)  Natural landscape buffers. Nothing in this section precludes the use of a natural landscape buffer. A natural buffer must contain the minimum number of plantings required for that buffer type. Natural buffers must be protected against heavy equipment and any grading activity during construction. Loss of trees in a designated natural buffer shall be replaced at a ratio of two to one. 
(c)  Landscaped buffer location. Landscaped buffers shall be located at the perimeter of the development site for any given use, and shall not be located in any portion of a public right-of-way. If the proposed development or expansion of an existing development is located on a larger tract of land, the buffer shall extend only for the length of the development. 
(d)  Landscaped buffer modifications. The planning commission for major development plans or staff for minor development plans may require enhanced and/or alternative buffering, landscaping, or locations to ensure compliance with the intent of these regulations for obnoxious heavy impact uses such as wastewater treatment plants, tallow plants, slaughterhouses, landfills, etc. 
(e)  Building setbacks and buffers. In the event that the required landscape buffer exceeds the required building setback (section 114-132), then the required building setback shall be equal to the required landscape buffer. 
(f)  Accessory buildings and buffers. Residential accessory buildings and/or structures shall not encroach into designated natural buffers. Residential accessory buildings and/or structures may be placed within non-designated natural buffers in compliance with section 114-183(b). 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 114-242. - Buffer types. 
(a)  Minimum requirements. The following buffers are the minimum required. There shall be no buffer required between land uses in the same classification. Illustrations of buffer types are available from the planning and development department. 
(1)  A type 1 buffer shall be required between single-family residential adjacent to or across a right-of-way of no more than two lanes from attached multi-family residential land uses (apartments). The buffer shall be at least 20 feet in width and may contain either a privacy fence at a minimum of six feet in height and a maximum of eight feet in height or, at a minimum, seven trees and 20 shrubs per each 100 linear feet. The construction of a privacy fence above six feet in height must be approved by the building official [see section 114-183(b)(3)]. If the landscaping option is utilized, the landscaping should be as evenly spaced throughout this area as possible. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of a natural buffer, subject to section 114-241(b). Any disturbance of the approved buffer shall require full restoration. Refer to Table 1. 
(2)  A type 2 buffer shall be required between residential adjacent to or across a right-of-way of no more than two lanes and non-residential land uses including apartments containing up to 25,000 square feet of gross floor area. The buffer shall be at least 25 feet in width. The 25-foot buffer must contain, at a minimum, eight trees and 30 shrubs per each 100 linear feet. Where vacant single family residential abuts vacant or existing non-residential property, the type 1 buffer shall apply on the residential side. Residential buffers shall be recorded on the final plat map. A type 2 buffer shall apply where a new non-residential land use including apartments containing up to 25,000 square feet of gross floor area is adjacent to or across a right-of-way of no more than two lanes from an existing or future residential land use and shown on the approved development plan. The landscaping should be as evenly spaced throughout this area as possible. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of a natural buffer, subject to section 114-241(b). Any disturbance of the approved buffer shall require full restoration. Refer to Table 1. 
(3)  A type 3 buffer shall be required between residential adjacent to or across a right-of-way of no more than two lanes and non-residential land uses including apartments containing 25,001 to 50,000 square feet of gross floor area. The buffer shall be at least 30 feet in width. The 30-foot buffer must contain, at a minimum, eight trees and 30 shrubs per each 100 linear feet. Where vacant single family residential abuts vacant or existing non-residential property, the type 1 buffer shall apply on the residential side. Residential buffers shall be recorded on the final plat map. A type 3 buffer shall apply where a new non-residential land use including apartments containing 25,001 to 50,000 square feet of gross floor area is adjacent to or across a right-of-way of no more than two lanes from an existing or future residential land use and shown on the approved development plan. The landscaping should be as evenly spaced throughout this area as possible. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of a natural buffer, subject to section 114-241(b). Any disturbance of the approved buffer shall require full restoration. Refer to Table 1. 
(4)  A type 4 buffer shall be required between residential adjacent to or across a right-of-way of no more than two lanes and non-residential land uses including apartments containing 50,001 to 75,000 square feet of gross floor area. The buffer shall be at least 40 feet in width. The 40-foot buffer must contain, at a minimum, 15 trees and 75 shrubs per each 100 linear feet planted in offset double rows. Where vacant single family residential abuts vacant or existing non-residential property, the type 1 buffer shall apply on the residential side. Residential buffers shall be recorded on the final plat map. A type 4 buffer shall apply where a new non-residential land use including apartments containing 50,001 to 75,000 square feet of gross floor area is adjacent to or across a right-of-way of no more than two lanes from an existing or future residential land use and shown on the approved development plan. The landscaping should be as evenly spaced throughout this area as possible. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of a natural buffer, subject to section 114-241(b). Any disturbance of the approved buffer shall require full restoration. Refer to Table 1. 
(5)  A type 5 buffer shall be required between residential adjacent to or across a right-of-way of no more than two lanes and non-residential land uses including apartments containing more than 75,000 square feet of gross floor area. The buffer shall be at least 50 feet in width. The 50-foot buffer must contain, at a minimum, 15 trees and 75 shrubs per each 100 linear feet planted in offset double rows. Where vacant single family residential abuts vacant or existing non-residential property, the type 1 buffer shall apply on the residential side. Residential buffers shall be recorded on the final plat map. A type 5 buffer shall apply where a new non-residential land use including apartments containing more than 75,000 square feet of gross floor area is adjacent to or across a right-of-way of no more than two lanes from an existing or future residential land use and shown on the approved development plan. The landscaping should be as evenly spaced throughout this area as possible. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of a natural buffer, subject to section 114-241(b). Any disturbance of the approved buffer shall require full restoration. Refer to Table 1. 
(6)  A type 6 buffer shall be required between industrial uses containing up to 25,000 square feet of gross floor area and any other land use. The buffer shall be at least 30 feet in width. The 30-foot buffer must contain, at a minimum, eight trees and 30 shrubs per each 100 linear feet. Where vacant single family residential is adjacent to or across a right-of-way of no more than two lanes from vacant or existing industrial property, the type 1 buffer shall apply on the residential side. Residential buffers shall be recorded on the final plat map. The landscaping should be as evenly spaced throughout this area as possible. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of a natural buffer, subject to section 114-241(b). Any disturbance of the approved buffer shall require full restoration. Refer to Table 1. 
(7)  A type 7 buffer shall be required between industrial uses containing 25,001 to 50,000 square feet of gross floor area and any other land use. The buffer shall be at least 35 feet in width. The 35-foot buffer must contain, at a minimum, eight trees and 30 shrubs per each 100 linear feet. Where vacant single family residential is adjacent to or across a right-of-way of no more than two lanes from vacant or existing industrial property, the type 1 buffer shall apply on the residential side. Residential buffers shall be recorded on the final plat map. The landscaping should be as evenly spaced throughout this area as possible. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of a natural buffer, subject to section 114-241(b). Any disturbance of the approved buffer shall require full restoration. Refer to Table 1. 
(8)  A type 8 buffer shall be required between industrial uses containing 50,001 to 75,000 square feet of gross floor area and any other land use. The buffer shall be at least 40 feet in width. The 40-foot buffer must contain, at a minimum, 15 trees and 75 shrubs per each 100 linear feet planted in offset double rows. Where vacant single family residential is adjacent to or across a right-of-way of no more than two lanes from vacant or existing industrial property, the type 1 buffer shall apply on the residential side. Residential buffers shall be recorded on the final plat map. The landscaping should be as evenly spaced throughout this area as possible. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of a natural buffer, subject to section 114-241(b). Any disturbance of the approved buffer shall require full restoration. Refer to Table 1. 
(9)  A type 9 buffer shall be required between industrial uses containing more than 75,000 square feet of gross floor area and any other land use. The buffer shall be at least 50 feet in width. The 50-foot buffer must contain at a minimum, 15 trees and 75 shrubs per each 100 linear feet planted in offset double rows. Where vacant single family residential is adjacent to or across a right-of-way of no more than two lanes from vacant or existing industrial property, the type 1 buffer shall apply on the residential side. Residential buffers shall be recorded on the final plat map. The landscaping should be as evenly spaced throughout this area as possible. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of a natural buffer, subject to section 114-241(b). Any disturbance of the approved buffer shall require full restoration. Refer to Table 1. 
Table 1 
Buffer Types 
Width and Landscape Requirements Land Use Type Width Content (Each 100 linear feet along Buffer) Between each Use Minimum Feet Trees Shrubbery Detached Residential and Attached Multi-Family 1 20 7 20 Residential and Non-residential (Up to 25,000 sq. ft. of GFA) 2 25 8 30 Residential and Non-residential (25,001 to 50,000 sq. ft. of GFA) 3 30 8 30 Residential and Non-residential (50,001 to 75,000 sq. ft. of GFA) 4 40 15 Offset double rows 75 Offset double rows Residential and Non-residential (Greater than 75,000 sq. ft. of GFA) 5 50 15 Offset double rows 75 Offset double rows Industrial (Up to 25,000 sq. ft. of GFA and Any Other Use 6 30 8 30 Industrial (25,001 to 50,000 sq. ft. off GFA) and Any Other Use 7 35 8 30 Industrial (50,001 to 75,000 sq. ft. of GFA) and Any Other Use 8 40 15 Offset double rows 75 Offset double rows Industrial (Greater than 75,000 sq. ft. of GFA) and Any Other Use 9 50 15 Offset double rows 75 Offset double rows  
(b)  Landscaped buffer reductions. Requests for a buffer reduction may be approved by the planning commission. A statement from the developer justifying the proposed reduction and a detailed plan specifying species, size, height, spacing, etc., which illustrates that an effective buffer will be established if approved. Such statement and plan must accompany the application. The provision of this section cannot be further varied. Landscaped buffers may be reduced under the following circumstances: 
(1)  A type 1 buffer may not be reduced. 
(2)  A type 2 buffer may be reduced five feet with the addition of an eight-foot wood privacy fence plus a 20-percent increase in plant material. In no event shall the buffer be less than 20 feet in width. 
(3)  A type 3 buffer may be reduced five feet with the addition of an eight-foot wood privacy fence plus a 20-percent increase in plant material. In no event shall the buffer be less than 25 feet in width. 
(4)  A type 4 buffer may be reduced by ten feet by adding an eight-foot privacy fence plus a 20-percent increase in plant material. In no event shall the buffer be less than 30 feet in width. 
(5)  A type 5 buffer may be reduced by ten feet by adding an eight-foot privacy fence plus a 20-percent increase in plant materials. In no event shall the buffer be less than 40 feet in width. 
(6)  Unless adjacent to residential, a type 6 buffer may be reduced by five feet by adding an eight-foot privacy fence in addition to the planting requirements. In no event shall the buffer be less than 25 feet in width. 
(7)  Unless adjacent to residential, a type 7 buffer may be reduced by five feet by adding an eight feet privacy fence in addition to the planting requirements. In no event shall the buffer be less than 30 feet in width. 
(8)  A type 8 or 9 buffer may not be reduced. 
(9)  Regardless of the buffer-type required, if an existing development is proposed to be expanded and there is insufficient width available, all required plant materials for that buffer type shall be installed as practicable. The applicant may not take credit for existing trees and shrubs. 
(c)  Landscape buffer requirements within mixed-use development. Where a building site is used for a single mixed-use development, landscaped buffers shall not be required between the various constituent uses. Landscaped buffers required at the perimeter of the development shall be based upon the individual uses on each portion of the property. 
(d)  Vehicular use areas. All non-residential vehicular use areas (parking, access and circulation) adjacent to or across a right-of-way of no more than two lanes from any residentially zoned property and having 40 or more parking spaces shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  The vehicular use area shall be separated from the residential area by a continuous shrub hedge. 
(2)  Shrubs shall be a minimum of two and one-half feet in height at installation, and shall be spaced three feet on center or closer. Said hedge shall be maintained at a height of no lower than three feet. 
(3)  Parking spaces facing into the shrub hedge shall include wheel stops unless the shrub hedge is planted four feet or more back from a raised curb. 
(4)  If a berm is utilized, it may act in lieu of the continuous shrub hedge. 
(Ord. No. 2015-336, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Secs. 114-243-114-253. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-1, § 1, adopted January 3, 2017, repealed §§ 114-254-114-273, which pertained to telecommunication facilities. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. Refer to Chapter 96 for similar provisions. 

Secs. 114-254-114-273. - Reserved. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1977 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1977 Code, as updated through Ord. No. 96-276, enacted August 27, 1996, which are included herein. Sections of the 1977 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1977 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1-1-3 1-1-1-3 1-4 1-9 1-5 1-8 1-6, 1-7 1-10, 1-11 1-8-1-10 1-4-1-6 1-12 1-12 2-2-2-4 2-36-2-38 2-5 2-211 2-6 2-41 2-7, 2-8 70-31, 70-32 2-9 2-1 2-10, 2-11 2-241, 2-242 2-12 2-2 2-20, 2-21 2-39, 2-40 2-22 2-71 2-23-2-28 2-102-2-107 2-29 2-101 2-30-2-32 2-108-2-110 2-42-2-52 2-141-2-151 3-1(a), (b) 10-51 3-1(c) 10-1 3-2 10-52 3-3 10-2 3-4 10-26 3-7(a)-3-7(e) 10-81-10-85 3-21-3-24 10-111-10-114 3-25, 3-26 10-114, 10-115 3-27 10-53 3-28 10-115 3-41-3-46 10-141-10-146 4-1 14-26, 14-27 4-2 14-27 4-4 14-1 4-5 14-591 4-6, 4-7 14-436, 14-437 4-20, 4-21 14-651, 14-652 4-22 14-652 4-31 14-681 4-35 14-682 4-40, 4-41 14-683, 14-684 4-42 14-622 4-43(b) 14-621 4-50 14-56 4-51(f) 14-59 4-52 14-86 4-53, 4-54 14-89 4-55, 4-56 14-87, 14-88 4-57 14-90 4-58 14-57 4-64, 4-65 14-116, 14-117 4-66(a)-4-66(c) 14-118-14-120 4-67, 4-68 14-121, 14-122 4-70, 4-71 14-123, 14-124 4-72 14-125, 14-126 4-73 14-58 4-80 14-156 4-80.1 14-157 4-81 14-159 4-84-4-89 14-160-14-165 4-97 14-191 4-99, 4-100 14-192, 14-193 4-102(1) 14-221 4-102(2) 14-592 4-103 14-222 4-104, 4-105 14-194, 14-195 4-106 14-158 4-110, 4-111 14-466, 14-467 4-116, 4-117 14-531, 14-532 4-120-4-122 14-251-14-253 4-123 14-253 4-125 14-254 4-131, 4-132 14-281, 14-282 4-133 14-281 4-134-4-138 14-283-14-287 4-139 14-255 4-150, 4-151 14-346 4-152-4-155 14-347-14-350 4-161 14-376 4-163, 4-164 14-377, 14-378 4-166(1) 14-406 4-166(2) 14-592 4-167 14-407 4-170, 4-171 14-379, 14-380 4-172 14-351 4-173, 4-174 14-561, 14-562 4-176-4-178 14-316-14-318 4-178(2) 14-592 4-179 14-319 5-1-5-3 18-31-18-33 5-4, 5-5 18-39, 18-40 5-6(b) 18-34 5-7 18-35 5-8 18-30 5-9, 5-10 18-27, 18-28 5-11, 5-12 18-36, 18-37 5-13-5-15 18-38 5-16 18-29 5-17, 5-18 18-1, 18-2 5-19 18-41 5-20 18-356 5-21, 5-22 18-276, 18-277 5-23-5-25 18-311-18-313 5-26(a)-5-26(d) 18-96-18-99 5-29 18-316 5-30 18-351 5-40 94-61 5-42 94-81 5-44, 5-45 94-31, 94-32 5-60-5-62 6-1-6-3 5-63 6-31 5-64 6-33 5-65 6-61 5-65.1 6-62 5-66 6-63 5-67-5-69 6-66-6-68 5-70, 5-71 6-64, 6-65 5-72 6-32 5-73 6-97 5-74 6-96 5-75, 5-76 6-98, 6-99 5-80 94-106 5-81-5-88 94-108-94-115 5-89 94-107 5-100-5-102 18-181-18-183 5-103 18-188 5-104-5-106 18-185-18-187 5-107 18-184 5-110-5-120 18-226-18-236 5-121-5-123 18-237 5-130 94-147 5-132 94-146 5-133 94-148 5-134 94-150 5-135 94-149 5-141, 5-142 18-296, 18-297 5-144-5-154 18-299-18-309 5-155 18-298 5-156 18-361 5-157 18-371 5-158 18-373 5-159-5-162 18-362-18-365 5-162.1 18-281 5-163 18-291 5-164(a) 18-283, 18-284 5-164(c), (d) 18-285 5-164(e) 18-284 5-165-5-167 18-292-18-294 5-168 18-282 5-169-5-173 18-396-18-400 6-1-6-3 22-1-22-3 8-1, 8-2 30-31, 30-32 8-3-8-6 30-34-30-37 8-9, 8-10 30-38, 30-39 8-11 30-33 8-12 30-43 9-1 62-1 9-2-9-4 62-2 9-5 62-66 9-6, 9-7 62-68, 62-69 9-7.1 62-67 9-9 98-238 9-10 62-3 9-12 62-171 9-14 62-136 9-23 62-5 9-38-9-45 62-137 9-46 30-44 10-1 38-1 10-1.1 38-2 10-2, 10-3 38-3, 38-4 11-1-11-3 46-1-46-3 11-4 46-3 11-5-11-7 46-31-46-33 11-8 46-35 11-9 46-34 11-10 46-36 11-11, 11-12 46-66, 46-67 11-12.1 46-68 11-14 82-72 11-15 82-37 82-72 11-16, 11-17 62-4 11-19-11-22 62-101-62-104 11-22.1 62-105 11-23 46-4 11-24 102-201 11-25 102-269 11-31-11-35 106-31-106-35 11-37, 11-38 106-36, 106-37 11-40 46-97 11-41 46-96 11-42-11-53 46-98-46-109 11-71 14-496 11-72-11-76 14-498-14-502 11-77 14-497 11.1-1 50-2 11.1-2 50-1 11.1-11-11.1-13 50-31-50-33 11.1-21-11.1-24 50-35-50-38 11.1-25 50-34 11.1-26 50-39 11.1-31-11.1-34 50-66-50-69 11.1-41-11.1-44 50-96-50-99 11.1-51, 11.1-52 50-126, 50-127 11.1-71 50-3 11.1-81 50-4 12-1 58-1 12-2 58-36 12-3(a)-(e) 58-37 12-3(f), 12-3(g) 58-2, 58-3 12-4-12-15 58-38-58-49 12-16 58-4 12-17 58-50 12-18 58-5 13-1 54-61 13-2-13-6 54-63-54-67 13-7 54-62 ch. 14, art. I 42-27 14-1-14-3 42-28-42-30 14-4 42-26 14-5 42-31 14-6 42-33 14-7 42-68 14-8 42-32 14-9-14-12 42-34-42-37 14-13 42-66 14-14 42-69 14-15 42-67 14-16 42-70 14-17 42-96 14-19 42-97, 42-98 14-20, 14-21 42-99, 42-100 15-40-15-43 54-31-54-34 15-45 54-35 16-1-16-4 74-1-74-4 17-1-17-8 86-1-86-8 18-1-18-6 90-1-90-6 18-7 90-41 18-18 90-42 18-19, 18-20 90-76, 90-77 18-21-18-24 90-101-90-104 18-25, 18-26 90-7, 90-8 18-37-18-42 90-136-90-141 18-53 90-172 18-54-18-59 90-221-90-226 18-60 90-196 18-61 90-171 18-62 90-197 19-2-19-4 98-41-98-43 19-5-19-10 98-45-98-50 19-12 98-51 19-13-19-15 30-40-30-42 19-16-19-18 98-52-98-54 19-19-19-21 98-9-98-11 19-22 98-44 19-23-19-25 98-127-98-129 19-25(c) 98-126 19-26 98-4 19-27 98-6 19-28 98-5 19-29, 19-30 98-7, 98-8 19-31 98-3 19-31.1, 19-31.2 98-1, 98-2 19-32-19-38 98-86-98-92 19-50-19-55 98-161-98-166 19-59-19-67 98-196-98-204 19-70 98-236 19-71, 19-72 98-266, 98-267 19-72.1 98-268 19-73-19-76 98-270-98-273 19-77 98-269 19-78 98-274 19-79 98-237 19-80 98-275 19-81 98-239 20-0 102-334 20-1, 20-2 102-2, 102-3 20-3 102-1 20-20 102-32 20-22, 20-23 102-33, 102-34 20-24 102-31 20-25 102-61 20-25(A)-20-25(K) 102-62-102-72 20-27, 20-28 102-101, 102-102 20-29, 20-30 102-131, 102-132 20-30.1 102-133 20-31 102-134 20-32 102-103 20-33(a)-20-33(c) 102-161-102-163 20-33(d)-20-33(f) 102-165-102-167 20-33(g) 102-164 20-40, 20-41 102-196, 102-197 20-42 102-202 20-43 102-198 20-44 102-203 20-45(a) 102-231 20-45(b), (c) 102-232 20-45(d)-20-45(h) 102-233-102-237 20-46 102-238 20-47-20-50 102-296-102-299 20-51 102-331 20-52, 20-53 102-267, 102-268 20-54 102-300 20-55 102-266 20-56 102-199 20-57 102-333 20-59 102-200 20-61, 20-62 102-335, 102-336 20-63 102-332 20-70 82-37 20-71 82-1 20-72 82-38 20-73(a), (b) 82-73 20-73(c) 82-71 20-73(d), (e) 82-73 20-75 82-36 20-76 82-39 21-20 110-31 21-21, 21-22 110-33, 110-34 21-23 110-38 21-24-21-30 110-71-110-77 21-31-21-33 110-35-110-37 21-34 110-32 21-51(b), 21-51(c) 34-33, 34-34 21-61 34-32 21-62 34-31 21-63-21-68 34-56-34-61 21-69, 21-70 34-86, 34-87 21-71, 21-72 34-111, 34-112 21-73 34-136 21-74-21-76 34-138-34-140 21-77, 21-78 34-161, 34-162 21-80, 21-81 34-164, 34-165 21-82 34-137 21-83 34-36 21-84 34-35 22-79 34-163 23-1 114-1 23-2, 23-3 114-221, 114-222 23-4, 23-5 114-261, 114-262 23-6-23-8 114-437-114-439 23-9 114-263 23-10(a) 114-556 23-10(b)-23-10(e) 114-558-114-561 23-10(f)(1) 114-562 23-10(f)(2) 114-557 23-10(g) 114-563 23-10(h) 114-562 23-20-23-24 114-46-114-50 23-30-23-32 114-176-114-178 23-33 114-180 23-40, 23-41 114-91, 114-92 23-42(a)-23-42(c) 114-131-114-133 23-42(d), (e) 114-134 23-42(f), (g) 114-135 23-43, 23-44 114-476, 114-477 23-50 114-3 23-51 114-6 23-60 114-5 23-62, 23-63 114-7, 114-8 23-64(a) 114-516 23-64(b) 114-519 23-64(c), 23-64(d) 114-517, 114-518 23-65 114-436 23-66 114-179 23-67 114-2 23-68 114-4 23-70 114-264 23-71, 23-72 114-301, 114-302 23-72.1 114-303 23-73-23-77 114-304-114-308 23-78 114-391 23-79-23-84 114-393-114-398 23-85 114-392 23-86-23-92 114-346-114-352  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1977 Code, as updated through Ord. No. 96-276, enacted August 27, 1996, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1977 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances which precede Ord. No. 96-276, enacted August 27, 1996, but which were never included in the 1977 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since Ord. No. 96-276, enacted August 27, 1996, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 96-228  7-16-96 23-67 114-2 96-276  8-27-96 1 94-147 94-149 97-17  1-14-97 1 2-1 97-24  1-21-97 1 110-72 97-126  4-15-97 1 30-37 97-277  8-12-97 1 2-36 97-278  8-19-97 1 18-41 2(5-156) 18-361 18-372 2(5-157) 18-371 2(5-158) 18-373 2(5-159)-2(5-162) 18-362-18-365 97-378 10-28-97 1(23-93), 1(23-94) 114-602, 114-603 1(23-95) 114-601 1(23-96)-1(23-111) 114-604-114-619 97-349 10-28-97 2 114-176 3 114-178 98-74  3-31-98 1-7       Added Adopt. Ord., p. xi 98-80  4- 7-98 1 114-2 98-146  6-16-98 1       Added 102-70.1 98-200  8- 4-98 1 18-41 98-220  8-18-98 1 114-601 2 114-604(f)(14)b. 98-307 10-27-98 1       Added 102-35 98-330 11-10-98 1       Added 62-173 98-331 11-10-98 1 102-34(f) 99-3  1- 5-99 2 38-1(a) 3 38-3(a) 99-44  2-16-99 1 42-26 42-33 42-67(3), (4) 42-69(2) 42-70(d) 42-70(f) 42-70(h)(1) 42-96(9)       Added 42-96(10) 42-97, 42-98 42-100 2       Added 42-101 99-54  2-23-99 1 110-33 99-227  8-10-99 1 2-103 2000-1  1- 4-00 2 14-56 2000-14  1-11-00 1 102-62(c) 102-62(e) 102-64(tit.) 102-64(a) 102-64(c) 102-64(e)       Rpld 102-65 102-66(tit.) 102-66(a) 102-66(d) 102-66(f) 102-66(h)       Rpld 102-67 102-70(tit.) 102-70(a), (b) 102-70(e), (f) 2       Added 102-73 2000-38  2- 1-00 1 102-70(e), (f) 2 102-73 2000-69  3- 7-00 1 90-102(g) 2       Added 90-102(h) 2000-87  3-21-00 1 102-62(c) 2000-259  8-29-00 1 18-41(2) 2000-277  9-12-00 1 102-62(c) 2000-279  9-12-00 1 110-33 2000-339 11- 7-00 1 30-35(a) 2000-355 11-21-00 1 2-103 2001-94  3-20-01 1 102-164, 102-165(c) 2001-95  3-20-01 1 114-302 2001-109  4- 3-01 1 102-70.1 2001-122  4-17-01 1 102-101-102-103 2001-185  6-19-01 1 14-1-14-55 2001-224  7-24-01 1 54-61-54-74       Added 54-68 2001-251  8-21-01 2 38-1-38-3 2001-252  8-21-01 1 114-516 114-518, 114-519 2001-254  8-21-01 1 30-37(d) 2001-323 10-23-01 1 102-62(c) 102-63(c), (e) 102-64(c), (e) 102-66(d), (h)       Dltd 102-68 102-69(a), (b) 2001-332 10-30-01 1 2-1 2001-363 12- 4-01 1 94-147 2002-80  3-19-02 1       Dltd 114-476, 114-477 113-1-113-6       Added 99-1-99-6 2002-87  3-26-02 1 18-41 2002-104  4- 9-02 1 102-165(c) 2002-121  4-23-02 1 102-131       Dltd 102-132, 102-133 102-134       Added 102-135 2002-155  5-21-02 1 6-65 2002-193  7- 2-02 1 102-1(a) 102-2(a), (c), (d) 102-3(e) 102-31 102-32 102-34 102-35       Added 102-36, 102-37 2002-216  7-30-02 1 102-131(a)(2)b., (3)b., (7)b., (8)b.       Added 102-136-102-138 2002-299 10- 8-02 1 2-242(b) 2002-313 10-15-02 2 38-1, 38-2 2002-315 10-15-02 1 14-8 2002-336 11-12-02 1       Added 102-70.2 2002-343 11-19-02 1 42-33 2002-350 11-26-02 1 114-301 2003-46  2-18-03 1 2-143 2003-118  4-29-03 1 102-34 2003-162  6-17-03 1 102-34 2003-198  7-22-03 1       Added 38-5-38-13 2003-199  7-22-03 1       Added 62-190 2003-240  9- 2-03 1 2-36 2003-303 10-21-03 1 46-96-46-109 2003-304 10-21-03 1 98-52(c) 2004-98  4-20-04 1       Added 102-70.3 2004-212  9- 7-04 1 102-62(c) 102-63(c) 102-64(c) 102-66(c), (d) 102-69(b) 102-70(e) 102-70.1(e) 102-70.2(d) 102-70.3(d) 102-71 2004-310 12-21-04 1 94-147, 94-149 2005-25  1-25-05 1 2-1 2005-159  6- 7-05 1 14-25-14-31 2005-224  8- 9-05 1 98-129(d) 2005-272  9-27-05 1 42-33 2005-281 10-11-05 1 102-62(c) 102-63(c) 102-64(c) 102-66(d) 102-69(b), (c) 102-70(e) 102-70.1(e) 102-70.2(d) 102-70.3(d) 102-71(b) 2005-305 10-25-05 1       Added 102-34(b)(3.1) 2 102-137 2005-314 11- 1-05 1 2-36 2006-35  2- 7-06 1 102-36(b), (c) 2006-123  5-16-06 1       Added 94-82, 94-83 2006-192  8- 1-06 1       Added 18-401-18-408 2006-248  9-19-06 1 94-61 2 94-81 3       Added 94-84 2007-47  2- 6-07 1 90-137 2007-48  2- 6-07 1       Added 98-300-98-304 2007-49  2- 6-07 1       Added 98-400-98-404 2007-55  2-13-07 1       Dltd 102-1-102-336       Added 102-1-102-338 2007-117  4- 3-07 1       Dltd 82-1-82-73       Added 82-1-82-123 2007-189  5-29-07 2       Dltd 14-1-14-55       Added 14-1-14-127 2007-190  5-29-07 2       Dltd 38-1-38-13       Added 38-1-38-74 2007-222  6-26-07 1 50-97 2007-289  8-14-07 1 2-1 2007-002(Res.)  9-19-07 90-1-90-226 2007-384 11- 6-07 1       Added 98-3.1 2007-392 11-13-07 1 2-36 2007-393 11-13-07 1 18-1-18-278       Rnbd 18-279-18-408 2007-394 11-13-07 1 110-74 2008-73  3-25-08 1 2-143 2008-102  4-22-08 1 98-300-98-304 2008-103  4-22-08 1 110-73 2008-143  5-20-08 1 2-36 2008-191  7- 1-08 1       Dltd 114-4 2       Added 114-399-114-407 2008-306 10-21-08 1 42-26 2 42-66-42-70 3 42-96-42-101 2008-307 10-21-08 1 82-95 2008-324 11- 4-08 1 2-1 2008-376 12-16-08 1 114-221 2 114-303 2009-220  7-14-09 114-302 2009-310  9-22-09 1 102-35 2009-311  9-22-09 1       Added 102-267(b)(5) 2 102-300(e) 3 102-333 4 102-334(f) 5 102-335 6 102-337 7 102-338(c) 2009-312  9-22-09 1       Added 114-176(f) 2009-313  9-22-09 1 14-12.1 2009-314  9-22-09 1 50-32 2009-355(Act)  5- 5-09 2-149 2010-82  3-23-10 1       Added 83-1-83-18 2010-148  6- 1-10 1 2-36 2010-227  8-17-10 1 2-1 2010-258  9-21-10 1       Dltd 114-1-114-8 114-46-114-50 114-91, 114-92 114-131-114-135 114-176-114-180 114-221, 114-222 114-261-114-264 114-301-114-308 114-346-114-352 114-391-114-398 114-399-114-407 114-436-114-439 114-516-114-519 114-556-114-563 114-601-114-619       Added 114-1-114-13 114-25, 114-26 114-38-114-42 114-54-114-62 114-73-114-81 114-93-114-103 114-115-114-118 114-130-114-132 114-140-114-143 114-155-114-157 114-170-114-188 114-207-114-210 2       Rpld 99-1-99-6 2010-300 11- 2-10 1 2-242 2011-1  1- 4-11 1 2-1 2011-29  2-15-11 1 114-117(a)(6) 2 114-131 2011-212  9- 6-11 1       Added 30-60-30-66 2       Added 30-67 2011-213  9- 6-11 1       Added 6-4 2011-286 10- 4-11 1 114-76(a) 2 114-117(a) 3       Dltd 114-131       Added 114-131.1.-;EOL;114-131.6. 4 114-132(b) 5 114-157(i) 6 114-183(b) 7 114-184(f) 2012-8  1-17-12 1 114-182 2012-119  5-15-12 1       Dltd 114-187, 114-188 2       Added 114-236-114-242 2012-208  8-21-12 1 10-145 2012-319 12- 4-12 1       Added 82-96, 82-97 2013-4  1-15-13 1 6-4 2013-94  4- 5-13 1       Added 94-88, 94-89 2013-149  6- 4-13 1       Added 83-19-83-32 2013-263  9- 3-13 1       Rpld 114-207-114-210       Added 114-207-114-224 2014-25  2- 4-14 2 50-32 2014-46  3- 4-14 1 6-100-6-103 2014-298 11-18-14 1       Added 106-61, 106-62 2015-259  9-15-15 1 2-1 2015-336 12- 1-15 1       Rpld 114-1-114-13 114-25, 114-26 114-38-114-42 114-54-114-62 114-73-114-81 114-93-114-103 114-130-114-132 114-140-114-143 114-155-114-157 114-170-114-186 114-207-114-224 114-236-114-242       Added 114-1-114-13 114-25, 114-26 114-38-114-43 114-54-114-63 114-73-114-82 114-93-114-103 114-115-114-118 114-130-114-132 114-140-114-143 114-155-114-159 114-170-114-186 114-207-114-224 114-236-114-242 114-254-114-273 2015-337 12- 1-15 1 102-233(a) 2 102-334(f) 3       Added 102-336 4 102-337(b) 2015-338 12- 1-15 1       Rpld 102-61-102-64, 102-66, 102-69-102-73       Added 102-61-102-66 102-69-102-71 102-74, 102-75 2015-366 12-15-15 1       Added 102-366-102-385 3       Rpld 58-1-58-5 58-36-58-50 2016-79  3-15-16 1       Rpld 2-106, 2-107       Added 2-111 2016-246  9- 6-16 1 114-116 114-131.2, 114-131.3 114-131.6, 114-131.7 2016-262  9-20-16 1 94-147 94-149 2017-1  1- 3-17 1       Rpld 114-254-114-273 2       Added 96-1-96-34 2017-15  1-17-17 1 10-1, 10-2, 10-26, 10-51-10-53, 10-81-10-85, 10-111-10-115, 10-141-10-152 2017-112  4-18-17 1 102-1-102-3 2 102-31-102-38 3 102-137 2017-113  4-18-17 1 2-242 2017-114  4-18-17 2 14-1-14-13, 14-21-14-29, 14-41-14-43, 14-51-14-57, 14-66-14-72, 14-81, 14-82, 14-91, 14-92, 14-96-14-99, 14-111-14-123, 14-126, 14-127 2017-115  4-18-17 2 38-1-38-16, 38-26-38-40, 38-51, 38-52, 38-56, 38-66-38-74 2017-116  4-18-17 1 6-102 2017-159  5-16-17 1 2-1 2017-160  5-16-17 1 94-82 (Res. of)  7-19-17 90-1-90-10, 90-41-90-105, 90-136-90-143, 90-171, 90-172, 90-196, 90-197, 90-220-90-226 2017-294  9-19-17 1       Added 54-91-54-98 2017-295  9-19-17 1 6-102 2017-348 11- 7-17 1 114-157(i) 2       Added 114-225 2017-349 11- 7-17 1 114-225 2017-376 11-21-17 1 6-102 2017-395 12- 5-17 1 10-145 2018-19  2- 6-18 1 114-131.2 2018-115  5-15-18 1 114-26 2 114-131.4 (Res. of)  6-20-18 90-6(b) 90-76 90-77(d)(20) 90-102(h)(9) 90-137 90-138 90-139(c)(2) 90-141 90-142(c) 2018-168  7-17-18 1 102-70.2(d) 2018-212  8-21-18 1 114-26 2 114-131.3 3 114-131.5 2018-235  9- 4-18 1, 2 114-157 2018-250  9-18-18 1 2-1 2019-1  1-15-19 1       Added 114-83 2019-17  2- 5-19 1 114-157(d), (f)  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the 1975 Code of Alabama. 
Code of Ala., 
1975 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1-1 1-2 3-1-1 et seq. Ch. 10 3-7A-1 et seq. 10-2 5-18-1 et seq. 18-41 5-19A-1 18-41 6-5-122 46-3 9-17-100 et seq. 14-66 10-4-107 18-41 18-22 tit. 11, ch. 44E Char. Arts. I-XI 11-4E-168 Char. § 11-44E-168 11-40-10 1-2 11-43-59 Ch. 38 11-43-81 Ch. 74 11-43-122 2-1 11-43-181 38-61 11-44E-3 Char. § 11-44E-40 11-44E-12 Char. § 11-44E-3 11-44E-40 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II, 
Div. 3 11-44E-43 Char. § 11-44E-44 11-44E-48 2-36 11-44E-50 2-39 11-44E-53 1-1 11-44E-70 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II, 
Div. 2 11-44E-71 Char. § 11-44E-3 11-44E-73 Char. § 11-44E-44 11-44E-90 2-141 11-44E-90 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II, 
Div. 4 11-44E-92 Char. § 11-44E-180 11-44E-92(2) Char. § 11-44E-45 Char. § 11-44E-93 2-144 11-44E-95- 
11-44E-100 2-146-2-151 11-45-1 1-4 11-45-8 Char. § 11-44E-51 Ch. 38 11-45-9 1-4 38-29 83-17 83-29 11-47-7.1 30-37 11-47-20 2-2 11-47-40 et seq. Ch. 22 11-47-113 62-136 11-47-116 98-162 98-166 11-47-117 46-3 106-33 114-96 11-47-118 106-33 114-96 11-47-130 et seq. Ch. 46 11-47-135 Ch. 82 11-48-1 et seq. 14-117 Ch. 50 11-49-1 Ch. 110, Art. II 11-50-1 et seq. Char. § 11-44E-52 Ch. 102 Ch. 102, Art. II, Div. 2 Ch. 102, Art. III 11-50-50 et seq. Ch. 102, Art. IV 11-51-1 et seq. Ch. 94 11-51-40-11-51-74 106-35 11-51-97 Ch. 18, Art. III 11-51-105 18-276 11-51-121 18-41 11-51-122 18-3 11-51-124- 
11-51-129 18-41 11-51-150 et. seq. 18-15 11-51-180 et. seq. 18-2 11-51-200 et seq. Ch. 94, Art. II tit. 11, ch. 52 114-4 11-52-1 et seq. 42-27 Ch. 70 90-1 11-52-3 70-31 11-52-14 70-31, 70-32 114-4 11-52-30 et seq. Ch. 90 11-52-33 90-104 11-52-80 et seq. 114-97 11-52-80 114-4 114-94 11-52-80(d) 114-94 11-52-81 42-70 114-103 11-53A-1 et seq. 14-111 11-53B-1 et seq. 14-111 11-67-20 et seq. Ch. 106, Art. II 106-33 106-36, 106-37 11-68-2 et seq. Ch. 50, Art. II 11-68-5 Ch. 50, Art. II 11-82-1 et seq. 70-32 114-4 12-14-1 et seq. 30-31 12-14-13 30-37 13A-1-2 30-63 62-1 13A-1-2(14) 30-61 13A-7-26 102-2 13A-11-52 62-171 13A-11-77 et seq. 18-41 13A-11-180 62-2 13A-11-181- 
13A-11-183 62-2 13A-12-111, 
13A-12-112 62-136 14-6-22 30-37 15-13-20, 15-13-21 30-37 15-13-22(c)-(e) Ch. 18, Art. IV 15-13-80 et seq. 30-37 22-3-1 et seq. 46-3 22-3-183 et seq. 6-32 22-18-1 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. II 22-18-7 Ch. 34, Art. II 22-22A-1 et seq. Ch. 102, Art. IV, 
Div. 2 22-24-1 et seq. 46-36 23-1-6 114-212 tit. 28, ch. 3A 6-101 28-3-1 et seq. 6-1 28-3A-25 6-31 32-1-4 30-37 32-5-1 et seq. Ch. 98 32-5A-1 et seq. 98-1 32-5A-191 62-1 32-5A-191(e)-(g) 62-1 32-5A-260 et seq. Ch. 98, Art. VI 32-5A-261- 32-5A-265 98-197-98-201 32-5A-330 6-103 32-6-231 98-92 32-9-20 et seq. 98-127, 98-128 32-13-1 et seq. Ch. 98, Art. V 98-162 32-13-2(c) 98-162 34-1-1 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. III 34-4-6 Ch. 18, Art. III 34-6-1 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. X 34-35-1 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. XIII 34-36-3 et seq. 14-56 34-37-1 et seq. 14-72 14-91 36-21-46 38-61 36-25-1(15) 30-61 37-3-33 18-41 37-8-50 et seq. 14-57 39-2-1 et seq. 2-241 40-2-1 et. seq. 18-2 40-2A-3 18-2 40-12-93 Ch. 18, Art. V 40-12-139 Ch. 18, Art. IX 40-12-174 Ch. 18, Art. XIII 40-12-176 18-41 40-12-224 18-23 40-23-1 et seq. Ch. 94, Art. II, 
Div. 2 40-23-21 94-61 40-23-24 Ch. 18, Art. XIII 40-23-25 18-23 40-23-60 et seq. Ch. 94, Art. II, 
Div. 3 40-23-82 18-23 40-25-1 94-106 40-25-1 et seq. Ch. 94, Art. III 40-25-29 94-108 40-26-1 et seq. Ch. 94, Art. IV 40-26-1(b) 94-147 41-8A-1(1) 30-61 41-9-166 42-27  
