TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE
PAGE
I. SHORT TITLE
1
n. PURPOSE
1
Section 1.0 Generally 1
m. ADMlNISTRA TION AND REVIBW PROCEDURES 2
Section LO Enforcing Officer 2
Section 2.0 Building Permit Required . 2.1 2 Plot Plan 3 2.2 Site Plan Review 3
2.3 Approval of Building Permit Application 4
2.4 Denial of Building Permit Application 4
2.5 Certificate of Occupancy 5 2;6 Expiration of Building Permit 5
2.7 Unlawful Structure 5
2.8 Penalties 6
2.9 Remedies 6
2.10 Jnterpretation· of District Boundaries 6
2.11 Interpretation ·of Uses 7
2.12 · Unclassified Uses 7
Section 3.0 Zoning Board of Adjustment 7
3.1 Appointment 7
3.2 Procedure 8
3.3 Powers and Duties 8
3.4 Administrative Review 8
Section 4.0 Variances 8 4.1 Justification 8
4.2 Application for a Variance 9
4.3 Public Notice Required 10
4.4 Action on Appeals 10
4.5 Appeals - How Taken 10 4.6 Stay of Proceedings 11 4.7 Appeals from Action of the Board 11
~ ~11
TABLE OF CONTENTS (CONTINUED)
ARTICLE
PAGE
m. Section 5.0 Special Exception Uses 11 5.1 Special Exception Procedu!es 11
5.2 Public Notice 12
Section 6.0 Amendments to Zoning Ordinance or
to the Zoning Map 13
6.1 Authority to Amend 13
6.2 Authorized Petitioners 13
6.3 Petition for Amendment 13
Section 7.0 City Council Action on Amendments 14
7.1 Notification and Adoption Requirements 14
Section 8.0 Limitations on Rezoning Requests 15
IV. DEFINITIONS
16
Section 1.0 Purpose of Definition 16
Section 2.0 Interpretation 16
Section 3.0 Word Usage 16
Section 4.0 Words and Phrases Defined 16
Section 5.0 Uses Defined 26
5.1 Agricultural Uses 26
5.2 Residential Uses 27
5.3 Institutional Uses 28
5.4 Commercial Uses 30
5.5 Industrial Uses 35
5.6 Temporary Uses 37
V. GENERAL REGULATIONS 38
Section 1.0 Genera) Use Regulations 38
Section 2.0 Application to this Ordinance 38
Section 3.0 Except as Otherwise Provided for in
this Ordinance 38
ii
; ~ -
TABLE OF CONTENTS (CONTINUED)
ARTICLE PAGE
v. Section 4.0 Joint Occupancy 39
Section 5.0 Public Utilities 39
Section 6.0 Non-conforming Uses 39
6.1 Non-conforming Lots of Record 39
Section 7.0 Continuance 40
Section 8.0 Restoration to Safe Condition 40
Section 9.0 Restoration After Damages 40
Section 10.0 Abandonment 40
Section 11.0 Annexed Property 40
Section 12.0 Change in Use 40
Section 13.0 Abandoned Right-of-way 41
Section 14.0 Abatement of Noise, Smoke, Gas,
Vibration, Fumes, Dust, Fire and
Explosion Hazard or Nuisance 41
Section 15.0 Reduction in Lot Area Prohibited 41
Section 16.0 Structures Conforming to District
Regulations but not Other Regulations 41
Section 17.0 Buildings to be Moved 41
VI. ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 42
Section 1.0 AG Agricultural District 42
1.1 Intent 42
1.2 Uses Permitted 43
1.3 Special Exception Uses 44
1.4 Area and Dimensional Regulations 45
1.5 Buffer Requirements 45
1.6 Additional Regulations (When Applicable) 45
iii
~~ "=\ -
TABLE OF CONTENTS (CONTINUED)
ARTICLE
PAGE
VI. Section 2.0 E-1 Single family Residential (Estate) 46
2.1 Intent 46
2.2 Uses Permitted 46
2.3 Special Exception Uses 46
2.4 Area and Dimensional Regulations 47
2.5 Public Buildings 47
2.6 Buffer Requirements 47
2.7 Additional Regulations (When Applicable) 48
Section 3.0 R-1 Single family Residential District 48
3.1 Intent 48
3.2 . Uses Permitted 48
3.3 Special Exception Uses 49
3.4 Area and Dimensional Regulations 49
3.5 Public Buildings 49
3.6 Buffer Requirements so
3.7 Additional Regulations (When Applicable) so
Section 4.0 R-2 Single family Residential District so
4.1 Intent so
4.2 Uses Permitted 50
4.3 Special Exception Uses 51
4.4 Area and Dimensional Regulations 51
4.5 Public Buildings 52
4.6 Buffer Requirements 52
4.7 Additional Regulations (When Applicable) 52
Section 5.0 R-2A Affordable Housing District 52
5.1 Intent 52
5.2 Uses Permitted 52
5.3 Special Exception Uses 53 SA Area and Dimensional Regulations 53
5.5 Public Buildings 53
5.6 Buffer Requirements 53
5.7 Additional Regulations (When Applicable) 54
Section 6.0 R-3 Multifamily Residential District 54
6.1 Intent 54
6.2 Uses Permitted 54
6.3 Special Exception Uses .,..
55
6.4 Area and Dimensional Regulations 55
6.5 Public Buildings 56
iv
:! -
TABLE OF CONTENTS (CONTINUED)
ARTICLE PAGE
VI.
Section 7.0 RG Single family Residential
(Garden Home District) 57
7.1 Intent 57
7.2 Uses Permitted 57 ..
7.3 Special Exception Uses 57
7.4 Area and Dimensional Regulations 57
7.5 Buffer Requirements 59
7.6 Additional Regulations (When Applicable) 59
Section 8.0 RT Townhouse Residential District 59
8.1 Intent 59
8.2 Uses Permitted 59
8.3 Special Exception Uses 60
8.4 Area and Dimensional Regulations 60
8.5 Buffer Requirements 61
8.6 Additional Regulations (When Applicable) 61
Section 9.0 MP Manufactured/ Mobile Home Park District 62
9.1 Intent 62
9.2 Uses Permitted 62
9.3 Site Standards 62
9.4 Installation 63
9.5 Storage Facilities, Accessory Uses and Structures 63
9.6 Off-street Parking and Streets 64
9.7 Service Facilities 64
9.8 Buffer Requirements 64
9.9 Signs 64
9.10 Landscaping 64
9.11 Deck (Patio) 64
9.12 Ownership 64
9.13 Fences 65
Section 10.0 MS Manufactured (Mobile) Home Subdivision 65
10.1 Intent 65
10.2 Uses Permitted 65
10.3 Area and Dimensional Regulations 65
10.4 Manufactured (Mobile) Home Standards 66
10.5 Procedure for Plat Approval 66
10.6 Additional Regulations .... 66
v
. _,-
TABLE OF CONTENTS (CONTINUED)
ARTICLE
PAGE
VI. Section 11.0 0-1 Office Building District 67
11.1 Intent 67
11.2 Uses Permitted 67
11.3 Special Exception Uses 67
11.4 Area and Dimensional Regulations 68
11.5 Buffer Requirements 69
11.6 Additional Regulations 69
Section 12.0 B-1 Neighborhood Business District 70
12.1 Intent 70
12.2 Uses Permitted 70
12.3 Special Exception Uses 70
12.4 Area and Dimensional Regulations 71
12.5 Buffer Requirements 72
12.6 Additional Regulations (When Applicable) 72
Section 13.0 B-2 General Business District 73
13. l Intent 73
13.2 Uses Permitted 73
13.3 Special Exception Uses 74
13.4 Area and Dimensional Regulations 74
13.5 Buffer Requirements 75
13.6 Additional Regulations (When Applicable) 75
Section 14.0 M-1 Light Industrial District 76
14.1 Intent 76
14.2 Uses Permitted 76
14.3 Special Exception Uses 77
14.4 Area and Dimensional Regulations 77
14.5 Buffer Requirements 78
14.6 Additional Regulations (When Applicable) 78
Section 15.0 M-2 Heavy Industrial District 79
15.1 Intent 79
15.2 Uses Permitted 79
15.3 Special Exception Uses 79
15.4 Area and Dimensional Regulations 80
15.5 Buffer Requirements 80
15.6 Additional Regulations (When Applicable) 80
~
Section 16.0 M-3-S Strip Mining District 81
16. I Intent 81
16.2 Uses Permitted 81
vi
ARTICLE
VI. Section
Section
TABLE OF CONTENTS (CONTINUED)
16.0 M-3-S Strip Mining District
16.3 Area and Dimensional Regulations
16.4 Additional Requirements
17.0 :MR Municipal Reserve District
17.1 Intent
17.2 Zoning of Annexed Area
17. 3 Rezoning from the MR District
17.4 Permitted Uses and Development Standards
17 .5 Action on Annexation Ordinances
vn. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
Section 1.0 Area Modification for Lots of Record
Section 2.0 General Yard Requirements
2.1 Front Yard Modifications
2.2 Rear Yard Modifications
·' Section 3.0 Height Modifications
Section 4.0 Fences and Walls
Section 5.0 Porches, Terraces, Balconies, Cornices
and Eaves
Section 6.0 Accessory Buildings and Structures
Section 7.0 Satellite Dish Antennas
Section 8.0 Temporary Structures and Building Material
Storage
Section 9.0 Garage or Yard Sales
Section 10.0 Private Swimming Pools
Section 11.0 Fanns
Section 12.0 Regulations Pertaining to Manufactured
Homes
vii
PAGE
81
81
82
82
82
82
82
83
83
84
84
84
84
85
85 I
85
86
87
88
88
88
89
89
91
ARTICLE
Section
TABLE OF CONTENTS (CONTINUED)
13.0 Buffers
13.1 Definition
13.2 General Requirements for Buffers/Screening
13.3 Modification or Waiver
vm. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
Section 1.0 Generally
1.1 Special Exception Procedures
1.2 Public Notice Required
Section 2.0 Hobby Fanns
Section 3.0 Shopping Centers
Section 4.0 Gasoline Service Stations
Section 5.0 Restaurants (Fast Food)
Section 6.0 Hospitals
Section 7.0 Nursing Care Facilities
Section 8.0 Cemeteries
Section 9.0 Home Occupations
Section 10.0 Mini-warehouses
Section 11.0 Private Tennis Courts
Section 12.0 Industrial Parks
Section 13.0 Transmission Towers (Commercial)
IX. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Section 1.0 Purpose of Off-street Parking and Loading
Requirements
viii
PAGE
92
92
92
93
94
94
94
95
95
96
96
98
99
99
100
100
101
102
103
104
106
106
TABLE OF CONTENTS (CONTINUED) ))
PAGE PAGE
ion 1.0 Purpose of Off-street Parking and Loading lnspections 138
Requirements 106 139
1.1 Off-street Parking and Loading Terms Defined 106 139
1.2 Required Off-street Parking Spaces 107 139
1.3 Off-street Parking Design Requirements 111 139
1.4 Location of Required Parking 112 140
1.5 Parking Prohibitions 113 on Public
1.6 Access Controls 113 140
1.7 Required Off-street Loading Spaces 114
1.8 Off-street Loading Design Standards 115 140
1.9 Change in Parking and Loading Requirements 115
140
ULATIONS 116 140
.on 1.0 Purpose and Intent 116
1.1 Definitions Applicable to this Ordinance 116 142
1.2 General Regulations Applying to all Signs 120
1.3 Exempt Signs, Permit Exemptions 121 142
on 2.0 Signs Permitted in Residential Districts 123 142
on 3.0 Signs Permitted in the B-1 Neighborhood 5 142
Business District 124
142
on 4.0 Signs Permitted in the B-2 General
Business District 127 143
on 5.0 Signs Permitted in the 0-1 Office Building
District 130
on 6.0 Signs Permitted in the IVl-1 Light Industrial
and the M-2 Heavy Industrial District 134
on 7.0 Signs Permitted in the AG Agriculture
District 136
.on 8.0 Billboard Regulations 136
on 9.0 Portable Sign Regulations 137
on 10.0 Construction and Maintenance of Signs 138
ix
ZONING ORDINANCE, FULTONDALE, ALABAMA
ORDINANCE NUMBER 433
AN ORDINANCE, IN PURSUANCE OF THE AUTHORITY GRANTED BY
CODE OF ALABAMA, 1975, VOLUME 10, TITLE 11, CHAPTER 52, AS
AMENDED AND SUPPLANTED BY ALL APPLICABLE LAWS TO PROVIDE FOR
THE ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS WITHIN THE CORPORA TE LIMITS OF
FULTONDALE, ALABAMA: TO REGULATE WITHIN SUCH DISTRICTS THE
HEIGHT, NUMBER OF STORIES, AND SIZE OF BUILDINGS AND OTHER
STRUCTURES, THE PERCENTAGE OF LOT THAT MAY BE OCCUPIED, THE
SIZE OF YARDS AND OTHER OPEN SPACES, THE DENSITY OF POPULATION
AND THE USE OF BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND LAND: TO REPEAL ALL
EXISTING ZONING ORDINANCES AND PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION
THEREOF.
THE GENERAL PUBLIC WELFARE REQUIRING IT, be it ordained by the
City Council of Fultondale, Alabama, as follows:
ARTICLE I
SHORT TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known as the Zoning Ordinance of Fultondale, Alabama and the
map herein referred to, identified by the title Zoning Map of Fultondale, Alabama, shall be
further identified by the signature of the Mayor of Fultondale and attested to by the City Clerk.
The Zoning Map of Fultondale is hereby adopted and made a part of this Ordinance. Such map
is filed with the City Clerk of Fultondale at the time of the introduction of the Ordinance and
will remain on file in the office of said clerk. Upon the adoption of this Ordinance, said map
shall show by endorsement thereon the date of such adoption.
ARTICLE II
PURPOSE
Section 1.0 Generally
The zoning regulations and districts as herein established have been in accordance with
a comprehensive plan and are designed: to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from
fire, panic, and other dangers; to promote health and general welfare; to provide adequate light
and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to regulate signs; to avoid undue concentrations
of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, s~~ers, schools,
parks, and other public improvements. The regulations have also been made with reasonable
consideration, among other things, to the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for
particular uses; and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most
appropriate use of land throughout the City.
ARTICLE ID
ADMINISTRATION AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
Section 1.0 Enforcing Officer
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the Building
Inspector of the City. He or she may be provided with the assistance of such other person or
persons as the City Council may direct. The Building Inspector, or the duly authorized
representative, shall in relation to this Ordinance:
1. Review all building permit applications with regard to conformance with all
applicable provisions of this Ordinance and perform required inspections to insure
such conformance.
2. Issue all building permits and maintain records thereof.
3. Issue all certificates of occupancy and maintain records thereof.
4. Issue and renew, where applicable, all temporary use permits and maintain records
thereof.
5. Maintain current zoning maps and records of amendments thereto.
6. Have the right to enter upon any premises at any reasonable time for the purpose
of making inspections of land, structures and buildings necessary to carry out the
enforcement of this Ordinance. If the Building Inspector shall find that any of the
provisions of this Ordinance are being violated, he or she shall proceed to notify,
in writing, the person or persons responsible for such violations, indicating the
nature of the violation(s) and ordering the appropriate action necessary to correct
it. He or she shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or
structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of additions, alterations,or
structural changes thereto; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall
tμce any other action authorized by this Ordinance to insur~ compliance with, or
to prevent violation of its provisions.
Section 2.0 Building Permit Required
It shall be unlawful to commence earthwork or the construction of any building or other
structure, including accessory structures, or signs, or to store building materials or erect
temporary field offices, or to commence the moving, alteration, or repair of any structure,
including accessory structures, until the Building Inspector of the City has issued for such work
a building permit including a statement that the plans, specifications, and intended use of such
building or structure conforms with the provisions of this Ordinance in all respects. Application
for a building permit shall be made to the Building Inspector on forms provided for that purpose.
I
I
\1
2.1 Plot Plan
2.2
A. It shall be unlawful for the Building Inspector to approve any plans or issue
building permits for any excavation or construction until he or she has
inspected such plans in detail and found them in conformity with this
Ordinance. To this end, the Building Inspector shall require that every
application for a building permit be accompanied by a plot plan drawn to
scale, dimensioned, and showing the following in sufficient detail to enable
the Building Inspector to ascertain whether or not the proposed
development is in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
1. The actual shape, proportion and dimensions of the lot to be built
upon.
2. The shape, size and location of all buildings or other structures to
be erected, altered or moved and of any buildings or other
structures already on the lot, both above and below existing grade.
3. The existing and intended use of all buildings or other structures.
4. The setback and side lines of buildings on adjoining lots and such
other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be
essential for determining conformance with the provision of this
Ordinance.
5. Every applicant for the use of land under and by virtue of the
provisions of this Ordinance, shall include therewith a plan showing
the location of necessary fire hydrants with adequate water flow.
In addition thereto, the applicant shall submit to the City a written
agreement between the applicant and the appropriate water
authority specifying that the applicant shall assume the
responsibility of purchasing and having installed such fire hydrants
as required by the Fultondale Fire Department. The applicant shall
also agree to pay the annual rental therefore, and such other
charges that may be l~vied by the water authority for a period of
two years from the date of their installation. Such agreement shall
be submitted to the Building Inspector for his or her and the
Fultondale Fire Department's review and approval, and shall be in
full force and effect at the time of the issuance of any building
permit provided for hereunder. In addition, where applicable, the
applicant shall provide the Building Inspector with copies of all
deed restrictions and/or covenants which pertain to the subject
property.
Site Plan Review
A. New construction and substantial site development expansion of all planned
residential developments: townhomes, garden homes, five (5) or more
3
multifamily dwellings, manufactured (mobile) home parks, manufactured
(mobile) home subdivisions, institutional uses, commercial uses, and
industrial uses shall require the submission and approval of a site plan
prepared by a professional engineer who is licensed in the State of
Alabama, with the minimum information described below. One
reproducible set of plans and five (5) copies of each set shall be submitted
for approval.
1. Cover Sheet with:
a. Name and location of the development; name, address, and
signature of the owner; and name, address, and seal of the
engineer.
b. Vicinity map.
c. Zoning and existing and proposed land use of the site.
d. Date, scale, north arrow, and number of streets.
2. Site layout, including: property dimensions, rights-of-way,
easements, location and dimensions of all buildings (existing and
proposed), setbacks, driveway access, off-street parking and
loading, circulation, screening, buffer yards, and landscaping.
3. Drainage, paving, grading and excavation, erosion and
sedimentation, storm water detention, and floodplain management
controls.
4. Public and private utilities, including the sewage disposal system
and water system.
5. Fire lanes and hydrants. See Subsection 2.1.
2.3 Approval Of Building Permit Application
If, after review, it is found that the proposed construction, excavation, moving
or other alteration (as set forth in the application) is in conformity with the
provisions of this Ordinance, the Building Inspector of the City shall issue a
building permit accordingly.
2.4 Denial Of Building Permit Application
The applicant, upon notification in writing by the Building Inspector of a building
permit denial, may contact the Chairman of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and
request a hearing before that body.
4
2.5 Certificate of Occupancy
No land or building or other structure or part thereof erected, moved or altered
in its use shall be used or occupied until the Building Inspector of the City has
issued a Certificate of Occupancy. Within three (3) days after the owner or his
or her agent has notified the Building Inspector of the City that a building or
premises thereof is ready for occupancy or use, it shall be the duty of the
Building Inspector of the City to make a final inspection thereof, and issue a
certificate of occupancy, if the building or premises or part thereof is found
to conform with the provisions of this Ordinance, or if such certificate is
refused, to state the refusal in writing with the cause. One (1) copy of the
signed statement by the owner or his or her agent regarding the intended use of
the premises, and a signed refusal (if any) shall be kept on file with the records
of the Building Inspector. Appeals from the decision of the building inspector
shall be heard by the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
2.6 Expiration of Building Permit
Any permit under which no construction work has been done above the
foundation wall or other foundation support within six (6) months from the date
of issuance shall expire by limitation, but shall upon reapplication, be renewable,
subject, however, to the provisions of all Ordinances in force at the time of said
application for renewal. In no event shall any permit be renewed more than one
time.
2. 7 Unlawful Structure
A. Any uses of land or dwellings or construction or alteration of buildings or
structures erected, altered, razed or converted in violation of any of the
provisions of this Ordinance are hereby declared to be a nuisance per se.
The Building Inspector is hereby authorized to apply to a court of equity
to abate the nuisance created by such unlawful use of a structure, land or
building. Whenever the Building Inspector has declared a structure to be
in violation of any applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the owner or
occupant shall, within seventy-two (72) hours from receipt of notification
from the Building Inspector to vacate such premises, accomplish such
vacation of said structure or premises which shall not again be used or
occupied until such structure or premises has been adapted to conform to
the provisions of this Ordinance. The service of notification shall be as
follows:
1. By delivery to the owner personally, or by leaving the notice at the
usual place of abode of the owner with a person of suitable age and
discretion; or,
5
..
2. By depositing the notice in the United States Post Office addressed
to the owner at his or her last known address with postage prepaid
thereon; or,
3. By posting and keeping posted twenty-four (24) hours, a copy of
the notice in a conspicuous place on the premises to be repaired.
2.8 Penalties
Any person, firm, corporation, or other organization which violates any provisions
of this Ordinance shall be fined, upon conviction, not less than ten dollars
($10.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus court costs for each
offense. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
The conviction of a violation and imposition of any fine shall not constitute an
exemption from compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
2.9 Remedies
In case any building or other structure is: erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, repaired, converted, or maintained; or any building, structure or land is
used in violation of this Ordinance, the Building Inspector of the City or any other
appropriate authority or any adjacent or neighboring property owner within five
hundred feet (500' ) who would be damaged or caused hardship by such violation,
in addition to other remedies, may: 1. Institute an injunction or Mandamus or
2. other appropriate action or proceedings to stay or prevent occupancy of such
building, structure or land.
2.10 Interpretation of District Boundaries
A. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall make an interpretation of the
Zoning Map of Fultondale upon the request of any person. Where
uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any district shown on said maps,
the following rules shall apply:
1. Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following street
and alley lines or land lot lines, such lines shall be construed to be
such boundaries.
2. In unsubdivided property or tracts where a district boundary
divides a lot, the location of such boundaries, unless same are
indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by the use of the
scale appearing on such maps.
3. Where boundaries are approximately parallel to public right-of-way
lines, such boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto.
6
2.11 Interpretation Of Uses
This ordinance recognizes the limitations of the district use listings given the
infinite variations of essentially similar uses. Therefore, the Building Inspector
is empowered to make interpretations so as to classify any questioned use within
a listed use of most similar impact and characteristics. However, in no case shall
the building inspector interpret a use as falling in one listed use when the use in
question is more similar in impact and characteristics to another listed use. Any
appeals related to the Building Inspector's use interpretation may be filed with the
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
2.12 Unc]assified Uses
A. In the event the Building Inspector finds a new or unusual use that cannot
appropriately fit a listed use in any district, the following procedures shall
be followed:
1. If compatible with the existing zoning district intent, the unclassified
use shall be permitted by Special Exception upon approval and
subject to the conditions set by the Fultondale Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
2. If the unclassified use would not be compatible with the intent of
the existing zoning district intent, the Building Inspector shall
determine the most appropriate zoning district classification and
require the property in question to be rezoned. In addition, the
unclassified use shall be permitted in the new district by special
exception if granted approval by Fultondale Zoning Board of
Adjustment. See Article VID.
3. Following final action on the unclassified use, as (1) and (2) above
may require, the Fultondale Planning Commission may initiate an
amendment to this Ordinance to list the newly permitted use in the
most appropriate district(s).
Section 3.0 Zoning Board of Adjustment
3.1 Appointment
A board of Zoning Adjustment is hereby established. Such board shall be
appointed as provided by Code of Alabama, 1975, Section 11-52-80, or as such,
may be amended; and, it shall have all powers granted therein.
7
3.2 Procedure
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its
affairs and in keeping with the provisions of this Ordinance. Meetings shall be
held at the call of the Chairman, or in his or her absence, the acting Chairman.
He or she may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All
meetings shall be open to the public. The Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes
of its proceedings, showing the vote, indicating such fact and shall keep records
of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be a public record
and be immediately filed in the office of the Board.
3.3 Powers and Duties
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers and duties as
granted in Section 3.2 above and as herein specified.
3.4 Administrative Review
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged
that an error exists in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by
the Administrative Official in the enforcement of this Ordinance.
Section 4.0 Variances
To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this Ordinance
as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, a literal
enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship.
4.1 .Justification
A. Variances to the terms of this Chapter may be granted individual cases
upon a finding by the Zoning Board of Adjustment that the variance will
not be contrary to the public interest and where owing to special
conditions, a literal enfo~cement of the provisions of_ this Ordinance would
result in unnecessary hardship. Another essential factor is that the spirit
of the Ordinance shall be observed and substantial justice done. More
specifically, the board shall determine all of the following criteria have
been satisfied.
1. The Board should make proper adjustment to prevent unnecessary
hardship, even to the extent of authorizing nonconforming uses.
Where the Board authorizes a nonconforming use in a district to
prevent unnecessary hardship, all relevant factoIS, when taken
together, must indicate that the plight of the premises in question
is unique in that they cannot be put reasonably to a conforming use
because of the limitations imposed upon them by reason of their
classification in a specific zone.
8
2. Variances should be permitted only under peculiar and exceptional
circumstances.
3. Hardship alone is NOT sufficient. Alabama statutes require
unnecessary hardship.
4. Mere finap.cial loss of a kind, which might be common to all of the
property owners in a district, is not an unnecessary hardship.
5. When a hardship is self-inflicted or self-created, there is no basis
for claim that a variance should be granted.
6. Variances should be granted sparingly and the spirit of this Chapter,
in harmony with the spirit of State Law, should be carefully
preserved to the end, that the structure of this section would not
disintegrate and fall apart by constant erosion at the hands of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
4.2 Application For A Variance
A. An application for a variance shall be filed with the Office of the Building
Inspector at least twenty-one (21) days ahead of the scheduled hearing date
before the Board of Adjustment. The application shall be filed by the
property owner or the authorized agent of the owner on a form made
available from the Building Inspector and shall include the following:
1. Name, signature and address of the property owner and agent of
the property owner, if any.
2. Address of the property under consideration.
3. Zoning and land use of the property under consideration.
4. Justification for the variance in accordance with ALL of the
criteria in Section 4~0_, Subsection 4.1.
5. A vicinity map showing the location of the property.
6. A plot plan, drawn to scale and dimensioned, showing the property
boundaries and proposed development layout with the variance
noted or highlighted.
7. The names and addresses of adjacent property owners, as shown
on the most recent records of the Jefferson County .. Tax Assessor's
Office.
9
8. A fifty dollar ($50.00) administrative fee is required from the
applicant or agent at the time the application for a variance is made,
plus the cost incurred in notification and publication.
4.3 Public Notice Required
A. At least fifteen (15) days prior to the scheduled Zoning Board of
Adjustment hearing, the Chairman of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
give written notice of the variance request to all adjacent property owners.
Such notice shall be deemed given when deposited in the United States
Mail, first class, postage prepaid, addressed to such property owners at
the addresses as submitted with the variance application. Any error in the
address of such notices shall not invalidate the giving of notice, provided
that no more than five percent (5 % ) of the total number of notices given
contain any such error. Such notice shall state the following:
1. The name of the applicant.
2. The location of the property.
3. The nature of the variance and applicable zoning provisions.
4. The time, date and location of the Zoning Board of Adjustment
hearing at which said application is to be considered.
4.4 Action On Appeals
In exercising the above mentioned powers, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may,
so long as such action is in conformity with the terms of this Ordinance, reverse,
affirm (wholly or partly) or modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination as to what should be made; and, to that end, shall have powers of
the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote
of four members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, decision or determination of the Building Inspector, or to decide in
favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this
Ordinance, or to affect any variation in the application of this Ordinance.
4.5 Appeals - How Taken
Appeals to the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved
of by any officer, department, board or bureau of the City affected by any
decision of the administrative official. Such appeals shall be taken within a
reasonable time, not to exceed thirty (30) days or such lesser period as may be
provided by the rules of the Board, by filing with the Building Inspector and with
the Zoning Board of Adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof.
10
..
The administrative official shall forthwith transmit to the Board all papers
constituting which the action' appealed from was taken.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing of the
appeal, give public notice thereof as well as due notice to the parties in interest,
and decide the same within a reasonable time. At the hearing, any party may
appear in person or by agent or attorney.
4.6 Stay Of Proceedin~s
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed, unless the
Building Inspector certifies to the Zoning Board of Adjustment (after the notice
of appeal is filed by him or her) that by reason of facts stated in the certificate,
a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property.
In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order
which may be granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment or by a court of record
on application, on notice to the Building Inspector from whom the appeal is taken
and on due cause shown.
4. 7 Appeals From The Action Of The Board
Any party aggrieved by any final judgement of the Zoning Board of Adjustment,
may appeal therefrom to the Circuit Court or court of like jurisdiction as provided
by Code of Alabama, 1975, Section 11-52-81, or as the same may be amended
within 15 days from the date of the Board hearing.
Section 5.0 Special Exception Uses
In certain cases, land uses are identified for special zoning treatment. The nature of these
uses is such that, when properly regulated, they are appropriate in several zone districts. In
order to bring about the proper integration of uses into the City's land use pattern, a special set
of criteria or standards may be provided for each use listed in the Special Exception Use
category. Review of these standards will tend to maintain compatibility with adjoining land uses
and it is intended that the Fultondale Zoning Board of Adjustment will review all such proposals
for these types of uses for compliance with the appropriate provisions before approval is granted
and appropriate permits are issued. See Article VID.
5.1 Special Exception Procedures
A. All uses listed as permitted by special exception shall require the
submission of an application to the Zoning Board of Adjustment. An
application for a special exception use shall be filed with the Building
Inspector at least twenty-one (21) days ahead of the schedYled hearing date
before the Zoning Board of Adjustment. An application shall be filed by
the property owner or the authorized agent of the property owner on a
11
• -;
form made available by the Building Inspector. Such form shall be
completed by the applicant or agent and include the following:
1. Name, address and signature of the property owner and agent of
the property owner, if any.
2. Address of the property under consideration.
3. Existing zoning and land use of the property under consideration.
4. Proposed use by Special Exception.
5. A vicinity map showing the location of the property.
6. A plot plan, drawn to scale and dimensioned, showing the property
boundaries and the proposed development layout.
7. In addition, the applicant or agent must at the time of application,
provide the Building Inspector with the names and addresses of
adjacent property owners, as well as those property owners within
five hundred feet (500 ' ) of the subject property as shown on the
most recent records of the Jefferson County Tax Assessor.
8. A seventy-five dollar ($75.00) administrative fee is required from
the applicant or agent at the time the application is made, plus the
cost incurred in the required notification and publication.
5.2 Public Notice
A. At least fifteen (15) days prior to the scheduled Zoning Board of
Adjustment public hearing, the Chairman of the Board of Adjustment shall
give written notice of the proposal to all adjacent property owners, as well
as those property owners within five hundred feet (500' ) of the subject
property. Such notice shall be deemed given when deposited in the United
States Mail,. first class, prepaid, addressed to those property owners at their
addresses as submitted by the applicant at the time application was made.
Any error in the addresses of such notices shall not invalidate the giving
of notice provided not more than five percent (5 % ) of the total number of
notices contain any such error. Such notice shall contain the following:
1. The name of the applicant.
2. The location of the property.
3. The proposed use by Special Exception.
4. The time, date and location of the Zoning Board of Adjustment
Public Hearing.
12
Section 6.0 Amendments To The Zoning The Ordinance Or To The Zoning Map
The regulations and the number, area and boundaries of districts established by this
Ordinance may be amended, supplemented, changed, modified or repealed by the City Council
of the City of Fultondale; but, no amendment shall be considered, unless it is first submitted
to the Fultondale Planning Commission for its review and recommendation. This body may,
on its own initiative, propose changes, hold public hearings (public notice of which shall be
given) for the consideration of any proposed amendment to the provisions of this Ordinance or
to the Official Zoning Map of the City of Fultondale.
6.1 Authority To Amend
Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning
practices warrant such action, the City Council, by favorable vote of a majority
of the members, may amend the regulations or zoning district boundaries herein
established, in accordance with the Code of Alabama, 1975, Section 11-52-78, or
as same may be amended.
6.2 Authorized Petitioners
A petition for amendment of this Ordinance or the Zoning District Boundaries
may be initiated by the City Council, the Planning Commission, or by the owner
or agent of such property owner.
6.3 Petition For Amendment
A. A petition for amendment, when initiated by the property owner or by
authorized agent of such owner, shall meet the application requirements
of this section.
B. The application for rezoning shall be made on a form available from the
Building Inspector and shall be filed with the Building Inspector at least
twenty-one (21) days prior to the Planning Commission hearing. The
applicant shall provide the following information and materials.
1. Name, signature and address of the property owner and agent of
the property owner, if any.
2. Address and legal description of the property under consideration,
accompanied by a copy of the applicable tax maps clearly
identifying the property subject to the rezoning request.
3. Pres~nt and proposed zoning and land use of the property under
consideration.
4. Reason for the rezoning request.
13
5. Availability of required utilities and methods of storm water
drainage and traffic control.
6. A vicinity map, drawn to scale, showing the size and location of
the subject property.
7. A site plan, drawn to scale and dimensioned, showing the property
boundaries, public rights-of-way, and the proposed use and
development layout.
8. The names and addresses of all adjacent property owners, as well
as property owners within five hundred feet (500' ) of the subject
property, as shown on the most recent records of the Jefferson
County Tax Assessor.
9. A one hundred and fifty dollar ( $150.00) administrative fee, plus
the cost incurred in the notification by certified mail and
publication.
Note: When a petition for a zoning change is initiated by the City, rather than
by a property owner or his authorized agent, those items and procedures outlined
under 6.3 (B) must also be followed; although, item 9 shall not apply.
Section 7 .0 City Council Action on Amendments
7.1 Notification and Adoption Requirements
At least fifteen (15) days in advance of the public hearing before the City Council,
the Council shall publish the proposed zoning amendment in full for one (1)
insertion in a newspaper of general circulation published within the City, together
with a notice stating the time and place that the Ordinance is to be considered by
the City Council, and stating further that at such time and place all persons who
desire shall have an opportunity of being heard in opposition to or in favor of the
amendment. The City Clerk shall give written notice ]?y certified mail to all
adjacent property owners as well as those property owners within five hundred
feet (500' ) of the subject property. Following the second public hearing, the
City Council must publish a synopsis of the proposed amendment. This synopsis
should refer to the date and name of the newspaper in which the proposed
amendment was first published. Both insertions must be published fifteen (15)
days in advance of the passage of the Ordinance. If there is no newspaper of
general circulation published within the City, the City Council must have the
synopsis posted in four (4) conspicuous places within the municipality. Until
these publication requirements have been met, no adoption of a zoning ordinance
or amendment thereto will be valid.
After such hearing, the governing body may adopt the Ordinance as reported by
the Planning Commission or in such amended form as it deems best. However,
14
if the governing body makes substantial changes in the Ordinance as first
advertised, the governing body should hold another public hearing after
giving notice as described above.
After the Ordinance is adopted by the governing body, it must again be published
in the same manner as all municipal ordinances, subject to the provisions of the
Code of Alabama, 1975, Section 11-45-8.
Section 8.0 Limitations On Rezoning Requests
Should the City Council reject a rezoning amendment proposal by a property owner, the
same kind of rezoning of the same tract of land will not be considered by the Planning
Commission until a period of six (6) months has elapsed from the date of such action by the City
Council. Furthermore, a withdrawal of the application for rezoning, after the hearing held by
the Planning Commission but prior to the hearing held by the City Council, shall also require
a six (6) month time period before another application may be submitted. However, the
Planning Commission may adjust this time period if in the opinion of a majority of the
Commission, an unusual situation or circumstance exists which would warrant another hearing.
Each time the zoning amendment application is made, the required filing fee must be paid.
Under no condition shall the fee be refunded for failure of such proposed amendment to be
enacted in to law.
15
1
..
"'
Section 1.0 Purpose of Definition
ARTICLE IV
DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Zoning Ordinance, certain terms used in this Ordinance shall have
the meanings defined by this article. In the event a term is not listed in this article or is not
defined elsewhere in this Ordinance, the conventional meaning of the term shall apply.
Section 2.0 Interpretation
The Building Inspector is authorized to make a final determination of the meaning of any
term used in this Ordinance. In the case of any dispute, an appeal of the Building Inspector's
determination may be filed with the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
Section 3.0 Word Usage
In the interpretation of this Zoning Ordinance, the provisions and rules of this section
shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly requires otherwise.
1. Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses and
derivative forms.
2. Words in the singular number shall include the plural number, and words in the
plural number shall include the singular number.
3. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, and the feminine gender shall
include the masculine.
4. The word shall is mandatory, and the word may is permissive.
- 5. The word person includes an individual, firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company or corporation.
Section 4.0 Words and Phrases Defined
The following general terms, when referred to in this Ordinance, shall have the meanings
defined by this section.
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE Any motor vehicle which is partially
dismantled, inoperative (See inoperative motor vehicle) wrecked, or junked
vehicle which is left at any place on a street or highway within the City for a
period of at least seven (7) consecutive days unless such vehicle, in the opinion
of the Fultondale Police Department, endangers traffic flow and poses a
•
traffic safety problem. In this case, such vehicle shall be moved by the
appropriate City department to a safe off-street location.
ABUT. ADJACENT, AD.JOIN OR CONTIGUOUS To physically touch or
border upon or to share a common border with or be separated from the common
border by an easement.
ACCESS A way or means of approach to provide physical entrance to a
property.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE A structure detached from a principal building on
the same lot and customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building
or use.
ACCESSORY USE A use of land or of a building or portion thereof commonly
associated with and integrally related to the principal use of the land or building
on the same lot.
ACRE A measure of land containing 43,560 square feet of area.
ADDITION A structure added to the original structure at some time after
completion of or after a Certificate of Occupancy has been issued for the original
structure.
ALLEY A service way providing a secondary means of access to abutting
property and not intended for general traffic circulation.
ALTERATION Any change or rearrangement in the supporting members of an
existing building, such as: bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or interior
partitions, as well as any change in doors or windows, or any enlargement to a
building or structure whether horizontally or vertically, or the moving of a
building or structure from one location to another.
APPLICANT A person submitting an application for development, a variance,
a special exception use or rezoning.
BASEMENT A portion of a building located wholly or partially underground,
having one-half or more of its floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of
the adjoining ground.
BEDROOM A room marketed, designed, or otherwise intended to function
primarily for sleeping.
BERM A grass covered or landscaped mound of earth with a..slope of 1/3 or
greater on both sides of the mound, used to screen activities of uses.
BLOCK A tract or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public streets other
than alleys.
17
-...
BOARD OF ZONING ADJUSTMENT The Zoning Board of Adjustment of
Fultondale, Alabama.
BOARDER An individual other than a member of a family occupying the
dwelling unit or part thereof, who, for compensation, is furnished sleeping
accommodations and is furnished meals and other services as a part of
consideration.
BUFFER A strip of land that is retained in an undeveloped state for the purpose
of providing a means of screening or separating incompatible land uses, promoting
visual harmony, reducing noise, diverting emissions, reducing the effects of
adjacent lighting and enhancing the natural environment. Buffers may consist of
existing or planted trees, shrubs or vegetation, fences, walls or earth berms. See
typical illustration below.
1-·-··-··- --T-- t: T--·-----------1
I .- - I i , I .
i I ·< ~ • I 1·
: I .. I . ! 1; -- i
I 1-·o :
: I . I
I I ' I '· i
I
I ,
BUFFER:. Aff.AFJ
BUILDING A structure designed to be used as a place of occupancy, storage or
shelter.
BUILDING, FRONT The exterior wall of a building which faces the designated
front lot line of the lot.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL The primary building on a lot or a building that
houses a principal use.
BUILDING HEIGHT The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the finished grade at the front of the building to the highest point of
the roof.
BUILDING LINE OR BUILDING SETBACK LINE A line generally parallel
to the street right-of-way line at a distance equal to the depth of the front yard
required for the zoning district in which the lot is located.
BUILDING SPACING The minimum distance between buildings, measured
from the outermost projection, excluding: bay windows, chimneys, flues,
columns, ornamental features, cornices and eaves.
18
..
CARPORT A roofed structure providing space for the parking or storage of
motor vehicles and enclosed on not more than three (3) sides.
CITY Shall mean the City of Fultondale, Alabama.
CONDOMINRJM An ownership arrangement, not a land use. It is allowed in
any district and under the same restrictions as the land that it comprises. It is
characterized by private ownership and maintenance of designated exterior spaces
by a condominium association of unit owners.
COUNCIL OR CITY COUNCIL Shall mean the City Council of the City of
Fultondale, Alabama.
CUL-DE-SAC A short street designed to have one end permanently closed; the
closed end is terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
DENSITY The minimum required lot area per dwelling unit or the maximum
number of dwelling units per acre of site area.
DEVELOPMENT The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels:
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, alteration, relocation or enlargement
of a structure; any mining, dredging, fitting, grading, paving, excavation, drilling
or disturbance of land; and, any use or extension of the use of the land.
DWELLING Any building or portion thereof, which is designed and used for
residential occupancy.
DWELLING. ATTACHED Three (3) or more dwelling units adjoining one
another by a common wall, roof or floor, such as a townhouse or apartment.
DWELLING, DETACHED A dwelling designed for and occupied by not more
than one family and having no roof, wall or floor in common with any other
dwelling unit, such as: a single family residence, manufactured home, modular
home, patio home or garden home.
DWELLING. MULTIFAMILY A building contalmng two (2) or more
dwelling units on a commonly shared lot, such as a duplex or apartment.
DWELLING, SEMI-DETACHED Two (2) dwelling units adjoining one
another by a common wall, roof or floor, such as a duplex or twin townhouses.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY A dwelling unit on an individual lot, such as:
a single family residence, garden home, patio home, manufactured (mobile) home,
townhouse or modular home. ..,..
EASEMENT Authorization by a property owner of the use of a designated part
of his property by another for a specified purpose.
19
FAMILY One person or a group of two or more persons living together and
inter-related by bonds of consanguinity, marriage, or legal adoption, occupying
the whole or part of a dwelling as a separate housekeeping unit with a common
and single set of culinary facilities. The persons thus constituting a family
may also include two (2) additional guests who occupy rooms for which
compensation may not be paid. Any group of persons not so related, but
inhabitating a single housekeeping unit, shall be considered to constitute one
family for each five persons, including domestic employees, contained in each
group.
FENCE An artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of
materials, or vegetation which. is planted or retained as a means to enclose or
screen areas of land.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS The total area of a building measured by taking the
outside dimensions of the building at each floor level intended for occupancy or
storage.
IMPROVEMENT Any man-made immovable item which becomes a part of,
placed upon or affixed to real estate.
INOPERATIVE MOTOR VEHICLE A motor vehicle which cannot be driven
upon the public streets for reasons including, but not limited to: being
unlicensed, wrecked, abandoned, in a state of disrepair or incapable of being
moved under its own power.
LIV ABLE FLOOR AREA Any floor area within a dwelling usable for any
combination of: sleeping, eating, cooking, recreation or working purposes.
LOT A parcel of land in one ownership, used or set aside and available for use,
as the site of one (1) or more buildings and accessory structures or for any other
purpose.
LOT, CORNER A lot abutting two (2) or more streets at their intersections.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE OR THROUGH A lot having frontage on two
(2) or more streets, but not at their intersections.
LOT, INTERIOR A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE A double frontage lot having a rear yard on a
major street and a front yard and access to a local or marginal access street.
LOT, FLAG A parcel of land which does not have the required minimum lot
width at the building line but has direct access to a public street through a narrow
strip of land which is part of the same lot. The lot lines of the narrow portion
of the lot (the flag pole) are parallel or nearly parallel. These provisions are
20
intended for tracts with limited frontage that would limit the number of lots with the required
width, but the tract would have sufficient area to the rear for an additional lot or two. See
illustration overleaf for examples of various types of lots defined herein including flag lot.
LOT AREA OR LOT SITE The minimum area contained within the property
of the individual parcels of land shown on a subdivision plat or survey. Lot area
excludes any area within an existing or future street right-of-way or any area
devoted to common open space.
LOT FRONTAGE The lot width measured at the street line. When a lot has
more than one (1) street line, lot width shall be measured and the minimum lot
width required by this Ordinance shall be provided at each such line.
LOT LINE A line bounding a lot which divides one (1) lot from another or
from a street or from any other public or private place.
LOT LINE, REAR That lot line which is parallel to and most distant from the
front line of the lot. In the case of an irregular or triangular lot, a line ten feet
(10' ) in length, entirely within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance
from the front lot line shall be considered to be the rear lot line. In the case of
a comer lot or a double frontag~ lot, there are no rear lot lines, but only side lot
lines. See examples below. -
1-i &:~CLOT
;' '""'\""'
..,,. I \ ""IOt\4 ~ ; ·Q \ ' ....... LI~~ -
r;:.Ji.AUIC&P ,...-r
_J__ _ __ _ __l _
•c:r~ f,TU,t.T" ~ -··---·-··-
r--'=l.,.~..,
. I 'D· ·.i a~ L~D _L_.
s rc:iu~.r roH - ··-··-··-
21
LOT LINE. SIDE Any lot line other than a front lot line or a rear lot line.
WT LINE. FRONT The lot line which the principal structure faces shall be
considered the front yard of the lot. In cases where structures face two streets,
the lot line that has the least frontage shall be deemed to be the front yard.
Where lot lines are approximately the same, the owner shall specify which shall
be considered the front yard.
LOT OF RECORD Any validly recorded lot, which at the time of its
recording, complied with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations.
LOT WIDTH The minimum distance measured between the side lot lines at the
required building setback line. In the case of only one side lot line, lot width is
the distance measured between the side lot line and the opposite lot line.
NON-CONFORMITIES Lawful uses of lots, structures or characteristics of
uses which, as a result of the adoption or subsequent amendment to this
Ordinance, no longer conform to all applicable zoning provisions.
OPEN SPACE. COlVIMON Land area within a residential development that is
held in common ownership and maintained by a homeowner's association for all
of the residents for recreation, protection of natural land features, amenities or
buffers; is freely accessible to all residents of the development; and, is protected
by the provisions of this ordinance to insure that it remains in such uses.
Common open space does not include surface water bodies, (i.e. rivers, streams,
lakes or ponds) nor land occupied by non-residential buildings, common driveways
or parking areas or street right-of-way; nor does it include lots for singlefamily
or multifamily dwellings. Common open space shall be left in a natural
state or landscaped, except in the case of recreational structures.
OUTDOOR STORAGE The keeping, in an unenclosed area, of any goods,
materials, merchandise, products or vehicles in the same place for more than
forty-eight (48) hours.
OWNER The person or persons having the right a,nd legal title to, beneficial
interest in or a contractual right to purchase a lot or parcel of land.
PERIMETER The boundaries or borders of a lot, tract or parcel of land.
PLANNING COlVIMISSION Shall mean the Planning Commission of the City
of Fultondale, Alabama.
PORCH A roofed open area, which may be windowed or screened, attached to
and with direct access to or from a building. A porch becomes a~oom within the
building when heated or air conditioned or when the walled area is less than
twenty percent (20%) windowed or screened.
22
PREMISES A lot, parcel, tract or plot or land tog.ether with the structures
thereon.
PROPERTY LINE The lot line or boundary line.
RETAIL The provision of services or the sale of goods and merchandise at
retail prices to the general public at large for personal or household use or
consumption.
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA An accessory structure designed to receive
television broadcasts relayed by microwave signals from earth orbiting
communication satellites.
SCREEN To visually shield or obscure one abutting or nearby structure or use
from another by means of opaque fencing, walls, berms or densely planted
vegetation.
SIGHT TRIANGLE A triangular-shaped portion of land established at street or
driveway intersections in which nothing is erected, placed, planted, or allowed
to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight distance of motorists
entering or leaving the intersection. See typic~l illustration below.
I
:l~---"w
/ / 'i(W RE51C£N0Al COUCCTCI\ srncu t'' \ '-'-'--'---+----
--- f\".V ·1 --~
SITE A parcel or parcels of land intended to have one or more buildings or
intended to be subdivided into one or more lots.
23
SITE AREA A minimum land area required to qualify for a particular use or
development. Site area is taken from an actual site survey and excludes:
Land within an existing or future street right-of-way, or utility right-of-way
easement;
Land which is not contiguous or is cut off by a major barrier;
Land which is part of a previously - approved development; and
Land which is zoned for another use.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION USE A use which is permitted, subject to special
exception is a use that would not generally be appropriate without restriction(s)
throughout the zoning district; but which, if controlled as to number, area,
location or relation to the neighborhood, would not be detrimental to public
health. This use is permitted subject to a Special Exception Use permit being
granted by the Fultondale Zoning Board of Adjustment and further subject to
appropriate permits being issued in accordance with the provisions of this
Ordinance.
STORY That portion of a building included between the upper surface of a floor
and upper surface of the floor or ceiling next above. A mezzanine or partial floor
shall be counted as a story if the vertical distance from the floor next below to
the floor or ceiling next above is twenty-four (24 ' ) feet or more. A basement
shall be counted as a story if it is used as livable area (in the case of dwellings)
or is used by the principal use (in the case of other uses) a story if it is used as
livable area in the case of dwellings or is used by the principal use in the case of
all other uses.
STREET Any vehicular way which has been dedicated to the public use,
including all land within the right-of-way.
STRUCTURE Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the
ground or attached to anything having a fixed location on the ground. All
buildings are structures, but not all structures are buildings.
SUBDIVISION The division of a lot, tract or parcel or land into two (2) or
more lots, plats, sites or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of sale or building development. Such term includes resubdivision
of land, and when appropriate to the context, relates to the process
of subdivision or to the land or territory subdivided. ·
TERRACE A level, landscaped or surfaced area on a lot direcny adjacent to or
close to a principal building and not covered by a permanent roof.
24
TRAVEL TRAILER/ RECREATIONAL VEHICLE A structure that is
intended to be transported over the streets, either driven as a motor vehicle or
attached to or hauled by a motor vehicle and is designed for temporary
recreational use as sleeping quarters but does not meet the definitional criteria
of a manufactured (mobile) home.
USE The activity or function that actually takes place or is intended to take place
on a lot or site.
VARIANCE A relaxation or waiver of the terms of this Ordinance (other than
use provisions) as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to
special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance will
result in unnecessary hardship. However, in all cases the spirit of this Ordinance
shall be observed and substantial justice done, as determined by the Zoning Board
of Adjustment.
YARD A minimum open area, unobstructed from the ground up, extending
along a lot line and inward to the structure. The yard shall be measured as the
shortest distance between the structure and the lot line.
YARD. FRONT A yard extending along the full width of the front lot line
between side lot lines and from the front lot line to the front building line in
depth.
YARD. SIDE A yard lying between the side line of the lot and the nearest line
of the building and extending from the front yard to the rear yard, or in the
absence of either of such front or rear yards, to the front or rear lot lines.
YARD. REAR A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying
between the rear lot . line and the nearest line of the building. See typical
illustrations of yards below.
STREET
210 210
u· ivn:uc un
qg ! ::::
~ "'
e VJ
Ct) '-'.]
'-'.] i~ ::u
::u c; . 1 <:; t"l:]
~ ~ <:> t"l:j ~ e '-'.]
'-'.]
q ii ei i! ! ::: e "'
303'~ 117'
STREET
25
Section 5.0 Uses Defined
When referred to in this Ordinance, the following uses shall have the meanings defined
in this section:
5.1 Aericultural Uses
FARM A parcel of land, in one ownership, used for agricultural purposes,
including: farming, dairying, pasturage, agriculture, horticulture, floriculture,
viticulture, animal and poultry husbandry and the necessary uses for packing,
treating or storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation of any such
accessory uses shall be secondary to that of normal agricultural activities.
FARM SUPPORT BUSINESS A commercial establishment engaged in the sale
of farm support goods and services, including the following activities:
the sale of feed, grains, fertilizers, pesticides and similar farm
support goods;
the provision of warehousing and storage facilities for raw farm
products; and,
the provision of veterinary services to farm animals.
FOWL Chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese, quail, guineas, etc.
HOBBY FARM A two acre or larger tract of land used for the keeping or
maintenance of farm animals personally useful to the occupants of a dwelling on
the same tract.
KENNEL The keeping of three (3) or more dogs on a lot or premises whether
permanently or temporarily kept.
LIVESTOCK Cows, horses, g<?ats, sheep, sw~ne, ponies, etc.
LIVESTOCK SALES The sale of animal livestock within an enclosed yard or
structure, including livestock markets, horse or cattle auctions and similar
activities.
ST ABLE, PRIVATE An accessory building in which horses are kept for private
use and not for commercial purposes, hire or sale.
STABLE, PUBLIC An accessory building in which horses are kept for
commercial use including boarding, hire and sale.
26
5.2 Residential Uses
APARTMENT Three (3) or more attached, multifamily dwelling units within
a building of three stories or less.
DUPLEX Two (2) attached, single-family dwelling units.
GARDEN HOME A detached, single-family dwelling designed on a small lot
with one (1) zero lot line on one side. See typical configuration overleaf.
MANUFACTURED HOME. <MOBILE HOME) A structure, transportable in
one (1) or more sections, which, in its traveling mode, is eight body feet (8 ' ) or
more in width or forty body feet (40' ) or more in length, or when erected on site,
is three hundred and twenty (320) square feet, or more, and which is built on a
permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling unit with or without a
permanent foundation, connected to the required utilities, and includes the
plumbing, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. If
constructed on or before June 15, 1976, the unit bears a seal certifying
compliance with the Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards of
the U.S. Department of Huusing and Urban Development (DHUD).
MANUFACTURED <MOBILE) HOME SUBDMSION A division of a tract
of land - ten (10) acres or more, into two (2) or more lots, plats, sites or other
subdivision of land which meets all required regulations and are owner occupied.
MANUFACTURED <MOBILE) HOME PARK A twenty (20) acre or larger
tract of land used or designed to accommodate a manufactured (mobile) home
community of multiple spaces for rent or lease.
MANUFACTURED <MOBILE) HOME WT A lot that is designed for use
within a manufactured (mobile) home subdivision.
27
MANUFACTURED (MOBILE) HOME SPACE A space that is designed for
use within a manufactured (mobile) home park.
MODULAR HOME A dwelling constructed on-site in accordance with the
Standard Building Code. It is composed of components substantially assembled
in a manufacturing plant and transported to the building site for final assembly
on a permanent foundation. A modular home is not a manufactured home in
that the latter (manufactured home) is constructed in a plant in accordance with
the U.S. Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development and does not meet the
requirements of the Standard Building Code.
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE A detached, single-family dwelling
constructed on-site and in accordance with the requirements of the Standard
Building Code.
TOWNHOUSE Two (2) attached single-family dwellings, or more, within a
building of six (6) or less units, in which each unit shares a common wall and in
which each unit occupies its own individual lot.
5.3 Institutional Uses
AN™AL SHELTER A non-profit or public organization providing shelter for
small, domestic animals.
BOARDING HOUSE A dwelling for the residency of two or more boarders on
a long term basis (at least month to month). Each unit is intended to be rented
and does not constitute a dwelling unit as defined in this Ordinance.
CEMETERY Human burial grounds.
PET CEMETERY Burial grounds for small domestic animals (pets).
CLUB A group of people organized for a common purpose to pursue common
goals, interests and activities and usually characterized by certain membership
qualifications, payment of fees or dues, which holds regular meetings and has a
constitution or by-laws.
COMMUNITY CENTER OR CIVIC CENTER A building, structure or other
facility used for and providing religious, fraternal, social and/or recreational
programs and activities generally open to the public and designed to accommodate
and serve significant segments of the community.
COUNTRY CLUB Land or buildings containing recreationaJ.-facilities and a
club house for private club members and their guests.
28
DOMICILIARY CARE FACILITY Homes for the aged, intermediate
institutions and related institutions (not otherwise defined in this Ordinance)
which are licensed by all applicable authorities and agencies and whose primary
purpose is to furnish room, board, laundry personal care and other non-medical
services, regardless of what it may be named or called, for not less than twentyfour
(24) hours in any week, to individuals not related by blood or marriage to
the owner or administrator. This kind of care implies sheltered protection and
a supervised environment for persons, who, because of age or disabilities, are
incapable of living independently in their own homes or in a commercial board
and room situation, yet who do not require the medical and nursing services
provided by a Nursing Home. In these facilities, there might be avail.able,
temporarily and incidentally, the same type of limited medical attention that an
individual would receive if living at home.
GARAGE. PRIVATE An accessory building designed or used for the storage
of motor driven vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the building to
which it is an accessory.
HALFWAY HOUSE A licensed home for inmates on release from more
restrictive custodial confinement or initially placed in lieu of more restrictive
custodial confinement, wherein supervision, rehabilitation and counseling are
provided to mainstream residents back into society, enabling them to live
independently.
HOSPITAL An establishment which provides health services primarily for inpatient
medical or surgical care of the sick or injured, including accessory
facilities such as: laboratories, pharmacies, out-patient clinics, training facilities,
gift shops, coffee shops, cafeterias and staff offices.
MILITARY INSTALLATION A government-sponsored defense facility,
including: military bases, national guard armories, military reserve centers and
similar uses.
NURSING CARE FACILITY A licensed institution maintained for the purpose
of providing skilled nursing care and medical supervision at a lower level than that
provided in a hospital but at a higher level than that provided in a domiciliary care
facility.
PARK Publicly-owned and operated parks, playgrounds, recreation facilities
and open spaces.
PENAL INSTITUTION A public institution housing inmates for correction or
rehabilitation.
PLACE OF WORSHIP Buildings arranged for religious purposes, such as
churches and synagogues, including: related facilities for instruction, meeting,
recreation, lodging, eating and other integrally related activities.
29
PUBLIC ASSEMBLY CENTER Buildings arranged for the general assembly
of the public for community events, including: coliseums, stadiums and similar
uses.
PUBLIC BUILDING Buildings arranged for the purpose of providing public
services, not otherwise defined in this section, including: government offices,
post offices, museums, libraries, transit stations, police and fire stations,
emergency service stations, civil defense operations and similar uses.
PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITY A facility that provides public utility services
to the public at large, including: water and sewer facilities, gas distribution
facilities, electric transmission and distribution facilities, and cable transmission
and distribution facilities.
PUBLIC UTILITY SERVICE Essential utility services necessary to support
development and which involve only minor structures such as lines and poles.
SCHOOL A public or non-profit school.
5.4 Commercial Uses
AIRPORT A place where aircraft can land and take off. Such use may include:
terminals, hangers, refueling and repair facilities, passenger accommodations and
other integrally related facilities.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL A place where small household pets are given medical
treatment which may also include surgical treatment and in which short term
boarding of pets, within an enclosed building, may be provided.
BAKERY (MINOR) An establishment which bakes goods for on-premise retail
sale only.
BANK OR FINANCIAL INSTITUTION A business engaged in providing
banking or financial services to the general public, such as a bank, savings and
loan in~titution, credit union, finance company and similar uses.
BED AND BREAKFAST INN A house, or portion thereof, where short-term
lodging rooms and meals are provided. The operator of the inn shall live on the
premises or in adjacent premises.
BROADCAST STUDIO Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of
broadcasting and other information relay services accomplished through the use
of electronic and telephonic mechanisms, including: film and sound recording,
a radio station, a television studio or a telegraphic service office:
BUSINESS OR PROFESSIONAL OFFICE A place where the administrative
affairs of a business or a profession is conducted, such as: the office of a law
firm, accounting or bookkeeping firm, real estate agency, insurance agency,
30
financial planner, architect, secretarial service, physician or dentist, engineer, the
administrative staff of business or industry and similar uses.
BUSINESS SUPPORT SERVICE A place of business which supplies support
services primarily to business or professional offices or services, such as:
photocopy, office equipment, supplies and services, cleaning services, computer
and office equipment repair and similar services.
CAMPGROUND A group of buildings or structures, on a site of ten (10) acres
or more (planned as a whole), for seasonal recreation or vacation uses, including
tent campsites, travel trailer/recreational vehicle sites, vacation cottages,
recreational facilities, eating facilities such as picnic tables, outdoor grills,
bathrooms; and, may include a facility which sells personal items and gifts.
CAR WASH A commercial establishment engaged in washing or cleaning of
automobiles and light vehicles. Such facility may be automated or employ the
services of individuals to perform such services manually. Such facility shall
contain bays which are partially enclosed with a roof over them and all water
discharged from this facility which is used in connection with the washing of
vehicles shall be in complete compliance with both City and Alabama Department
Of Environmental Management Requirements.
CLINIC A facility providing medical, psychiatric or surgical services for sick
or injured persons exclusively on an out-patient basis.
COMMERCIAL PARKING Parking of motor vehicles on a temporary basis
within a commercially-operated, off-street parking lot or garage.
COMMERCIAL SCHOOL A private, gainful business providing instructional
service in: the arts, business, crafts, trades or professions.
CONVENIENCE STORE A one-story retail establishment with less than two
thousand (2,000) square feet of gross floor area that is primarily designed to sell
food, beverages, and other household goods and products to customers who
purchase only a relatively few items at a time (in contrast to a supermarket). Such
an establishment may also engage in the incidental sale of vehicle fuel, oil and
accessories. However, such business shall not engage in either major or minor
vehicle repair activities as defined in this Ordinance or the permanent or
temporary storage of heavy equipment, or other vehicles on the premises).
DAY CARE CENTER A licensed facility, other than a residence, providing
day care on a regular basis to more than six (6): children, elderly, handicapped
or infirm persons.
DAY CARE HOME A licensed service operated from a dwelling by the
resident, providing day care on a regular basis to six (6) or less: children,
elderly or infirm persons.
31
:!
ENTERTAINMENT. INDOOR A commercial establishment providing
spectator entertainment within an enclosed building, including movie theaters,
playhouses, etc.
ENTERTAINMENT. OUIDOOR A commercial establishment providing
spectator entertainment in open or partially enclosed or screened facilities,
including: sports arenas, racing tracks, drive-in theaters, amusement parks, etc.
FUNERAL HOME A building or part thereof used for human funeral services.
Such building may contain space and facilities for:
a) embalming and the performance of other services used in preparation of the
dead for burial
b) the performance of autopsies and other surgical procedures
c) the storage of caskets, funeral urns, and other related funeral supplies
d) space for the storage of funeral vehicles, but shall not include facilities for
cremation.
Where a funeral home is permitted, a funeral chapel shall also be permitted as an
incidental use.
GARAGE. REPAIR Any place of business engaged in major vehicle repair
activities as defined in this Ordinance. Such establishments may also engage
in minor vehicle repair activities as well but shall not engage in the sale of
vehicle fuel and all major vehicle repair work shall be performed entirely
within an enclosed building. No such building or premises shall be used for
the parking of vehicles which are offered for sale, nor shall any abandoned
or inoperative motor vehicles be permanently stored on the premises.
GARDEN CENTER OR NURSERY Retail sale of plants, trees, shrubs and the
like for ornamental purposes, conducted from a building, greenhouse, outdoor
display area or stand, including incidental sales of items customarily associated
with such sales activities, including such items as: containers, fertilizers,
ornaments, mulch, potting soil, small gardening tools, gardening equipment and
seeds.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION A comf!1ercial establishment providing fuel,
lubricants, parts and accessories for vehicles, which may also engage in the
incidental sale of food items and beverages. Gasoline service stations may also
engage in minor vehicle repair activities as defined in this section. However,
neither the principal building nor the premises shall be used for the parking and
display of motor vehicles offered for sale, nor shall such building or premises be
used for the permanent storage of inoperable motor vehicles, heavy equipment,
tractor trailers, or other motor vehicles not incidential to the operation of the
business. All gasoline storage tanks shall be in full compliance with Alabama
Department of Environmental Management (ADEM) requirements, as well as all
local regulations.
32
GENERAL RETAIL, ENCLOSED Retail sales of goods and services, not
otherwise defined in this section, including, but not limited to: food sales,
department stores, clothing stores, home furnishings, appliance stores, automobile
parts and supply stores, video rental, gift shops, florist shops, hardware stores,
specialty shops, jewelry stores, variety stores, sporting goods stores, antique shops
and similar retail activities.
GENERAL RETAIL. UNENCLOSED Retail sales of goods and services not
otherwise defined in this section, conducted partially or fully outside of a building,
including, but not limited to: sidewalk sales, flea markets, outdoor food service
and similar activities.
GROCERY STORE/ SUPER MARKET A retail establishment which is usually
in excess of 2,000 square feet in which the following items are normally sold:
food items, beverages, household supplies, personal care items, etc. Such an
establishment may also include magazine sales, the sale of automobile maintenance
supplies, a deli and/ or bakery; but, shall not engage in any form of vehicle repair
or maintenance or the sale of vehicle fuel. However, such premises shall not be
used for the storage or display of vehicles offered for sale, or the storage or
parking of heavy equipment, buses, tractor trailers and similar vehicles.
HOME OCCUPATION A business, profession, occupation or trade conducted
for gain or support and located entirely within the living area of a dwelling as an
incidental activity of the residents of that dwelling. Moreover, such activity
shall not alter the exterior of the property or affect the residential character of the
neighborhood in which it is located.
HOME ll\llPROVEMENT CENTER A place of business providing building,
yard and garden materials, appliances, tools and supplies at retail or wholesale.
HOTEL OR MOTEL A commercial facility offering transient lodging
accommodations on a daily or weekly basis to nine (9) or more guests. Such
facility may also include, as an integral part of operations, such services as:
restaurants, meeting rooms, banquet rooms, gift shops, recreational facilities, etc.
Hotels and motels may also include, as an incidental use, a liquor lounge in which
liquor is sold for on-premise consumption.
LIQUOR LOUNGE A licensed establishment engaged in the preparation, sale
or serving of liquor for consumption on the premises. This shall include, but not
be limited to, the following terms: taverns, bars, cocktail lounges, nightclubs and
similar uses where liquor consumption is a primary or incidental activity on the
premises of the establishment. Not included in this definition are establishments
which sell alcoholic beverages for off-premise consumption only, such as: a
package store, State Alcoholic Beverage Store, supermarket, etc;
MANUFACTURED <MOBILE) HOME SALES A lot or tract of land used for
the display of manufactured (mobile) homes for sale.
33
MEDICAL SUPPORT SERVICE A place of business which supplies medical
support services to: individuals, medical practitioners, clinics, and hospitals, such
as: a pharmacy (where the business activity is limited to the filling of
prescriptions and the sale of drugs and medical supplies), medical and surgical
supply store, an optician and the like.
MINI-WAREHOUSE A structure/ structures partitioned for the leasing of
individual storage spaces and used exclusively for the storage of non-volatile, nontoxic
and non-explosive materials. The facility shall not be used for retail or
wholesale operations; however, such a facility may be permitted to hold periodic
auctions to dispose off unclaimed materials and goods that are stored and not
reclaimed by the party or parties signing the lease agreement.
OPEN-AIR MARKET Retail sales of: arts, crafts, produce, discount or used
goods which are located partially or wholly outside of an enclosed building. This
may include: produce markets, craft markets, farmers markets or similar
activities.
PERSONAL SERVICE A retail establishment engaged in providing services
involving the care of a person or persons, such as: a barber shop, beauty shop,
cosmetic studio, dry cleaning and laundry service, laundromat, indoor exercise
and fitness center, tanning salon, seamstress, shoe repair, travel agency,
locksmith, interior decorator, formal wear rental ~nd similar uses.
PRINTING ESTABLISHMENT (MINOR) Blue printing, copying, printing,
engraving or other reproduction services limited to 2,500 square feet of floor
space/ area.
RECREATION A commercial establishment providing recreational or sports
activities to participants, including: bowling alleys, billiard parlors, video game
centers, ice and roller skating rinks, driving ranges, miniature golf courses,
conventional golf courses, swimming pools, tennis courts and other commercial
recreational and sports activities.
RESTAURANT, STANDARD An establishment where food and drink are
prepared, served and primarily consumed within the building where patrons are
seated and served.
RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD An establishment where food and drink are
rapidly prepared for carry-out, fast delivery, drive-thru or drive-in and may also
include facilities for standard sit-down consumption by patrons.
SHOPPING CENTER A group of commercial establishments Tocated on a lot,
planned and developed in a unified manner and design, with shared parking and
driveway facilities and under a common ownership or management authority. The
premises shall not be used for the parking of vehicles offered for sale.
34
STUDIO A place of work for an artist, photographer or craftsman, including:
instruction, display, production and retail sales of materials produced on the
premises.
TRUCK STOP A commercial establishment which may contain a restaurant
(standard) or a delicatessen; a gift shop; provisions for the incidental sale
gasoline, including diesel fuel; designated areas for the temporary parking of
large trucks/rigs, including overnight parking; and, the sale of vehicle equipment,
motor oil and other vehicle accessories. Such a facility may also engage in minor
vehicle repair activities, as defined in this ordinance; however, such a facility or
premise shall not be used for the permanent storage of the types of equipment
mentioned above. There shall be no display of vehicles or equipment offered for
sale or the storage of inoperable or abandoned motor vehicles. This use shall not
be confused with TRUCK TERMINAL, defined herein.
VEHICLE SALES OR RENTAL A commercial establishment engaged in the
sale or rental of: automobiles, light trucks, travel trailers, recreational vehicles,
boats, motorcycles; including the incidental: parking, storage, maintenance,
servicing and repair of such vehicles. (All servicing and repair work shall be
performed within an enclosed building, with the exception of the washing and
waxing of such vehicles.)
VEHICLE REPAIR. MAJOR A place of business engaged in the repair and
maintenance of vehicles including: painting, body work, rebuilding of engines
or transmissions, upholstery work, fabrication of parts and similar activities, all
of which shall be performed entirely within an enclosed building.
VEHICLE REPAIR, MINOR A place of business engaged in: sales,
installation, and servicing of mechanical equipment and parts; including: audio
equipment and electrical work, lubrication, tune-ups, wheel alignment, tire
balancing, brake and muffler work, battery charging and/or replacement and
similar activities. All such work shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed
building except for minor work which can be performed relatively quickly
such as battery recharging, tire repair, and similar light activities.
5.5 Industrial Uses
BAKERY, MAJOR An establishment which bakes goods primarily for
wholesale and/ or retail and in which may include storage and distribution
facilities.
CONSTRUCTION SERVICE A place of business engaged in construction
activities and incidental storage as well as wholesaling of building materials (but
not a home improvement center which also sells at retail) such- as: a building
contractor, trade contractor or wholesale building supply store.
35
.. z
HEAVY INDUSTRY Meat or poultry processing, slaughterhouse, the storage
or manufacturing of flammable, explosive or toxic materials or other materials
generally considered to be hazardous or offensive in nature.
INDUSTRIAL PARK An industrial park is a tract of land, the control and
administration of which is vested in a single body, suitable for industrial use
because of the location, topography, zoning, availability of utilities and
accessibility to transportation. (See Article VID, Section 12.0).
MANUFACTURING, GENERAL The basic processing and manufacturing of
materials or products predominantly from extracted or raw materials and the
incidental storage, sale and distribution of such products.
MANUFACTURING. LIGHT The manufacture, predominantly from
previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including:
processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, and packing of such products, and
the incidental storage, sale and distribution of such products.
MAINTENANCE SERVICE An establishment providing building and yard
maintenance services, such as: janitorial services, exterminating services,
landscaping services, window cleaning services, office cleaning services and
similar uses.
PRINTING ESTABLISHMENT, MA.TOR Blue printing, copying, printing,
engraving or other reproduction services with no limit on floor space/ area.
RECYCLING PLANT A facility that is not a junkyard and in which
recoverable resources, such as: newspapers, magazines, books and other paper
products, glass, metal cans, and other products which are recycled, reprocessed
and treated to return such products to a condition in which they may again be used
for production.
RESEARCH LABORATORY A building or group of buildings in which are
located facilities for: scientific research, investigation, testing or experimentation,
but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of products, except as incidental to
the main purpose of the laboratory.
RESOURCE EXTRACTION The removal of: soil, sand, clay, gravel,
minerals or similar materials for commercial purposes; including: quarries, sand
and gravel operations, gas extraction and mining operations.
SALVAGE YARD OR .JUNK YARD A lot or structure or part thereof, used
primarily for: the collecting, storage and sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal
or discarded material or for: the collecting, dismantling, storage and salvaging
of machinery or vehicles not in running condition, or for the sale of parts thereof.
36
SANITARY LANDFILL A state approved site for solid waste disposal
employing an engineering method of disposing of solid wastes in a manner that
minimizes environmental hazards by: spreading, compacting to the smallest
volume and applying cover material over all exposed waste at the end of each
operating day. NOTE: A sanitary landfill should not be confused with a
dump. Solid waste at a dump is disposed of without being compacted and
covered. A sanitary landfill presents fewer health and aesthetic problems and
has the potential of being reclaimed for other land uses later. Hazardous or
radioactive waste material disposal is not permitted in a sanitary landfill.
TRANSMISSION TOWER A tower used for the transmission of radio and
television signals to the general public or private receivers, other than amateur
radio towers and towers used by a public facility.
TRUCK TERMINAL Land and buildings used as a relay station for the transfer
of a load from one vehicle to another or one party to another. The terminal
cannot be used for permanent or long-term accessory storage for principal land
uses at other locations. The terminal facility may include storage areas for trucks
and buildings or areas for the repair and maintenance of trucks associated with
the terminal.
VEHICLE AND EQUIPMENT SALES. MAJOR A place of business engaged
in the sale or rental of: heavy trucks (over one ton), construction equipment,
tractors and farm implements, and similar equipment; including: the storage,
maintenance, and servicing of such vehicles and equipment.
5.6 Temporary Uses
GARAGE OR YARD SALES The sale by a resident, conducted on the
premises his or her dwelling, of personal property belonging to the occupant of
such dwelling. See Article VII, Supplemental Regulations, Section 9.0, Garage
or Yard Sales.
SEASONAL SALES Unless otherwise specified in this Ordinance, the seasonal
sale of farm produce, firewood, Christmas trees and similar items shall be
conducted either from motor vehicles or premises. Such items shall not be sold
from permanent structures/locations and the use of structures or buildings in
conjunction with said activity shall be temporary as specified by the City and
subject to the City's conditions at the time a business license is issued. This term
shall not be confused with OPEN Am MARKET, defined in this Ordinance .
. ..,..
37
In no case shall basements of dwellings, residences or buildings be used as temporary
living space prior to the total completion of the structure.
Section 4.0 Joint Occupancy
No structure shall be erected, structurally altered for or used as a single-family or twofamily
dwelling simultaneously with any other use.
Section 5.0 Public Utilities
Utility structures including, but not limited to: poles, wires, cross-arms, transformers
attached to poles, guy wires, insulators, conduits (and other facilities necessary for the
transmission or distribution of electric power or to provide telephone or telegraph service), pipe
lines, vents, valves, hydrants, regulators, meters and other facilities necessary for the
transmission or distribution of gas, oil, water or other utilities may be constructed, erected,
repaired, maintained or replaced within any district of the City. This is not to be construed
to include the erection or construction of buildings. (See district regulations for public utility
facilities and services.)
Section 6.0 Non-conforming Uses
Within the districts established by this Ordinance or amendments that may be later
adopted, there exist: lots, structures, uses of land and structures and characteristics of use which
were lawful before the Ordinance was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited,
regulated or restricted under the terms of this Ordinance or future amendment; it is the intent
of this Ordinance to permit these non-conformities to continue until they are removed, but not
to encourage their survival. It is further the intent of this Ordinance that non-conformities shall
not be enlarged upon, expanded nor used as grounds for adding other structures or uses
prohibited elsewhere in the same district in which the non-conforming use is located.
6.1 Non-Conforming Lots of Record
Where a lot of record existed at the time of the effective date of this Ordinance
having less area or w~dth than herein required for the district in which it is
located, the following shall apply: Said lot may none-the-less be used as a
building site provided the yard space and other requirements conform as closely
as possible with the requirements of the district in which it is located, in the
opinion of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. However, this provision shall not
apply when two or more lots exist together, with contiguous frontage in single
ownership at the time of passage of this Ordinance or any time thereafter.
Such land shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purpose of
this Ordinance and shall not be used or sold in a manner which creates lot
area or width below the requirements stated in this Ordinance.
39
I
I
.'1
Section 7 .0 Continuance
A lawful non-conforming use existing at the effective date of this Ordinance may be
continued, except as hereafter provided; although, such use does not conform with the
provisions of this Ordinance subject to the conditions outlined in Sections 6.0 and 6.1.
Section 8.0 Restoration To Safe Condition
Nothing in this Ordinance shall prevent the restoration of any building or structure to a
safe or sanitary condition when required by the proper authorities.
Section 9.0 Restoration After Damages
No non-conforming building or structure which has been damaged by fire or other causes
to the extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its current replacement value at the time of
such damage shall be rebuilt or restored except in conformity with the provisions of this
Ordinance. If a non-conforming building is damaged less than fifty percent (50 % ) of its current
replacement value, it may be rebuilt or restored and used as before the damage, provided that
such rebuilding or restoration is completed within twelve (12) months of the date of such
damage.
Section 10.0 Abandonment
A non-conforming use which has been discontinued for a continuous period of six months
shall not be re-established and any future use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this
· Ordinance.
Section 11.0 Annexed Property
Owners of property who have requested the annexation of their property into the City of
Fultondale shall be subject to The Fultondale Planning Commission's recommendation for
annexation of the property to the City Council. At the time the request is considered by the City
Council, a recommendation for zoning of the property shall have been made in accordance with
the provisions of the MR Municipal Reserve District.
Section 12.0 Change In Use
A non-conforming use shall not be changed to another non-conforming use.
40
Section 13.0 Abandoned Right-of-way
Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated or abandoned by official action
of the City of Fultondale, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley or public
way shall be automatically extended to the center of same and all area included therein shall then
be subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended district.
Section 14.0 Abatement of Noise, Smoke, Gas, Vibration, Fumes, Dust, Fire and Explosion
Hazard or Nuisance
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may require the conduct of any use, conforming or
non-conforming, which results in: unreasonable noise, smoke, gas, vibration, fumes, dust, fire,
radio interference or explosion hazard or nuisance to surrounding property to be modified or
changed to abate such hazard to health, comfort and convenience. The Zoning Board of
Adjustment may direct the Building Inspector to issue an abatement order but such order may
be directed only after a public hearing by the said board, the notice of which shall be sent
by registered mail to the owners and/ or operators of the property on which the use is
conducted in addition to due notice by advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation.
A hearing to consider issuance of an abatement order shall be held by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment either upon petition signed by any person affected by the hazard or nuisance or upon
the initiative of the Board. An abatement order shall be directed by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment only upon reasonable evidence of hazard or nuisance and such order shall clearly
specify the date by which the hazard or nuisance shall be abated.
Section 15.0 Reduction In Lot Area Prohibited
No lot shall be reduced in area so that yards and other open spaces total less than the
minimum area required under this Ordinance. (See Subsection 6.1.)
Section 16.0 Structures Conforming To District Regulations But Not Other Regulations
A structure or building conforming to the use regulations of a district, but not
conforming to other provisions of this Ordinance, may be enlarged or altered, provided
that such enlargement or alteration conforms with the provisions of this Ordinance.
Section 17 .0 Buildings To Be Moved
Any building or structure which is to be moved to any location within the City limits of
the City of Fultondale shall be considered for the purpose of this Ordinance to be a new building
under construction, and as such, shall conform to all applicable provisions of this Ordinance.
41
ARTICLE VI
ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
In order to carry out the intent and purpose of this Ordinance, the City of Fultondale is
hereby divided into the following districts or zones. The location, boundaries and area of which
are, and shall be as shown and depicted upon the official zoning map. Said districts or zones
are to be as follows:
AG
E-1
R-1
R-2
R-2A
R-3
RG
RT
MJ>
MS
0-1
B-1
B-2
M-1
M-2
M-3-S
MR
Agricultural District
Single family Residential District (Estate)
Single family Residential District
Single family Residential District
Affordable Housing District
Multifamily Residential District
Single family Residential (Garden Home District)
Townhouse Residential District
Manufactured (Mobile) Home Park District
Manufactured (Mobile) Home Subdivision District
Office Building District
Neighborhood Business District
General Business District
Light Industrial District
Heavy Industrial District
Strip Mining District
Municipal Reserve District
The boundaries of the above districts are hereby established as shown on the official
zoning map of the City of Fultondale. Questions concerning the exact location of district
boundary lines shall be decided by the Zoning Board of Adjustment, as outlined in Article ID,
Subsection 2.9, Administration and Review Procedures. The zoning district regulations are
as described below.
Section 1.0 AG Agricultural District
1.1 Intent
This district consists primarily of undeveloped lands where agricultural and related
pursuits may occur within the City and where agriculture support centers may
serve outlying rural areas beyond the City. Furthermore, the intent of the AG
District is to preserve these areas in: agriculture, forestry, outdoor recreational,
rural residential and other limited, yet compatible uses until such·time as a higher
density development pattern may be desired and City services can be expanded
to accommodate this development.
1.2 Uses Permitted
The following uses shall be permitted in the AG Agricultural District. Similar uses
to those listed below may also be permitted subject to Article ID, Administration
and Review Procedures, Subsection 2.10, Interpretation Of Uses and
subsection 2.11, Unclassified Uses.
A. Agricultural Uses
1. Farms, See Article IV Definitions, Section 5.0, Subsection 5.1;
Article VII, Supplemental Regulations, Section 11.0.
2. Hobby Farms, Subject to Article VID, Section 2.0.
3. Kennels
4. Stables (private)
B. Residential Uses
1. Detached Single family Residences, provided, however, recording of
subdivisions with lots of three (3) acres or more shall be permitted.
2. Duplexes
3. Manufactured (Mobile) Homes Subject to Article VII, Section 12.0.
4. Accessory Structures and Buildings, Subject to Article VII, Section
6.0.
5. Private Tennis Courts, Subject to Article Vill, Section 11.0.
6. Private Swimming Pools, Subject to Article VII, Section 10.0.
7. Non-Commercial Greenhouses and Gardens.
c. Institutional Uses
1. Clubs
2. Community Centers
3. Country Clubs
4. Parks
5. Places of Worship
6. Public Buildings
-7. Public Utility Facilities
8. Public Utility Services
9. Schools
D. Commercial Uses
1. Animal Hospitals
2. Bed and Breakfast Inns
3. Produce Stands, Subject to Article VII, Section 11:0
4. Studios
E. Temporary Uses
43
1. Garage or Yard Sales, Subject to Article Vll, Section 9.0.
1.3 Special Exception Uses
The following uses may also be permitted, subject to approval of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment and further subject to appropriate permits being issued by
the City. See Article Vill, Special Exception Uses, Section 1.0 and
Subsections 1.1and1.2.
A. Agricultural Uses
1. Farm Support Businesses
2. Livestock Sales
B. Institutional Uses
1. Animal Shelters
2. Boarding Houses
3. Cemeteries, Subject to Article VIII, Section 8.0.
4. Domiciliary Care Facilities
5. Halfway Houses
6. Military Installations
7. Penal Institutions
8. Pet Cemeteries
9. Public Assembly Centers
C. Commercial Uses
1. Airports
2. Broadcast Studios
3. Campgrounds
4. Commercial Chicken Houses (Fowl) See Additional Regulations, 1.6
(H).
5. Day Care Homes
6. Entertainment, outdoor
7. -Home Occupations, Subject to Article Vill, Section 9.0.
8. Open Air Markets
9. Manufactured (Mobile) Home Sales
10. Stables (Commercial)
D. Industrial Uses
1. Transmission Towers, Subject to Article Vill, Section 13.0.
1.4 Area And Dimensional Regulations
Except as may be provided for elsewhere in this Ordinance, the following area
and dimensional r~gulations shall be required:
44
Minimum Lot Area:
Minimum Lot Width:
Minimum Yard Setback:
Front:
Rear:
Side:
15,000 Square Feet
150 Feet at the Building Line.
35 Feet*
35 Feet
20 Feet
*Undedicated road - 60 feet from the centerline.
Corner Lots: Setbacks shall be the same on both streets or roads.
1.5 Buff er Requirements
None specified; although, in appropriate cases, the Planning Commission, during
its site plan review process, may require a buffer or other suitable means of
separation of land uses. See Article VII, Supplemental Regulations,
Subsections 13.0 through 13.3.
1.6 Additional Reeulations (When Applicable)
A. Administration and Review Procedures, Article III.
B. Definitions, Article IV.
C. General Regulations, Article V.
D. Supplemental Regulations, Article VII.
E. Special Exception Uses, Article VIII.
F. Off-street Parking and Loading Regulations, Article IX.
G. Sign Regulations, Article X.
H. In the A-1 Agricultural District, the minimum setback of livestock
barns and commercial chicken (fowl) houses from adjoining property
lines shall be one hundred feet (100 ' ); from highway (road) right-ofway
lines, it shall be three hundred feet (300 ' ), provided, however,
that no livestock barn or commercial chicken (fowl) houses shall be
built closer than three hundred feet (300 ' ) to the nearest then existing
residence other than that of the owner. Swine (hogs) are to be housed,
fed and/or watered not nearer than one hundred feet (100 ' ) to any
adjoining property line or within three hundred feet (300 ' ) of any
adjoining property line or within three hundred feet (300 ' ) of any road
or street right-of-way.
Section 2.0 E-1 Single family Residential District (Estate)
2.1 Intent
To provide areas suitable for detached single family residences on large lots, along
45
with selected institutional and commercial uses which are integrally related to
residential neighborhoods.
2.2 Uses Permitted
The following uses shall be permitted in the E-1 Single-Family Residential
District. Similar uses to those listed may also be permitted Subject to Article
ID, Administration and Review Procedures, Subsection 2.10 Interpretation
of Uses, and Subsection 2.11, Unclassified Uses.
A. Agricultural Use.s
1. Hobby Farms, Subject to Article VID, Section 2.0.
B. Residential Uses
1. Detached Single-Family Residences
2. Accessory Buildings and Structures, Subject to Article VII, Section
6.0.
3. Private Tennis Courts, Subject to Article VIII, Section 11.0.
4. Private Swimming Pools, Subject to Article VII, Section 10.0.
5. Non-commercial Greenhouses and Gardens
C. Institutional Uses
1. Parks
2. Public Utility Services
D. Temporary Uses
1. Garage or Yard Sales, Subject to Article VII, Section 9.0.
2.3 Special Exception Uses
The following uses may also be permitted subject to approval of the Zoning Board
of Adjustment and further subject to appropriate permits being issued by -the City.
See Article VID, Special Exception Uses, Section 1.0 and Subsections 1.1 and
1.2.
A. Institutional Uses
1. Country Clubs
2. Places of Worship
3. Public Buildings, Subject to Section 2.0, Subsection 2.5.
4. Public Utility Facilities
5. Schools
46
B. Commercial Uses
1. Day Care Homes
2. Home Occupations,
Subject to Article VID, Section 9.0.
2.4 Area and Dimensional Reeulations
Except as may be provided for elsewhere in this Ordinance, the following area
and dimensional regulations shall be required:
Minimum Lot Area:
Minimum Lot Width:
Minimum Yard Setback:
Front:
Rear:
Side:
Maximum Height:
Minimum Floor Area:
One story Residence:
Two Story Residence:
20,000 Square Feet
100 Feet at the Building Line.
50 Feet*
50 Feet
15 Feet
35 Feet or 2-1/2 Stories
2,000 Square Feet
1,400 Square Feet on first floor, Total minimum for
dwelling-2,400 Square Feet.
* Undedicated road - 60 feet from the centerline.
Corner Lots: Setbacks shall be the same on both streets or roads.
2.5 Public Buildin2s
In an E-1 Residential District, public buildings shall have a front yard setback of
fifty feet (50' ). In all other residential districts, where permitted, public
buildings shall have: rear yard: thirty-five feet (35 ' ), side yard: thirty-five feet
(35 ' ), maximum height: forty-five feet (45 ' ) or three (3) stories; maximum
building area on a lot shall be fifty percent (50%).
2.6 Buffer Requirements
Unless otherwise specified elsewhere in this Ordinance, when any lot is to be
developed for any use other than a single-family residence and such lot abuts a
lot occupied or zoned for single family residential development, a minimum
buffer yard width of twenty-five feet (25 ' ) shall be provided. See Article VII,
Subsections 13.0 through 13.3.
47
2. 7 Additional Rewlations (When Applicable)
A. Administration and Review Procedures, Article ID.
B. Definitions, Article IV.
C. General Regulations, Article V.
D. Supplemental Regulations, Article VII.
E. Special Exception Uses, Article VID.
F. Off-street Parking and Loading Regulations, Article IX.
G. Sign Regulations, Article X.
Section 3.0 R-1 Single family Residential District
3.1 Intent
To provide areas for medium-density, detached, single-family residences, along
with selected institutional and commercial uses which are integrally related to
residential neighborhoods.
3.2 Uses Permitted
The following uses shall be permitted in the R-1 Single family Residential
District. Similar uses to those listed below may also be permitted, subject to
Article ID, Administration and Review Procedures, Subsection 2.10,
Interpretation of Uses and Subsection 2.11, Unclassified Uses.
A. Residential Uses
1. Accessory Structures and Buildings, Subject to Article VII, Section
6.0.
2. Detached Single family Residences
3. Non-commercial Greenhouses and Gardens
4. Private Swimming Pools, Subject to Article VII, Section 10.0.
5. Private Tennis Courts, Subject to Article VID, Section 11.0.
B. Institutional Uses
1. Parks
2. Public Utility Services
C. Temporary Uses
1. Garage or Yard Sales, Subject to Article VII, Section 9.0.
48
3.3 Special Exception Uses
The following uses may also be permitted subject to approval of the Zoning Board
of Adjustment and further subject to appropriate permits being issued by the City.
See Article VID, Special Exception Uses, Section 1.0 and Subsections 1.1 and
1.2.
A. Institutional Uses
1. Places of Worship
2. Public Buildings
3. Public Utility Facilities
4. Schools
B. Commercial Uses
1. Day Care Homes
2. Home Occupations, Subject to Article VIII, Section 9.0.
3.4 Area And Dimensional Regulations
Except as may be provided for elsewhere in this Ordinance, the following area
and dimensional regulations shall be required:
Minimum Lot Area:
Minimum Lot Width:
Minimum Yard Setbacks:
Front:
Rear:
Side:
Minimum Floor Area:
15,000 Square Feet
100 Feet at the Building Line
35 Feet*
35 Feet
10 Feet
1,200 Square Feet
* Undedicated road - 60 feet from the centerline.
Corner Lots: Setbacks shall be the same on both streets or roads.
3.5 Public Buildini;:s
See Subsection 2.5 in the E-1 Residential District Regulations.
49
...'
3.6 Buffer Requirements
Unless otherwise provided for elsewhere in this Ordinance, when any lot is to be
developed for any use other than a single-family residence and such lot abuts a
lot occupied or zoned for single family residential development, a minimum
buffer yard width of twenty-five feet (25') shall be provided. (See Article VII,
Supplemental Regulations, Subsections 13.0 through 13.3.)
3. 7 Additional Regulations (When Applicable)
A. Administration and Review Procedures, Article ID.
B. Definitions, Article IV.
C. General Regulations, Article V.
D. Supplemental Regulations, Article VII.
E. Special Exception Uses, Article Vill.
F. Off-street Parking and Loading Regulations, Article IX.
G. Sign Regulations, Article X.
Section 4.0 R-2 Single-Family Residential District
4.1 Intent
To provide areas for medium density single-family residences along with selected
institutional and commercial uses which are integrally related to residential
neighborhoods.
4.2 Uses Permitted
The following uses shall be permitted in the R-2 Single-Family Residential District
Similar uses to those listed below may also be permitted subject to Article ill,
Administrative and Review Procedures, Subsection 2.10, Interpretation Of
Uses, and Subsection 2.11, Unclassified Uses.
A. Residential Uses
1. Accessory Structures and Buildings, Subject to Article VII, Section
6.0.
2. Detached Single-Family Residences
3. Private Swimming Pools, Subject to Article VII, Section 10.0.
4. Private Tennis Courts, Subject to Article Vill, Section 12.0.
5. Non-commercial Greenhouses and Gardens.
B. Institutional Uses . ..,..
1. Parks
2. Public Utility Services
50
4.3 Special Exception Uses
The following uses may also be permitted subject to approval of the Zoning Board
of Adjustment and further subject to appropriate permits being issued by the City.
See Article VID, Special Exception Uses, Section 1.0 and Subsections 1.1 and
1.2.
A. Institutional Uses
1. Country Clubs
2. Places of Worship
3. Public Buildings
4. Public Utility Facilities
5. Schools
B. Commercial Uses
1. Day Care Home
2. Home Occupation, Subject to Article VID, Section 9.0.
4.4 Area And Dimensional Re211Iations
Except as may be provided for elsewhere in this Ordinance, the following area
and dimensional regulations shall be required:
Minimum Lot Area:
Minimum Lot Width:
12,000 Square Feet, [15,000 square feet if septic
tanks and field lines are required.]
75 Feet at the building line.
Minimum Yard Setbacks:
Front:
Rear:
Side:
Maximum Height:
35 Feet*
35 Feet
IO Feet
35 Feet or 3 stories
Interior Living Space: The minimum livable floor area, exclusive of any area
contained within an attached garage or porch, required for each family shall not
be less than 1,000 square feet.
* Undedicated Road - 60 feet from the centerline.
Corner Lots: Setbacks shall be the same on both streets or roads.
51
4.5 Public Buildings
See Subsection 2.5 in the E-1 Residential District Regulations.
4.6 Buffer Requirements
Unless otherwise specified elsewhere in this Ordinance, when a lot is to be
developed for any use other than a single family residence and such lot abuts a
lot occupied or zoned for single family residential development, a minimum
buffer yard of twenty-five feet (25' ) shall be provided. See Article Vll,
Supplemental Regulations, Subsections 13.0 through 13.3.
4. 7 Additional Regulations ((When Applicable)
A. Administration and Review Procedures, Article ID.
B. Definitions, Article IV.
C. General Regulations, Article V.
D. Supplemental Regulations, Article VII.
E. Special Exception Uses, Article VID.
F. Off-street Parking and Loading Regulations, Article IX.
G. Sign Regulations, Article X.
Section 5.0 R-2A Affordable Housing District
5.1 Intent
This district consists of areas suitable for a mix of single family residences and
Manufactured (Mobile) Homes. The underlying intent of this district is to
encourage affordable home ownership alternatives in select locations within the
City. The district allows for certain accessory uses customarily associated with
single family dwellings. Further, it provides for institutional uses which are
integrally related to residential neighborhoods.
5.2 Uses Permitted
The following uses shall be permitted in the R-2-A Affordable Housing Residential
District. Similar uses to those listed may also be permitted subject to Article ID,
Administration and Review Procedures, Subsection 2.10, Interpretation of
Uses and Subsection 2.11, Unclassified Uses.
A. Agricultural Uses
1. Hobby Farms, Subject to Article VID, Section 2.0:-
52
B. Residential Uses
1. Accessory Structures and Buildings, Subject to Article VII, Section
6.0.
2. Detached Single family Residences
3. Duplexes
4. Manufactured (Mobile) Homes
5. Non-Commercial Greenhouses and Gardens
6. Private Swimming Pools, Subject to Article VII, Section 10.0.
7. Private Tennis Courts, Subject to Article VID, Section 11.0.
C. Institutional Uses
1. Parks
2. Public Utility Facilities
5.3 Special Exception Uses
The following uses may also be permitted subject to approval of the Zoning Board
Adjustment and further subject to appropriate permits being issued by the City.
See Article VID, Special Exception Uses, Section 1.0 and Subsections 1.1 and
1.2.
A. Institutional Uses
1. Places of Worship
2. Public Buildings
3. Public Utility Facilities
4. Schools
B. Commercial Uses
1. Day Care Homes
2. Home Occupations, Subject to Article VIII, Section 9.0.
5.4 Area and Dimensional Reefilations
Same as in District R-2.
5.5 Public Buildines
See Subsection 2.5 in the E-1 Residential District Regulations.
5.6 Buffer Requirements
Unless otherwise specified elsewhere in this Ordinance, when a lot is to be
developed for any use other than a single family residence, and such lot abuts
a lot occupied or zoned for single family residential development, a minimum
53
buffer yard of twenty-five feet (25 ' ) shall be provided. See Article Vil!
Supplemental Regulations! Subsections 13.0 through 13.3.
5. 7 Additional Reeu1ations <Vi'hen Applicable)
A. Administration and Review Procedures! Article ID.
B. Definitions, Article IV.
C. General Regulations, Article V.
D. Supplemental Regulations, Article Vll.
E. Special Exception Uses, Article VIII.
F. Off-street Parking and Loading Regulations, Article IX.
G. Sign Regulations, Article X.
Section 6.0 R-3 Multifamily Residential District
6.1 Intent
To provide areas for medium density single-family residences, along with multimultifamily
residences and selected institutional and commercial uses which are
integrally related to residential neighborhoods.
6.2 Uses Permitted
The following uses shall be permitted in the R-3 Multifamily Residential District.
Similar uses to those listed below may also be permitted, Subject to Article Ill,
Administration and Review Procedures, Subsection 2.10, Interpretation of
Uses, and Subsection 2.ll, Unclassified Uses.
A. Residential Uses
1. Accessory Structures and Buildings, Subject to Article Vll, Section
6.0.
2. Det.ac.hed Single family Residences
3. Duplexes
4. Multifamily Dwellings
5. Non-Commercial Greenhouses and Gardens.
6. Private Swimming Pools, Subject to Article VII, Section 10.0.
8. Private Tennis Courts, Subject to Article VID, Section 11.0.
B. Institutional Uses
1. Parks
2. Public Utility Services
*See Code of Alabama, 1975, § 11-52-75.1, Regulation as to housing
of menta lly retarded or mentally ill persons in multi-famil}' zone.
54
C. Temporary Uses
1. Garage or Yard Sales, Subject to Article VII, Section 9.0.
6.3 Special Exception Uses
The following uses may also be permitted subject to approval of the Zoning Board
of Adjustment and further subject to appropriate permits being issued by the City.
See Article VID, Special Exception Uses, Section 1.0 and Subsections 1.1 and
1.2.
A. Institutional Uses
1. Domiciliary Care Home
1. Halfway Houses
2. Public Buildings
3. Places of Worship
4. Public Utility Facilities
5. Schools
B. Commercial Uses
1. Bed and Breakfast Inns
2. Day Care Homes
3. Home Occupations, Subject to Article Vill, Section 9.0.
6.4 Area and Dimensional ReeuJations
Except as may be provided for elsewhere in this Ordinance, the following area
and dimensional regulations shall be required:
Minimum Lot Area:
Minimum Lot Width:
One of two family dwellings, 7 ,500 Square Feet.
For each additional family unit, add 2,000 square
Feet.
60 Feet
Minimum Yard Setbacks:
Front:
Rear:
Side:
25 Feet*
25 Feet
8 Feet
Maximum Height of Structures: 35 Feet or 3 Stories.
* Undedicated Road - 60 Feet from the centerline.
55
Corner Lots: Setbacks shall be the same on streets and roads.
Interior Living Space: The minimum livable floor area required for each
dwelling unit, exclusive of any area contained within a basement, attached garage
or porch, shall be in accord with the following schedule:
Interior Living Space
per Dwelling Unit
Not less than 900 square feet
Not less than 700 square feet
Not less than 550 square feet
6.5 Public Buildings
Number of Units
Per Dwelling
1
2 to 4 inclusive
More than 4 Units
See Subsection 2.5 of the E-1 Single family Residential Estate District.
6.6 Buffer Requirements
Unless otherwise specified elsewhere in this Ordinance, when any lot is to be
developed for any use other than residential, and such lot abuts a lot occupied
or zoned for residential use, a minimum buffer yard width of twenty-five feet
(25 ' ) shall be provided. See Article VIl, Supplemental Regulations,
Subsections 13.0 through 13.3.
6. 7 Additional Re~Iations (When Applicable)
A. Administration and Review Procedures, Article Ill.
B. Definitions, Article IV.
C. General Regulations, Article V.
D. Supplemental Regulations, Article VII.
E. Special Exception Uses, Article VIIT.
F. Off-street Parking and Loading Regulations, Article IX.
G. Sign Regulations, Article X.
H. A site development plan is required which provides for:
1. Convenient vehicular servicing of the buildings, satisfactory
circulation of traffic in the parking areas, and no undue
interference with through traffic in gaining ingress and egress
from the proposed site.
2. A preliminary plan or engineering report providing for the site
grading, storm drainage, sanitary sewers, and water supply
prepared by an Alabama Registered Professional Engineer.
3. Suitable entrance and exit points adjoining public streets
highways, or thoroughfares serving the proposed development,
which shall be properly illuminated to reduce traffic hazards.
56
• .. . ... · ..
4. Garbage and refuse collection facilities shall be the responsibility
of apartment management and shall be screened to the full
height of such facilities.
Section 7 .0 RG Garden Home Residential District
7.1 Intent
To provide areas suitable for the development of residential garden homes along
with selected institutional and commercial uses which are integrally related to
residential neighborhoods.
7.2 Uses Permitted
The following uses shall be permitted in the RG Garden Home District:
A. Residential Uses
1. Accessory Structures or Buildings, Subject to Subsection 7.6 {E).
2. Residential Garden Homes
B. Institutional Uses
1. Home Instruction
2. Public Utility Services
C. Temporary Uses
1. Garage or Yard Sales, Subject to Article VII, Section 9.0.
7 .3 Special Exception Uses
The following uses may be permitted subject to a special exception use permit
being granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment and further subject to
appropriate permits being issued. See Article VIII, Section 1.0.
A. Commercial Uses
1. Home Occupations, Subject to Article VIII, Section 9.0.
7 .4 Area and Dimensional Reirulations
Except as may be provided for elsewhere in this Ordinance, the following
area and dimensional regulations shall be required:
Minimum Lot Area: 4,000 Square Feet
57
J
Minimum Lot Wid-th:
Minimum Yard Setbacks:
Front:
Rear:
Side:
40 Feet at Building Line
20 Feet*
25 Feet
0 Feet
* Undedicated Road - 45 Feet from the Centerline.
Corner Lots: ShaU have the same setbacks on both streets or roads.
Minimum Floor Area: One Story - 1,000 Square Feet
Two Story - 850 Square Feet on First Floor.
Side Yards are subject to the fo1lowing building separation provisions:
I. Garden Homes shall be so located so as to permit a minimum of ten feet (10' )
between homes measured from the closest outside wall to closest outside wall.
2. No building in an RG District shall be located less than twenty-five feet (25 , )
from any boundary of the RG Development abutting single family residential
zoning districts.
Eve Overhangs: Cornices or eaves may extend into adjoining property when
allowed by properly executed and recorded covenants between property owners.
All such cornices and eaves shall be fire-proof.
Note: A Site Development Plan is required for aU garden home developments,
as per Article ID, Section 2.2.
Requirements for non-sewered development.
In the event a site is to be developed with septic tank facilities, the developer/
builder shall produce an Engineering Report for the perusal of the Fultondale
Planning Commission, City of Fultondale, prepared by an Staie of Alabama
Registered Professional Engineer. This report shall contain all the relevant
information on the site, pertaining to soil conditions, soil capacity, percolation
study, proximity to flood plains, etc. The developer/builder shall be required to
produce a permit from the Jefferson County Department of Health. The City of
Fultondale shall issue a permit for the development of garden homes, to the
developer/builder in concern, based on the findings and recommendations of the
Jefferson County Health Department. In accordance with these recommendations,
the density, unit size and other relavant requirements for garde&- homes shall be
provided by the City of Fultondale to the developer/builder.
58
· . . . :
7.5 Buffer Requirements
Unless otherwise stipulated, when any lot is to be developed for any use other
than single family residential and such lot abuts a lot occupied or zoned for
single family residential development, a minimum buffer yard width of twentyfive
feet (25') shall be required. See Article Vll, Supplemental Regulations,
Subsections 13.0 through 13.3.
7.6 Additional Re1mlations (When Applicable)
A. No fence shall be permitted forward of the front comer of the house;
other fences shall not exceed seven feet (7') in height.
B. Due to the zero lot line, easements or comparable access rights shall be
included in the deed so as to permit maintenance on each home.
C. All utilities shall be placed underground.
D. There shall be two (2) paved off-street parking spaces provided for each
unit, the depth of which shall be measured from the back of the curb.
Twenty percent (20%) of the parking shall be dedicated to landscaping~
with adequate shade provided for trees, grass, etc. There shall be no of~- ·
street parking along existing interior streets.
E. · Customary accessory buildings or structures, one (1) per parcel or lot,
shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet.
F. Signs Shall be in accordance with Article X.
Section 8.0 RT Townhouse Residential District
8.1 Intent
To provide areas suitable for Townhouse ~esidential Dwellings.
8.2 Uses Permitted
A. Residential Uses
1. Accessory Structures and Buildings provided they are located
in the rear yard only.
2. Townhouse Dwellings
B. Institutional Uses
1. Public Utility Service
59
8.3 Special Exception Uses
The following uses may be permitted subject to approval of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment and further subject to appropriate permits being issued by the City.
See Article Vill, Special Exception Uses, Section 1.0 and Subsections 1.1 and
1.2.
A. Commercial Uses
1. Home Occupations, Subject to Article Vill, Section 9.0.
8.4 Area and Dimensional Reeulations
These regulations shall pertain to areas with adequate sewer facilities.
Maximum Density:
Minimum Lot Width:
Ten (10) units per gross tract acre, including
common area.
18 Feet at the building Line.
Minimum Yard Setbacks:
Front:
Rear:
Side:
35 Feet**
30 Feet
0 Feet
** Townhouse dwellings shall be located at least fifteen feet ( 15 ' ) from the RT
District boundary as depicted on the site development plan and twenty feet (20' )
from an E-1, R-1 or R-2 Single family residential district.
Maximum Height: 35 Feet or 2-1/2 Stories.
Minimum Livable Floor Area:
I. One (1) Story Townhouse - 1,000 square feet
2. One and one-half (1-1/2) or two story townhouse:
500 feet on first floor, total minimum for townhouse -
1,000 square feet.
Undedicated Road: 60 Feet from the centerline.
Corner Lots: Shall have the same setbacks on both streets or roads.
A. Eve Overhangs: Cornices or eaves may extend into adjoining property
when allowed by properly executed and recorded covenants between
property owners. All such cornices and eaves shall be fire-proof.
Note: A Site Development Plan is required for all townhouse developments,
as per Article ID, Section 2.2.
60
7 .5 Buff er Requirements
Unless otherwise stipulated, when any lot is to be developed for any use other
than single family residential and such lot abuts a lot occupied or zoned for
single family residential development, a minimum buffer yard width of twentyfive
feet (25') shall be required. See Article VII, Sup.plemental Regulations,
Subsections 13.o· through 13.3.
7.6 Additional ReinJlations (When Applicable)
A. No fence shall be permitted forward of the front corner of the house;
other fences shall not exceed seven feet (7') in height.
B. Due to the zero lot line, easements or comparable access rights shall be
included in the deed so as to permit maintenance on each home.
C. All utilities shall be placed underground.
D. There shall be two (2) paved off-street parking spaces provided for each
unit, the depth of which shall be measured from the back of the curb.
Twenty percent (20%) of the parking shcill be dedicated to landscaping,
with adequate shade provided for trees, grass, etc. There shall be no offstreet
parking along existing interior streets.
E. Customary accessory buildings or structures, one (1) per parcel or lot,
shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet.
F. Signs Shall be in accordance with Article X.
Section 8.0 RT Townhouse Residential District
8.1 Intent
To provide areas suitable for Townhouse ~esidential Dwellings.
8.2 Uses Permitted
A. Residential Uses
1. Accessory Structures and Buildings provided they are located
in the rear yard only.
2. Townhouse Dwellings
B. Institutional Uses
1. Public Utility Service
59
I-
8.3 Special Exception Uses
The following uses may be permitted subject to approval of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment and further subject to appropriate permits being issued by the City.
See Article VID, Special Exception Uses, Section 1.0 and Subsections 1.1 and
1.2.
A. Commercial Uses
1. Home Occupations, Subject to Article VID, Section 9.0.
8.4 Area and Dimensional Re~ulations
These regulations shall pertain to areas with adequate sewer facilities.
Maximum Density:
Minimum Lot Width:
Ten (10) units per gross tract acre, including
common area.
18 Feet at the building Line.
Minimum Yard Setbacks:
Front:
Rear:
Side:
35 Feet**
30 Feet
0 Feet
** Townhouse dwellings shall be located at least fifteen feet ( 15 ' ) from the RT
District boundary as depicted on the site development plan and twenty feet (20' )
from an E-1, R-1 or R-2 Single family residential district.
Maximum Height: 35 Feet or 2-1/2 Stories.
Minimum Livable Floor Area:
1. One (1) Story Townhouse - 1,000 square feet
2. One and one-half (1-1/2) or two story townhouse:
500 feet on first floor, total minimum for townhouse -
1,000 square feet.
Undedicated Road: 60 Feet from the centerline.
Corner Lots: Shall have the same setbacks on both streets or roads.
A. Eve Overhangs: Cornices or eaves may extend into adjoining property
when allowed by properly executed and recorded covenants between
property owners. All such cornices and eaves shall be fire-proof.
Note: A Site Development Plan is required for all townhouse developments,
as per Article ID, Section 2.2.
60
Requirements for non-sewered development:
In the event, a site is to be developed with septic tank facilities, the developer/
builder shall produce an Engineering Report, for the persual of the Planning
Commission, City of Fultondale, prepared by a State of Alabama Registered
Professional Engineer. This report shall contain all the relevant information, on
the site, pertaining to the soil conditions, soil capacity, percolation study,
proximity to flood plains, etc. The developer/builder shall be required to produce
a permit from the Jefferson County Health Department. The City of Fultondale
shall issue a permit for the development of townhouses, to the developer/builder
in concern, based on the findings and recommendations of the Jefferson County
Health Department. In accordance with these recommendations, the density, unit
size and other relevant requirements for townhouses shall be provided by the City
of Fultondale to the developer/builder.
8.5 Buffer Requirements
Unless otherwise specified elsewhere in this Ordinance, when any lot is to be
developed for any use other than Townhouses, and such lot abuts a lot occupied
or zoned for any other use, a minimum buffer yard width of twenty-five feet (25 ' )
shall be provided. See Article VII, Supplemental Regulations, Subsections 13.0
through 13.3.
8.6 Additional Reeulations (When Applicable)
A. There shall be two (2) off-street parking spaces provided for each unit, the
depth of which shall be measured from back of curb. Twenty percent
(20 % ) of the parking shall be dedicated to landscaping with adequate shade
providing trees, grass, etc. There shall be no off-street parking permitted
along existing interior streets.
B. An easement appertained across lots shall be provided where a property
owner must cross an adjoining property to reach his or her own property
with gates, provided fence extends to the property line.
C. The applicant shall provide for and establish an organization or other legal
entity for the ownership and maintenance of any commonly owned areas
designated as such on the site development plan. Such organization shall
be created by covenants running with the land and such deed restrictions
or covenants shall be duly recorded in the Office of the Probate Judge of
Jefferson County, Alabama.
D. No fences shall be allowed in the front yard.
E. Private swimming pools are prohibited in· the RT District.
F. All utilities shall be placed underground.
61
G. All lots shall be served by water and sewer.
H. Garbage and refuse facilities shall be the responsibility of management and
shall be screened to the full height of such facilities.
1. Supplemental Regulations, Article VII.
2. General Regulations, Article V.
3. Definitions, Article IV.
4. Special Exception Uses, Article VID.
5. Administration and Review Procedures, Article ID.
6. Off-street Parking and Loading Requirements, Article IX.
7. Sign Regulations, Article X.
Section 9.0 MP Manufactured/Mobile Home Park District
9.1 Intent
To provide areas suitable for Manufactured (Mobile) Home Parks, free from
other uses which are incompatible with the character and intent of this district.
9.2 Uses Permitted
Manufactured (Mobile) Homes, Management Offices, Manager's Residences,
Service Facilities such as: Laundromats, Household Storage Buildings, Refuse
Collection Areas, and similar common service facilities designed and intended to
serve only the residents of the park. Other uses such as Recreational Facilities
designed and intended to serve only the residents of the park and their guests, and
Residential Accessory uses and Structures may also be permitted.
9.3 Site Standards
A site plan shall be prepared and submitted for each manufactured (mobile) home
park, and:
A. The minimum site area for a manufactured (mobile) home park shall be
twenty (20) acres of land with access to a public street and fronts upon a
dedicated street of not less than fifty feet (50' ).
B. Each manufactured (mobile) home lot shall have a mm1mum of five
thousand (5,000) square feet and have a minimum width of forty-five feet
( 45 /) at the front lot line.
C. Each manufactured (mobile) home lot shall be set bacl~ a minimum of
thirty-five feet (35 /) from any park boundary line and ten feet (10/) from
any other lot line.
62
-..
D. Minimum Yard Setbacks shall be:
E.
Front Yard:
Rear Yard:
Side Yard:
25 Feet*
10 Feet
10 Feet
* Undedicated Road - SO feet from the Centerline.
No mru:mfactured (mobile) home may be located closer than twenty feet
(20' ) from another such home on an adjacent space.
F. The maximum density shall be six (6) manufactured (mobile) homes per
gross tract acre. If not served by public water and sewer, a lower density
may be required by the Jefferson County Health Department.
G. Location and type of street lighting as recommended by the Alabama
Power Company or comparable engineering data.
H. Location and type of fire hydrants to be coordinated with City of
Fultondale Fire Department.
I. Each manufactured (mobile) home park shall be provided with a park and
recreational area having a minimum area of one hundred (100) square feet
per manufactured (mobile) home space. Such areas shall be consolidated
into usable areas.
9.4 Installation
All manufactured (mobile) homes shall be installed according to all requirements
of the Standard Building Code, Appendix H, or as same may be amended. It
shall be completely skirted within thirty (30) days from the date the home is
moved into the park with a weather resistant material. Skirting shall be
adequately vented.
9.5 Storaee Facilities, Accessory Uses and Structures
A maximum of one hundred (100) square feet of storage area shall be provided
for each space. Alternatively, park management may provide common storage
lockers at an equivalent capacity. Permitted accessory structures on manufactured
(mobile) home spaces shall include all accessory structures permitted on the lots
of single family residences, except for private swimming pools and satellite dish
antennas. Such accessory uses shall not be permitted closer than five feet (5 ' )
of the rear and side boundaries of each space. Carports may be permitted within
the front yard but shall not be permitted within five feet (5 ' ) of the rear and side
boundaries of each space and twenty-five feet (25 ' ) from the front lot line, and
in the case of a comer lot, twenty-five feet (25 ' ) from lot lines adjacent to a
street.
63
9.6 Off-street Parkine and Streets
Two-way private, paved streets maintained by the park management shall be
installed to furnish convenient access to all manufactured (mobile) home spaces
within the park and such streets shall be in compliance with the street standards
of the City of Fultondale. No manufactured (mobile) home shall have its own
access into a public street. Dead-end streets shall have turnarounds in
conformance with Fultondale Street Standards and each manufactured (mobile)
home lot shall have two (2) paved off-street parking spaces provided. The
location of all driveways shall be shown on the required site plan and approved
by the Fultondale Planning Commission.
9. 7 Service Facilities
Common recreational facilities and laundromats shall be provided for the use of
park residents only. Refuse collection and disposal shall be the responsibility
of the park management and any common refuse collection areas provided shall
be screened to the full height of such facilities.
9.8 Buffer Requirements
The proposed development shall be designed as a single architectural scheme with
appropriate landscaping and a thirty-five foot (35') buffer strip shall be retained
or installed around the entire park. The buffer strip shall be landscaped and
maintained by the park management and no accessory buildings or structures shall
be erected or maintained in the required buffer strip. Refer to Article VII,
Supplemental Regulations, Section 11.0 through Subsection 11.3.
9.9 Siens
Signs shall be in accordance with the provisions of Article X, Sign Regulations,
Section 2.0.
9.10 Landscapine
All required yards should be permanently landscaped with ground cover, trees
or shrubs.
9.11 Deck (Patio)
Each manufactured (mobile) home shall be provided with a deck or patio of at
least two hundred (200) square feet.
9.12 Ownership
All manufactured (mobile) home lots are to be leased or rented ONLY and are
not to be sold individually.
64
9.13 Fences
Fences shall be in accordance with the provisions of Article VII, Section 4.0.
Section 10.0 MS Manufactured (Mobile) Home Subdivision
10.1 Intent
To provide areas for Manufactured (Mobile) Home Subdivision development, free
from other uses which are incompatible with the character and intent of this
district.
10.2 Uses Permitted
Within the MS Manufactured (Mobile) Home Subdivision District, a building or
land shall be used only for the following:
A. Residential Uses
1. Customary Accessory Structures and Buildings.
2. Detached Single family Manufactured (Mobile) Homes located on
owned lots.
3. Non-commercial Greenhouses and Gardens.
B. Commercial Uses
1. Home Occupations, Subject to Article VIII, Section 9.0.
10.3 Area and Dimensional Re2ulations
Except as may be provided for elsewhere in this Ordinance the following
area and dimensional regulations shall be required.
Minimum Lot Area:
Minimum Lot Width:
Minimum Yard Setbacks:
Front:
Rear:
Side:
*Undedicated Road:
7 ,500 Square Feet [15,000 Square Feet if septic tanks
and field lines are required]
50 Feet at the Building Line
35 Feet*
35 Feet
8 Feet
Sixty feet (60 /) from centerline.
Corner Lots: Setbacks shall be the same on both streets or roads.
65
.. -,
10.4 Manufactured (Mobile) Home Standards
A. The minimum manufactured (mobile) home floor area shall be five hundred
(500) square feet.
B. Each manufactured (mobile) home shall be provided with two (2) off-street
parking spaces, with all streets and parking spaces in complete
conformance with the City of Fultondale Subdivision Regulations relative
to street standards and design.
C. All manufactured (mobile) homes shall be installed according to all
applicable requirements of the Standard Building Code, Appendix Hor as
same may be amended and shall be completely skirted within thirty (30)
days from the date the home is moved on the lot with weather resistant
material. Skirting shall be adequately vented.
10.5 Procedure For Plat Approval
Layout plans for all manufactured (mobile) home subdivisions shall be prepared
by an Alabama Registered Professional Engineer and submitted to the Fultondale
Planning Commission for review and approval. This site plan shall include the
following:
A. Area and dimensions of the site.
B. Number of lots, dimensions and layout of all lots.
C. Location, size and layout of all utilities and streets.
D. Assessment of drainage conditions by an Alabama Registered Professional
Engineer, including all proposed measures needed to rectify problems
where they exist.
E. Street plan, including all off-street parking.
F. Assessment of traffic conditions, including all proposed measures needed
to rectify problems, where they exist.
G. Location of all fire hydrants.
H. Location and type of all street lighting.
10.6 Additional Reeulations
A. All manufactured (mobile) homes shall be individually owned.
B. The subdivision shall be in accordance with all applicable sections of the
City of Fultondale Subdivision Regulations.
66
..
C. All access points shall be controlled through the site review of plans
submitted to the Fultondale Planning Commission on each manufactured
(mobile) home subdivision plan.
D. The subdivision shall be served by water, sanitary facilities and by
adequate drainage facilities and such plans shall be submitted to both the
City Engineer and City Building Inspector, as well as to the City of
Fultondale Planning Commission for review.
Section 11.0 0-1 Office Building District
11.1 Intent
To provide areas suitable for office and professional buildings, along with selected
institutional and commercial uses which are deemed compatible with the
professional office environment.
11.2 Uses Permitted
*
11.3
The following uses shall be permitted in the 0-1 Office Building District. Similar
uses to those listed below may also be permitted Subject to Article Ill,
Administration and Review Procedures, Subsection 2.10, Interpretation Of
Uses, and Subsection 2.11, Unclassified Uses.
A. Commercial Uses
1. Bank or Financial Services
2. Business or Professional Offices*
3. Business Support Services
4. Commercial Parking
5. Commercial Schools
6. Personal Services
B. Institutional Uses
1. Public Utility Services
Office Buildings in excess of 2,500 square feet of floor space may use up to ten
percent (10%) of such space for commercial and personal service oriented
activities.
Special Exception Uses
The following uses may be permitted subject to approval of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment and further subject to appropriate permits being issued by the City.
See Article Vill, Special Exception Uses, Section 1.0 and Subsections 1.1 and
1.2.
67
A. Commercial Uses
1. Broadcast Studios
2. Clinics
3. Day Care Centers
4. Funeral Homes
5. Restaurants, Fast Food, See Article VID, Section 5.0.
6. Restaurants, Standard
7. Studios
B. Institutional Uses
1. Parks
2. Places of Worship
3. Public Buildings, Subject to Section 2.0, Subsection 2.5.
4. Public Utility Facilities
5. School
6. Nursing Care Facility, See Article VID, Section 7.0.
7. Domiciliary Care Facility
8. School
11.4 Area and Dimensional Regulations
Except as may be provided for elsewhere in this Ordinance, the following area
and dimensional regulations shall be required:
Minimum Yard Setbacks:
Front:
Rear:
Side:
Maximum Building Height:
35 Feet
35 Feet*
35 Feet**
45 Feet or 4 Stories
Corner Lots: Shall have the same setbacks on both streets and roads.
*
**
Rear Yard may be reduced to fifteen feet (15 ' ) if the adjoining property
is zoned commercial or light industrial.
If the adjoining property is zoned commercial or light industrial, interior
side yard setbacks may be reduced to zero feet (0 ' ), provided that all
portions of the side of the structure are enclosed with an un-perforated firewall
of four (4) hour fire construction. In addition, if the,..structure is not
built to the side lot line, a minimum setback of at least ten feet (10 ' ) shall
be maintained.
68
11.5 Buffer Requirements
Unless otherwise stipulated elsewhere in this Ordinance, when any lot is to be
developed for any use permitted in this district and such use abuts a lot occupied
or zoned for single family residential use, a minimum buffer yard width of
twenty-five feet (25 ') shall be provided. See Article VII, Supplemental
Regulations, 13.0 through 13.3.
11.6 Additional Re211lations
A. Administration and Review Procedures, Article ill.
B. Definitions, Article IV.
C. General Regulations, Article V.
D. Supplemental Regulations, Article VII.
E. Special Exception Uses, Article VIII.
F. Off-street Parking and Loading Requirements, Article IX.
G. Sign Regulations, Article X.
H. Each structure located in the 0-1 Office Building District shall have
a service yard or yards, adequate for the handling of waste and
garbage and the loading and unloading of vehicles. Such service yard
shall be paved, have access to a public street or alley, be located to the
rear or side of the primary structure and be enclosed on three sides
with a permanent wall or fence at least six feet (6' ) in height and
adequate in height to conceal the service yard from visibility.
I. No exterior lighting fixture, including lighting for parking areas,
walkways, general illumination or any other purposes except legal
signs shall exceed twenty-five feet (25 ' ) in height measured from the
ground and be located and erected in such a manner as to direct the
beam of light away from nearby residential areas.
J. A Site Development Plan is required which provides for:
1. Convenient vehicular servicing of the buildings, satisfactory
circulation of traffic in the parking areas, as well as in adjacent
areas. There should be no undue interference with through
traffic in gaining ingress and egress from the proposed site.
2. A preliminary plan or engineering report providing for the site
grading, storm drainage, sanitary sewers and water supply
prepared by an Alabama Registered Professional Engineer.
3. Suitable entrance and exit points adjoining public streets,
highways, or thoroughfares serving the proposed development.
4. The location, size, number and character of all exterior signs
69
and lighting.
5. The type and location of all buffers to be employed.
Section 12.0 B-1 Neighborhood Business District
12.1 Intent
To establish and preserve areas for those commercial uses which are especially
useful in close proximity to residential areas, along with selected institutional uses,
while minimizing the possible undesirable impact of such uses on the
neighborhoods they serve.
12.2 Uses Permitted
The following uses shall be permitted in the B-1 Neighborhood Business District.
Similar uses to those listed below may also be permitted subject to Article ID,
Administration and Review Procedures, Subsection 2.10, Interpretation of
Uses, and Subsection 2.11, Unclassified Uses.
A. Commercial Uses
1. Banks or Financial Services
2. Business or Professional Offices
3. Business Support Services
4. Car Washes
5. Convenience Stores
6. Clinics
7. Day Care Centers
8. General Retail (Enclosed)
9. Personal Services
10. Studios
B. Institutional Uses
1. Community Centers
2. Public Utility Services
12.3 Special Exception Uses
The following uses may be permitted subject to approval of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment and further subject to appropriate permits being issued by the City.
See Article VID, Special Exception Uses, Section 1.0 and Subsections 1.1 and
1.2.
A. Commercial Uses
70
Section 13.0 B-2 General Business District
13.1 Intent
To establish and preserve a retail business district convenient to the public which
is attractive for a wide range of retail and service uses usually found along major
streets and thoroughfares and downtown areas.
13.2 Uses Permitted
The following uses shall be permitted in the B-2 General Business District. Similar
uses to those listed may also be permitted subject to Article ID, Administration
and Review Procedures, Subsection 2.12, Interpretation Of Uses, and
Subsection 2.11, Unclassified Uses.
A. Commercial Uses
1. Bakeries (Minor)
2. Business or Professional Offices
3. Banks or Financial Services
4. Business Support Service
5. Clinics
6. Commercial Parking
7. Commercial Schools
8. Convenience Stores
9. Day Care Centers
10. Entertainment (Indoor)
11. General Retail Businesses (Enclosed)
12. General Retail Businesses (Unenclosed)
13. Home Improvement Centers
14. Medical Support Services
15. Personal Services
16. Prin~ing Establishment (Minor)
17. Restaurants (Standard)
18. Studios
19. Vehicle Repair (Minor, See Definition Section)
20. Vehicle Sales or Rentals
B. Institutional Uses
1. Clubs
2. Community Centers or Civic Centers
3. Community Service Clubs
4. Public Utility Services
73
13.3 Special Exception Uses
13.4
The following uses may be permitted subject to the approval of the Zoning Board
of Adjustment and further subject to appropriate permits being issued by the City.
See Article VIll, Special Exception Uses, Section 1.0 and Subsections 1.1 and
1.2.
A. Commercial Uses
1. Campgrounds
2. Car Washes
3. Funeral Homes
4. Garden Centers or Nurseries
5. Gasoline Service Stations, Subject to Article VIII, Section 4.0.
6. Hotels and Motels
7. Liquor Lounges
8. Major Vehicle Repair Services as defined in Article IV, Definitions.
9. Mini-warehouses, Subject to Article VID, Section 10.0.
10. Restaurants (Fast Food, Subject to Article VIII, Section 5.0.
11. Shopping Centers, Subject to Article VIII, Section 3.0.
12. Truck Stops
B. Institutional Uses
1. Country Clubs
2. Hospitals
3. Parks
4. Places of Worship
5. Public Assembly Centers
6. Public Buildings, Subject to Article VI, Section 2.0, Subsection 2.5.
7. Public Utility Facilities
8. Schools
9. Nursing Care Facility, See Section VID, Section 7.0.
10. Domiciliary Care Facility
C. Temporary Uses
1. Seasonal Sales, Subject to Article IV, subsection 5.6
Area and Dimensional Reeulations
Except as may be provided for elsewhere in this Ordinance, the following
area and dimensional regulations shall apply:
Minimum Lot Size: None specified, although the lot size shall be
adequate to provide for the required parking, buffers,
storage and servicing of the buildings.
74
..
Minimum Lot Width: None specified, although it is the intent of this
Ordinance that lots be of sufficient width to allow
for the proposed use, along with adequate space for
parking, buffers, storage and the servicing of the
building(s).
Minimum Yard Setbacks:
Front:
Rear:
Side:
35 feet
35 feet*
35 feet**
Maximum Height: Forty-five feet (45 ' ) or four (4) stories
Corner Lots: Setbacks shall be the same on both streets or roads.
*
**
Rear yard may be reduced to fifteen feet (15 /) if the adjoining rear
property is zoned commercial or light industrial.
If adjoining property is zoned commercial or light industrial, interior side
yard setback may be reduced to zero feet (0 /), provided that all portions
of the side of the structure is enclosed with an un-pierced fire-wall of four
(4) hour fire construction. In addition, if the structure is not built to the
side lot line, a minimum setback of at least fifteen feet (15 /) shall be
maintained.
13.S Buffer Reguirements
Unless otherwise stipulated, when any use allowed in this district is located
adjacent to any occupied residential lot or a lot that is zoned residential, such use
shall provide a minimum buffer yard width of twenty-five feet (25 /). See Article
Vil, Supplemental Regulations, Subsections 13.0 through 13.3.
13.6 Additional Reeulations (When Applicable)
A. Administration and Review Procedures, Article ill.
B. Definitions, Article IV.
C. General Regulations, Article V.
D. Supplemental Regulations, Article VII.
E. Special Exception Uses, Article VID.
F. Off-street Parking and Loading Regulations, Article IX.
G. Sign Regulations, Article X.
H. Each structure located in the B-2 General Business District shall have
a service yard or yards adequate for the handling of waste and garbage
and the loading and unloading of vehicles. Such service yard shall be
paved, have access to a public street or alley, be located to the rear or
side of the primary structure(s) and be enclosed on three sides with a
wall or fence, at least six feet (6 /) in height and adequate to conceal
75
the service yard from public view.
I. No exterior lighting fixture, including lighting for parking areas,
walkways, general illumination or any other purposes except legal signs
shall exceed twenty-five feet (25 /) in height measured from the ground
and shall be located and constructed in such a manner so as to direct
the beam of light away from any adjacent areas.
Section 14.0 M-1 Light Industrial District
14.1 Intent
This district consists of areas where limited industrial uses are permitted. The
district encourages employment centers with a low degree of environmental
impact. Principal industrial activities include: light manufacturing, industrial
services, warehousing, wholesaling, distribution services, and other limited impact
activities. The M-1 District also allows for selected commercial and institutional
uses which are supportive of industrial employment centers.
14.2 Uses Permitted
The following uses shall be permitted in the M-1 Light Industrial District. Similar
uses may also be permitted subject to Article III, Administration and Review
Procedures, Subsection 2.10, Interpretation of Uses, and Unclassified Uses,
Subsection 2.11.
A. Industrial Uses
1. Construction Services
2. Industrial Parks, Subject to Article VIII, Section 12.0.
3. Maintenance Services
4. Manufacturing (Light)
5. Research Laboratories
6. Truck Terminals
7. Vehicle and Equipment Sales (Major)
B. Commercial Uses
1. Animal Hospitals
2. Bakeries (Major)
3. Business or Professional Offices
4. Business Support Services
5. Garage, Repair
6. Gasoline Service Stations, Subject to Article VID, Section 4.0.
7. Home Improvement Centers
8. Mini-warehouses, Subject to Article VID, Section 10.0.
76
9. Printing Establishment (Major)
10. Vehicle Repair, (Minor and Major)
C. Institutional Uses
1. Public Utility Services
D. Agricultural Uses
1. Farm Support Businesses
14.3 Special Exception Uses
The following uses may be permitted subject to the approval of the Zoning Board
of Adjustment and further subject to appropriate permits being issued by the City.
See Article Vffi, Special Exception Uses, Section 1.0 and Subsections 1.1 and
1.2.
A. Commercial Uses
1. Airports, including heliports
2. Animal Kennels
3. Commercial Transmission Towers, Subject to Article VID, Section
13.0.
4. Kennels
B. Institutional Uses
1. Animal Shelters
2. Cemeteries
3. Military Installations
4. Parks
5. Pet Cemeteries
6. Public Buildings, Subject to Article VI, Subsection 2.5.
7. Public Utility Fa~ilities
14.4 Area and Dimensional Regulations
Except as may be provided for elsewhere in this Ordinance, the following area
and dimensional regulations shall be required:
Minimum Lot Size: None specified, although it is the intent of this
Ordinance that lots be of sufficient size to
accommodate the proposed use, alm1g with adequate
space for parking, loading and unloading of vehicles,
buffers, storage and servicing of the building(s).
77
Minimum Lot Width:
Minimum Yard Setbacks:
Front:
Rear:
Side:
None specified; although, it is the intent of this
Ordinance that lots be of sufficient width to allow
the proposed use and adequate space for parking,
buffers, storage and servicing of the building(s).
35 feet
35 feet*
35 feet**
Maximum Building Height: 45 feet
Corner Lots: Same setbacks on streets, roads and highways; from an undedicated
road, it shall be one hundred feet (100 ') from the centerline.
* Rear Yard may be reduced to fifteen feet (15') if the adjoining property
is zoned industrial.
** If the adjoining property is zoned industrial, interior side yard setbacks
may be reduced to zero feet (0 ' ); provided that all portions of the side of
the structure are enclosed with an un-pierced fire-wall of four ( 4) hour
construction. In addition, if the structure is not built to the side lot line,
a minimum setback of at least fifteen feet (15') shall be maintained.
14.5 Buffer Requirements
Unless otherwise stipulated, when any use permitted in this district is located
adjacent to any occupied residential or commercial lot or a lot that is zoned
residential or commercial, said use shall provide a minimum buffer yard width
of forty feet (40' ). See Article VII, Supplemental Regulations, Subsections
13.0 through 13.3.
14.6 Additional Reeulations (When Applicable)
A. Administration and Review Procedures, Article ID.
B. Definitions, Article IV.
C. General Regulations, Article V.
D. Supplemental Regulations, Article VII.
E. Special Exception Uses, Article VID.
F. Off-street Parking and Loading Regulations, Article IX.
G. Sign Regulations, Article X.
H. Any outdoor storage area shall be screened to a height which is
adequate to conceal such area from public view from off the
premises.
78
I. Any garbage/ ref use service areas shall be limited to the rear of the
principal building or complex it serves to a height which is adequate
to conceal such facilities from public view from off the premises.
Section 15.0 M-2 Heavy Industrial District
15.1 Intent
To provide suitable areas where heavy industrial uses are permitted. This district
encourages employment centers where a potentially high degree of environmental
impact uses can be located, including general and heavy manufacturing and
industry.
15.2 Uses Permitted
The following uses shall be permitted in the M-2 Heavy Industrial District.
Similar uses to those listed may also be permitted Subject to Article ID,
Administration and Review Procedures, Subsection 2.10, Interpretation of
Uses, and Subsection 2.11, Unclassified Uses.
A. Industrial Uses
1. Heavy Industry
2. Industrial Parks, Subject to Article VIII, Section 12.0.
3. Manufacturing (General)
4. Manufacturing (Light)
5. Warehousing, Wholesaling and Distribution.
B. Institutional Uses
1. Public Utility Services
15.3 Special Exception Uses
The following uses may be permitted subject to approval of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment and further subject to appropriate permits being issued by the City.
See Article VID, Special Exception Uses, Section 1.0 and Subsections 1.1 and
1.2.
A. Industrial Uses
1. Recycling Plants
2. Salvage Yards or Junk Yards
3. Sanitary Landfills
B. Commercial Uses
79
1. Animal Hospitals
2. Kennels
3. Transmission Towers, Subject to Article VID, Section 13.0.
C. Institutional Uses
1. Animal Shelters
2. Public Utility Facilities
15.4 Area and Dimensional Rei:ulations
Except as may be provided for elsewhere in this Ordinance, the following area
and dimensional regulations shall be required:
Minimum Lot Size: The same as in District M-1.
Minimum Lot Width: The same as in District M-1.
Minimum Yard Setbacks: The same as in District M-1.
Corner Lots: Setbacks shall be the same on both streets, roads or highways.
15.5 Buffer Reguirements
Unless otherwise stipulated, when any use allowed in this district is located
adjacent to any occupied residential or commercial lot or a lot that is zoned
residential or. commercial, said use shall provide a minimum buffer yard width
of fifty feet (50' ). See Article VII, Supplemental Regulations, Subsections
13.0 through 13.3.
15.6 Additional Re2ulations (When Applicable)
A. Administration and Review Procedures, Article ID.
B. Definitions, Article IV.
C. General Regulations, Article V.
D. Supplemental Regulations, Article VII.
E. Special Exception Uses, Article VIII.
F. Off-street Parking and Loading Regulations, Article IX.
G. Sign Regulations, Article X.
H. Any outdoor storage areas shall be screened to a height which is
adequate to conceal such storage areas from public view from off the
premises.
I. Any garbage/ ref use service area shall be limited to the rear of the
principal building or complex it serves and screened to a height which
is adequate to conceal such facilities from public view from off the
premises.
80
Section 16.0 M-3-S Strip Mining District
16.1 Intent
To provide standards to regulate strip mining operations in selected areas and to
provide safeguards for both adjacent properties and the environment. This is the
only district in the City of Fultondale in which strip mining shall be permitted,
with the exception of any operations licensed by the State of Alabama and/or the
City of Fultondale actively engaged in strip-mining at the time of the adoption of
this Ordinance.
16.2 Uses Permitted
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
A. Extraction of minerals - coal, ore, etc.- by the surface mining method.
B. The right to: erect, maintain, alter, enlarge, use and operate: a structure,
building, machinery, housing, road, railroad, transmission lines, right-ofway
and other facilities accessory to strip mining.
16.3 Area and Dimensional Regulations
In the .above permitted uses, the area and dimensional regulations set forth in the
following section shall be observed:
A. The extraction of minerals (coal, ore, etc.) by the surface mining method
will not be permitted within two hundred feet (200' ) of any property line
or public road right-of-way within this zoning district, with exception to
the following:
1. The foregoing two hundred feet (200 ' ) property line setback _
requirement may be reduced in whole or in part with the written
consent of the owner(s) of the adjacent property and the approval
of the Fultondale Planning Commission.
2. The foregoing 200-foot public road right-of-way setback
requirement may be reduced in whole or in part with the written
consent of the Fultondale City Council.
B. The right to: erect, maintain, alter, use and operate a stmcture, building,
machinery, housing, road, railroad, transmission lines, right-of-way and
other facilities accessory to strip mining will not be permitted within fifty
feet (50' ) of any property line or public road right-of-way line within this
zoning district, except where mine access roads or haulage roads join such
81
right-of-way line and except that the Planning Commission or governmental
body having jurisdiction over such roads may permit such roads to be
relocated or the area affected to lie within fifty feet (50' ) of such road.
C. Exception to the setback requirement stated in A, 1 and 2 above will be
made where the adjoining property is also zoned M-3-S, thereby
eliminating the need for setback lines.
16.4 Additional Requirements
Prior to the use of the land for the above described purposes, the applicant shall
submit a plan showing an informal sketch as to the locations of the coal seam,
estimated number of tons, approximate time required to strip and reclaim a
general expression of the subsequent use of the property. In addition, all such
firms, persons, corporations and other entities shall be subject to any and all State
and Federal Laws pertaining to regulation of strip mining operations. Upon
completion of mining and reclamation, property within this district shall then
revert back to its previous zoning district designation or shall be rezoned within
a period of one (1) year. All strip mining activities must be in complete
conformity and in full compliance with all State and Federal Laws pertaining to
such operations, including, but not limited to those of the Alabama Department
of Environmental Management (ADEM) requirements.
Section 17 .0 MR Municipal Reserve District
17.1 Intent
This District serves as an interim zone for newly annexed areas of the
municipality. The MR District seeks to protect newly annexed property prior to
the time comprehensive zoning can be applied to the area.
17.2 Zonine Of Annexed Area
On the effective date of annexation, all newly annexed property shall be zoned
MR Municipal Reserve District.
17.3 Rezonine From The MR District
As soon as practicable following annexation, the Fultondale Planning Commission
shall initiate a petition to rezone property annexed into the City from the MR
District to any other district contained within this Ordinance. In"Cletermining the
most appropriate zone or zones, the Planning Commission shall duly consider the
following items, among others:
82
A.
B.
c.
The Comprehensive Land Use Plan and or a Planning Commission study
of the area.
The desires of property owners in the area subject to rezoning.
The purposes and considerations of zoning as contained in this Ordinance
as well as Code of Alabama, 1975, Section 11-52-72.
17 .4 Permitted Uses and Development Standards
All uses in existence at the time of annexation may lawfully continue under the
provisions of the MR District. However, at such time as rezoning is
accomplished, all applications shall be subject to the uses permitted in the zone
or zones assigned to the subject property along with all criteria and requirements.
17.5 Action on Annexation Ordinances
All annexation ordinances enacted by the City of Fultondale shall include the
provision that the property shall be temporarily zoned MR. A copy of the
annexation ordinance shall be transmitted to the Building Inspector and the
Planning Commission for action.
ARTICLE VII
SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
Section 1.0 Area Modification For Lots Of Record
The Fultondale Zoning Board of Adjustment shall approve all proposed development
involving non-conforming lots of record. See Article V, General Regulations, Section 6.0
and Subsection 6.1.
Section 2.0 General Yard Requirements
Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky, unobstructed by any structure or
part thereof, and unoccupied for storage, servicing or similar uses, except as provided for
herein.
More than one (1) multiple dwelling, office, institutional, industrial or public building
may be located upon a lot or tract of land, but such dwellings shall not encroach upon the front,
side or rear yards required by the district regulations.
2.1 Front Yard Modifications
A. Where forty percent (40%) or more of the frontage on the same side of
the street between two (2) intersecting streets is presently developed or
may hereafter be developed .with buildings that have [with a variation of
five feet (5 ' ) or less] a front yard greater or lesser in depth than herein
required, new buildings shall not be erected closer to the street than the
average front yard so established by the existing dwelling.
B. Where forty percent (40%) or more of the frontage on one (1) side of a
street between two (2) intersecting streets is presently developed or may
hereafter be developed with buildings that do not have a front yard as
described below. The fol_lowing shall apply:
1. Where a building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is within
one hundred feet (100' ) of existing buildings on both sides, the
minimum front yard shall be a line drawn between the closest front
comers of the adjacent buildings; or,
2. Where a building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is within
one hundred feet (100 ' ) of an existing building on one (1) side
only, such building may be erected as close to ·the street as the
existing building.
C. Through lots shall provide the required front yard on both sides.
D. Corner lots shall provide a front yard on each street.
..
.. .,_
2.2 Rear Yard Modifications
Where a lot abuts an alley, one-half (1/2) of the alley width may be considered
as part of the required rear yard.
Section 3.0 Height Modifications
Any limitation on the number of stories shall not apply to buildings used exclusively for
storage purposes, provided such buildings do not exceed the height in feet permitted in the
district in which located.
Chimneys, cooling towers, elevators, bulkheads, fire towers, gas tanks, steeples,
penthouses, stacks, stage towers or scenery lofts, tanks, water towers, ornamental towers and
spires, wireless, television or radio towers, or necessary mechanical appurtenances, where
permitted, may be erected to any height not in conflict with existing or hereafter adopted
ordinances of the City of Fultondale, except that where permitted in connection with residential
uses, such structures shall be limited to a height of twenty-five feet (25 ' ) above the average
height of structures permitted in that district.
Section 4.0 Fences and Walls
No fence shall be allowed beyond the front yard set-back line in any single family
residential district. ·
The height requirements in any single-family residential zone shall be as follows: fences
constructed on a side or rear lot line or behind the required front yard as set forth elsewhere in
these regulations shall not exceed a height of six and one-half feet (6' -6" ) as measured from the
topmost point of the fence to the ground or surface along the center line of the fence.
The following types of fences are permitted in Residential Zone Districts: masonry
walls, ornamental (iron) woven wire (chain link), wood or other man-made materials and
hedges. The following type of fences are Prohibited: any fence carrying electric current, any
fence that utilizes spikes, nails, barb wire or other pointed materials in its construction.
However, when warranted,-those fence types listed as prohibited above may be permitted in the
A-1 Agricultural, M-1 Light Industrial and M-2 Heavy Industrial Districts.
On any corner lots, no fence of any material shall be permitted to encroach a required
thirty-five foot (35 ' ) building line setback that would hinder site distances for motorists or
pedestrians. No fence, hedge or any type of planting shall be placed or constructed in any
location that would hinder access to fire hydrants, including ornamental or split-rail fences.
The following exceptions should be noted relative to fences, walls and...fiedges: fences
used for guard railing, around depressed ramps, tops of retaining walls along driveways and
adjacent to residential sidewalks, not to exceed forty-two inches (42" ) in height. (See
Illustration overleaf.)
85
2.2 Rear Yard Modifications
Where a lot abuts an alley, one-half (1/2) of the alley width may be considered
as part of the required rear yard.
Section 3.0 Height Modifications
Any limitation on the number of stories shall not apply to buildings used exclusively for
storage purposes, provided such buildings do not exceed the height in feet permitted in the
district in which located.
Chimneys, cooling towers, elevators, bulkheads, fire towers, gas tanks, steeples,
penthouses, stacks, stage towers or scenery lofts, tanks, water towers, ornamental towers and
spires, wireless, television or radio towers, or necessary mechanical appurtenances, where
permitted, may be erected to any height not in conflict with existing or hereafter adopted
ordinances of the City of Fultondale, except that where permitted in connection with residential
uses, such structures shall be limited to a height of twenty-five feet (25' ) ~bove the average
height of structures permitted in that district.
Section 4.0 Fences and Walls
No fence shall be allowed beyond the front yard set-back line in any single family
residential district. ·
The height requirements in any single-family residential zone shall be as follows: fences
constructed on a side or rear lot line or behind the required front yard as set forth elsewhere in
these regulations shall not exceed a height of six and one-half feet (6' -6" ) as measured from the
topmost point of the fence to the ground or surface along the center line of the fence.
The following types of fences are permitted in Residential Zone Districts: masonry
walls, ornamental (iron) woven wire (chain link), wood or other man-made materials and
hedges. The following type of fences are Prohibited: any fence carrying electric current, any
fence that utilizes spikes, !tails, barb wire or other pointed materials in its construction.
However, when warranted,- those fence types listed as prohibited above may be permitted in the
A-1 Agricultural, M-1 Light Industrial and M-2 Heavy Industrial Districts.
On any comer lots, no fence of any material shall be permitted to encroach a required
thirty-five foot (35 ' ) building line setback that would hinder site distances for motorists or
pedestrians. No fence, hedge or any type of planting shall be placed or constructed in any
location that would hinder access to fire hydrants, including ornamental or split-rail fences.
The following exceptions should be noted relative to fences, walls and"11edges: fences
used for guard railing, around depressed ramps, tops of retaining walls along driveways and
adjacent to residential sidewalks, not to exceed forty-two inches (42;,) in height. (See
Illustration overleaf.)
85
STREET
115' 100' 115'
FRONT YARD FRONT YARD FRONT YARD --- REAR ~ . YA!W ~ .t.-........
!;:-
S IDE I 0
~
a- ~ YARD I ~
C\l !;: I 0 ::: I R EAR YARD REAR YARD I
I S IDE I
I
YARD I
h II II .~... h
~ I ~ ~ . I C:; ~
~
....
I s _...._ "' ~
~ I ;,,
11
I '"' ~ h I REAR YARD
I h
VJ ~ . S IDE ~ V) REAR YARD YARD
~- ~-
.".', o!;: a(\' )
a I I ::: (\') - C\l I •
0 n: ~ • FRONT YARD
!;: I
0 I FRONT ::: I YARD
I
UILDINC LINE
FRONT YARD
115' 100' 115' .
TYPICAL CONFIGURATIONS
...... FENCES AND WALLS
For non-residential Districts, all fence construction shall be subject to site plan
approval with no height or setback restriction(s) except those deemed necessary and
reasonable by the Planning Commission unless otherwise stipulated elsewhere in this
Ordinance. See Special Exception Uses.
Section 5.0 Porches, Terraces, Balconies, Cornices, and Eaves
Sills or ornamental features of a structure may project into any yard not to exceed six
inches (6//).
86
"
Cornices or eaves may project into any required yard not to exceed twenty-four inches
(24" ).
Terraces, unenclosed porches, underground fallout shelters or ornamental features (which
are constructed as part of a single-family or two-family dwelling) may project into a required
yard, provided such projections be not closer than thirty feet (30 ' ) from the front lot line, and
twenty-five feet (25 ' ) from the back lot line. Sai~ terraces, porches, shelters and ornamental
features (when constructed as part of a multifamily dwelling) may exceed a maximum of five
feet (5') into the side yards.
In single-family and two-family residential zones, an unenclosed balcony, deck, porch
or fire escape may project into a required rear yard, provided such structures be located not
closer than twenty-five feet (25 ') from the rear property line and ten feet (10') from either side
property line.
In multifamily residential zones, an unenclosed balcony, porch, deck or fire escape may
project into a required rear yard for a distance not to exceed twelve feet (12 ' ), and may project
into a required side yard for a distance not to exceed eight feet (8 ' ); but, in no instances, shall
said structures be located closer than twenty-five feet (25 ' ) from any property line in which a
buffer is required as a means of separating incompatible land uses.
Section 6.0 Accessory Buildings and Structures
Non-residential accessory buildings or structures up to twelve feet (12' ) in height shall
be permitted within five feet (5 ' ) of any side or rear property line, but shall not occupy any
portion of the front yard. Accessory buildings above twelve feet (12' ) in height shall be set back
one (1) additional foot for each four feet (4 ' ) in height above twelve feet (12 ' ) up to the district
maximum building height limitation of the district in which located.
Non-residential accessory buildings shall be constructed of materials which are compatible
with other buildings in the district in which located in order to insure that the aesthetic value and
appearance of the neighborhood is retained.
Residential accessory buildings, attached and detached carports, and garages on
residential lots shall meet. the following requirements:
1. The maximum floor area shall be twenty-five percent (25 % ) of the habitable floor
area of the principal building.
2. The maximum height shall be eighteen feet (18 ' ) and in no case will it exceed
the principal building height.
3. Such structures and additions shall be subject to the front yard requirements in that
respective district.
4. Detached accessory structures shall be constructed in the rear yard but shall be
located no closer than five feet (5 ' ) from the property line.
87
5. Accessory structures shall be constructed of materials which are compatible with
other buildings in the district in which located in order to insure that the aesthetic
value and appearance of the neighborhood is retained.
6. Accessory structures shall not be built prior to construction of the primary
structure, nor shall such be used for non-residential purposes which are not
normally incidental to residential use.
7. All electrical power service to accessory buildings on residential lots shall
originate from the main power service at the main building and not a separate
metered service.
8. Attached accessory buildings and structures, such as, carports and garages may
be built in the side yard but must conform with the side setback requirements for
the district in which such is located.
Section 7 .0 Satellite Dish Antennas
Satellite dish antennas and other ground mounted antennas shall not be permitted in the
front yard. Setbacks shall be from all property lines a distance equal to the height of the
antenna. The setback of a satellite dish shall be equal to the minimum distance measured from
the closest edge of the dish to the property line. Satellite dishes are subject to the district
maximum building height limitations.
Those satellite dish antennas shall be neutral in color and, to the greatest extent possible,
compatible with the appearance and character of the neighborhood in which located. In case the
required placement prevents satisfactory reception or other problems of a unique nature, such
shall be referred to the Zoning Board of Adjustment for resolution of the problem(s).
Section 8.0 Temporary Structures and Building Material Storage
Temporary buildings may be permitted for storage of materials connected with
construction projects and such buildings may also be permitted as temporary offices until such
time as the construction projects are completed and permanent buildings are ready for habitation.
However, no such buildings or structures shall be permitted until appropriate building permits
have been approved by the Building Inspector and issued by the City Clerk.
Section 9.0 Garage or Yard Sales
Garage or yard sales on the same lot shall not be conducted for more than three (3) days
(whether consecutive or not) during any 90 day period.
All posters and/or signs, display tables, stands, racks, etc., shall be removed immediately
after such sale by the person or persons conducting the garage or yard sale and such items shall
be stored inside an enclosed building or screened from public view.
88
Section 10.0 Private Swimming Pools
Where permitted, private swimming pools shall comply with the following requirements:
Permanent swimming pools which are wholly or partially above ground level shall be
located in the rear yard of a single or two-family residential district no closer than twenty-five
feet (25 ' ) froin any property line. No mechanical appurtenance shall be located within ten feet
(10' ) of any property line.
Private Swimming Pools constructed below grade level shall be:
1. Located, including mechanical appurtenances, no closer than ten feet (10' ) from
any property line.
2. Enclosed at the time of construction by a fence of not less than five feet (5 ' ) in
height (measured from ground level to the highest point on the fence). Fences
and gates shall be constructed of such materials so as to prevent unauthorized
entcy by persons or household pets. Moreover, gates shall be provided with
permanent self-latching devices which shall be locked at all times when the pool
is not in use.
3. Above-ground pools shall be subject to the requirements of the Standard
Swimming Pool Code, 1991 Edition, and any future amendments thereto.
4. All exterior lighting fixtures shall be constructed to direct the beam of light below
the horizontal plane of the fixture, reflecting away from any adjacent property.
Said fixtures may not extend higher than twenty-five feet (25 ' ) in height.
5. Swimming pools for multifamily and commercial uses shall meet minimum
standards deemed appropriate by the Building Inspection Department upon review
of each specific proposal.
Section 11.0 Farms
The minimum land area shall be five (5) acres.
The following farming activities shall be permitted:
1. Forage and Sod Crops
2. Grain and Seed Crops
3. Dairy Animals and Products
4. Livestock, such as: beef cattle, swine, sheep, goats, or any similar livestock,
including the breeding and raising of such animals but, excluding commercial
meat processing operations.
89
..
5. Poultry, including egg production but excluding commercial poultry processing
operations.
6. Nursery operations involving the raising of plants, shrubs and trees for sale and
transplantation, including greenhouses and the incidental sale of items customarily
associated with a nursery operation.
7. Bees and Apiary Products
8. Fisheries, excluding commercial fish processing operations.
9. Fruit and Vegetables of all kinds, including the growing and harvesting of such
fruit and vegetables, but excluding commercial food processing operations.
10. In the A-1 Agriculture Zone, the minimum setback of livestock barns and
commercial chicken (fowl) houses from adjoining property lines shall be one
hundred feet (100 ' ); and from highway (road) right-of-way lines shall be three
hundred feet (300' ), provided, however, that no livestock barn or chicken houses
shall be built closer than three hundred feet (300 ,) to the nearest then existing
residence other than that of the owner. Swine, (hogs) to be housed, fed and
watered not nearer than one hundred feet (100 ' ) to any adjoining property line
or within three hundred feet (300' ) of any street or road right-of-way.
11. Temporary sawmills and chippers (used in connection with timber cutting
operations) shall be set back at least two hundred feet (200 ' ) from any lot line.
12. Non-farm related single family residences and subdivisions are permitted,
provided that the recording of lots in this district contains a minimum of half (1/2)
an acre and is in complete conformance with the City subdivision regulations.
Applicants should also be apprised of the fact that a two (2) acre minimum lot is
required for a hobby farm, in case the intent is to utilize the lot for that purpose.
A booth or stall (farm stand) from which farm produce grown on the same premises and
sold to the general public shall be permitted subject to the following:
1. Sales areas shall be-set back from all lot lines so as _to meet the district yard
requirements.
2. Sales areas shall not occupy any part of a required off-street parking/loading area.
Incidental structures and activities commonly associated with a farm may include: barns,
silos, animal pens, loading and unloading platforms or chutes and other accessory uses.
90
..
Section 12.0 Regulations Pertaining to Manufactured (Mobile) Homes
Where permitted, Manufactured (Mobile) Homes shall comply with the following
requirements:
All Manufactured (Mobile) Homes are prohibited in all zone districts of the City except
in Districts R-3-A and R-3-B; however, manufactured (mobile) homes shall be
allowed in the AG Agricultural District upon compliance with the following
requirements:
1. The Manufactured (Mobile) Home, as located on the proposed site, shall be at
least seventy-five feet (75 /) from the nearest residential structure (excluding
another such home) located on the same property under separate ownership.
2. Water and sanitary facilities must be approved by the City of Fultondale, as well
as the Jefferson County Health Department.
3. Site· Requirements:
Minimum Lot Width at Front Setback Line:
Minimum Lot Area:
4. Yard Requirements:
Front: 35 Feet
un-dedicated street 60 feet from centerline
Side:
Rear:
15 Feet
35 Feet
100 Feet
15,000 Sq. Ft.
Parcel or parcels and adjacent property, under the same ownership, will allow the
following:
One (1) home: 15,000 sq. ft.
Two (2) homes: One (1) acre minimum
Only two additional homes, three including the principal structure, shall be
permitted in any parcel in this district without having to subdivide the parcel in
concern. This use will further require the approval of contiguous property
owners' to site such additional homes. All the lots that are contiguous to the lot/
property in question shall not be under the ownership of the same individual.
91
Section 13.0 Buffers
13.1 Definition
A buffer is herein defined as a strip of land that is retained, planted or constructed
for the purpose of providing a means of: screening or separating incompatible
land uses, promoting visual harmony, reducing noise, diverting emissions,
restricting passage and enhancing the natural environment - thereby providing for
a compatible mix of otherwise conflicting uses. A buffer may consist of the
following:
A. A natural barrier such as existing or planted trees or shrubs, or a
combination of trees, shrubs or vegetation. Any combination of evergreen
trees or other deciduous trees (hardwoods) or shrubs are acceptable as
long as the desired visual barrier will be uniformly dense at the minimum
height required.
B. A solid opaque fence, a brick or masonry wall or an earth berm.
13.2 General Requirements for Buffers/Screenine
Specifications for buffers shall be determined by the Planning Commission where
otherwise specified during its review of site development plans. At a minimum,
buffers shall meet the following criteria: (a) If a natural barrier is specified in
the buffer strip, such barrier shall be a planting strip so planted that within one
full growing season after installation, said planting strip shall provide a visually
impervious barrier uniformly dense at all heights from the ground, and a minimum
of four feet (4 ' ) tall throughout the entire length of the planting strip. The entire
surface area of the buffer shall be planted with trees and/or shrubs. Within three
(3) full growing seasons after installation, said planting strip shall have reached
a minimum height of six feet (6' ) or greater.
A. If man-made screening methods are specified, the following shall apply:
1. Screening materials shall be continuously maintained, present an
attractive exterior appearance and be of durable construction.
2. Unless otherwise noted, acceptable screening materials include:
wood stockade fences, decorative masonry walls, brick walls and
earth berms. Screening walls or fences shall be a minimum of six
feet (6 ' ) in height (or as modified by the Planning Commission),
but not exceeding three feet (3 ' ) in height within any required front
yard.
3. Location of screening shall not obstruct the visibility of traffic
circulation.
92
..
B. Buffers shall be of sufficient: width, height, opacity and density to
eliminate the adverse impact on adjacent properties.
13.3 Modification or Waiver
The screening and planting requirements of this Section shall be applied equally
to similarly classified and situated properties, but may be modified or waived
altogether in certain cases where a building site is subject to any of the following
circumstances as determined by the Planning Commission:
A. Where natural vegetation (trees and/or shrubs) exist on a piece of property,
when application is made for a building permit, a strip of natural
vegetation shall be left undisturbed until the Building Inspector has
inspected such area and evaluated it with regard to the width requirements
set forth in the Zoning Ordinance for that specific use and zone, as well
as suitability. The Building Inspector may require that the developer retain
a portion of the natural vegetation as a greenbelt/buffer, where such
already exists, rather than require a man-made planting strip or other
method of screening. However, such greenbelt/buffer must be sufficient
in both height and/or density to achieve the desired purpose as a natural
barrier.
B. Where impending development of adjacent property would make these
standards unreasonable or impractical.
C. Where, after inspection by the Building Inspector, it is found that two (2)
different and incompatible zone districts abut each other but are already
separated by a street or alley, or where the view from the adjoining district
is blocked by a change in grade or other natural or man-made feature.
D. Where a greenbelt or planting strip cannot, in the professional opinion of
an expert, be expected to thrive due to poor soil conditions, intense shade
or similar conditions.
E. Fencing, where installed, shall be constructed prior to the issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy.
F. All plantings shall be permanently maintained in good growing condition
by the party or parties required to provide such plantings and, when
necessary, replaced with new growth. All fencing shall be permanently
maintained in good condition and, whenever necessary, repaired or
replaced by the party or parties required to provide such fence.
G. In special cases where the side and/or rear yards may be inadequate to
meet the requirements for the buffer strip, the Planning Commission shall
determine, based upon the site plan review or other pertinent information
requested, an alternative method of screening or separation.
93
..
:!
ARTICLE vm
SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
Section 1.0 Generally
Certain land use activities are identified for special treatment. The nature of these uses
is such that, when properly regulated, they are appropriate in several zone districts. In order
to bring about proper integration of these uses into the City's land use pattern, a special set of
criteria or standards will tend to maintain compatibility with adjoining land uses. It is intended
that the Fultondale Zoning Board of Adjustment will review all proposals for special exception
uses for compliance with the appropriate provisions for these special exception uses contained
in this Article before an approval is granted and a building permit is issued.
1.1 Special Exception Procedures
A. All uses listed as permitted by special exception shall require the review
and approval of an application to the Zoning Board of Adjustment. An
application for a special use shall be first filed with the Building Inspector
at least twenty-one (21) days before the scheduled public hearing date by
the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The application shall be filed by the
property owner (or authorized agent of the property owner) on a form
made available by the Building Inspector. Such form shall be completed
by the applicant (or agent of the applicant) and include the following
information and materials:
1. Name, signature and address of the property owner and agent of
property owner, if any.
2. Address of the property under consideration.
3. Existing zoning and land use of the property under consideration.
4. Proposed use by Special Exception.
5. A vicinity map showing the exact location of the property.
6. A plot plan, where deemed applicable, drawn to scale and
dimensioned, showing the property boundaries and the proposed
development layout.
7. The applicant or agent must, at the time application is made,
provide the Building Inspector with the names and addresses of
adjacent property owners, as well as those property owners within
five hundred feet (500 ' ) of the subject property.
8. A seventy-five dollar ($75.00) filing fee is required from the
applicant or agent of the applicant at the time application is made
for a Special Exception Use. This fee is non-refundable in the
event such proposal is not approved.
1.2 Public Notice Required
A. At least fifteen (15) days prior to the scheduled Zoning Board of
Adjustment, the Building Inspector shall give written notice of the proposal
to all adjacent property owners as well as those property owners within
five hundred feet (500/) of the subject property. Such notice shall be
deemed given when deposited in the United States Mail - first class,
postage prepaid and addressed to such property owners at their addresses
as submitted with the application. Any error in the address of such notice
shall not invalidate the giving of notice, provided that no more than five
percent (5 % ) of the total number of notices given contain any such error.
Such notice shall contain the following:
1. The name of the applicant.
2. The location of the subject property.
3. The proposed use by Special Exception.
4. The time, date and location of the Board of Adjustment public
hearing.
Section 2.0 Hobby Farms
A. The minimum lot area shall be two (2) acres.
B. Unless otherwise provided for in this Ordinance, the keeping of farm
animals and fowl (livestock and fowl) shall be limited to the following
types:
1. Poultry.
2. Horses, donkeys and ponies, although the keeping of goats, sheep
and swine are prohibited as a part of a hobby farm.
C. The use shall be subject to the following setback and area requirements:
1. Farm animals shall be housed not less than two hundred feet (200 /)
from any adjacent lot not zoned A-1.
2. At least one (1) acre of lot area shall be required for each small
livestock animal and a maximum of twenty (20) poultry for every
8,000 square feet of lot area shall be permitted.
95
3. Offensive animal odors shall not be detectable at the property line.
Section 3.0 Shopping Centers
Where permitted, a shopping center shall consist of a building group that is unified.
A site development plan shall be required which provides for:
1. A minimum site depth of three hundred feet (300' ) unless otherwise provided for
elsewhere in this ordinance.
2. An integrated parking area and vehicular loading spaces as specified in Article
IX.
3. Convenient vehicular servicing of the buildings, satisfactory circulation of traffic
throughout the parking areas, and no undue interference with through traffic in
gaining ingress and egress from the proposed site.
4. The location, size and character of all exterior signs.
5. A buffer strip of not less than twenty feet (20 ' ) where a shopping center abuts
any residential district.
6. Convenient and safely located pedestrian walkways.
7. A traffic analysis indicating the estimated effect of the proposed shopping center
on adjacent street traffic, including volume flows to and from the proposed
facility. This analysis should be prepared by an Alabama Registered Professional
Engineer.
8. A preliminary plan or engineering report providing for: site grading, storm
drainage, sanitary sewers and water supply prepared by an Alabama Registered
Professional Engineer.
9. Copy of any Deed Restrictions intended for the property upon which the shopping
center is to be constructed.
Section 4.0 Gasoline Service Stations
Where permitted, Gasoline Service Stations shall observe all regulations for such
structures and their uses as required by the laws of the State of Alabama, as well as provisions
contained herein:
1. No gasoline service station shall be located within a radius of three hundred feet
(300' ) from a public assembly center, including but not limited to: places of
worship, community centers, hospitals, schools, day care centers, and similar uses
96
..
in which large numbers of people are concentrated on a temporary or permanent
basis.
2. All permanent storage of materials, merchandise, and equipment shall be within
the principal building or within the setback lines, with the exception of garbage
and trash, which shall be located in an area enclosed on three (3) sides by an
opaque fence of at least six feet (6 ' ) in height and located behind the rear building
line.
3. Drains located on the premises without the approved separators in the trap shall
be prohibited. Gasoline storage tanks shall be located underground and be in full
compliance with Alabama Department of Environmental Management (ADEM)
requirements.
Applicable Only To New Service Stations:
1. Minimum site of 12,000 square feet.
2. Frontage on a public street of one hundred and twenty feet (120 ' ).
3. Structures permitted on said site not to exceed one (1) principal structure, and
three (3) triple gas pumps.
4. All islands shall have a minimum of a twenty foot (20' ) setback from the street.
5. All driveways shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet (20 ' ) from the property
comers, shall not exceed thirty-five feet (35 ' ) in width and shall be thirty feet
(30' ) apart.
6. A minimum of 1,600 square feet of lot area is required for each additional triple
pump island. ·A lot area of 1,200 square feet shall be provided for each service
bay or car wash and 150 square feet for a separate pay station.
Applicable only to construction of gasoline pumps and facilities to existing
establishments. The following minimum standards shall apply to the gasoline
dispensing area, including pump islands and approach drives:
1. One triple island: 2, 700 square feet.
2. One pay station and one triple island: 5,200 square feet.
3. A minimum of 1,600 square feet of lot area shall be provided for each additional
triple pump island and a minimum of 1,200 square feet of lot area shall be
provided for each bay and car wash.
97
The following are prohibited uses at Gasoline Service Stations:
1. Storage of vehicles on the premises for purposes other than maintenance and
repair. This shall not include wrecked motor vehicles left on the premises
temporarily for insurance inspection and estimates of repair. However, such
vehicles shall not be parked or stored in the building or on the premises longer
than seventy-two (72) hours.
2. Major vehicle repair activities as defined in Article IV.
3. Buying or offering for sale of new or used motor vehicles.
4. Any use performed inside the principal building or on the premises which is
offensive or dangerous or which constitutes a nuisance to the occupants of
adjacent properties by reason of: smoke, fuels, dust, odor, vibrations, noise or
unsightliness.
Section 5.0 Restaurants, Fast Food
Where permitted, Fast Food Restaurants shall comply with the following:
Submission of a site development plan, which provides for:
1. A five foot (5 ' ) high fence, constructed of opaque material, shall be located on
all property lines of said Fast Food Restaurant premises not bordering on a public
street. Where the Zoning Board of Adjustment deems appropriate, a buffer may
be substituted, provided the desired screening effect is achieved by providing a
visually impervious barrier.
2. The front yard and any side yard adjacent to a public street shall be provided with
a ten-foot (10' ) wide buffer, except where a driveway opening is necessary for
ingress to and egress from the site.
3. A preliminary plan or engineering feasibility report providing for the site grading, .
storm drainage, sanitary sewers and water supply shall be prepared by an Alabama
Registered Professional Engineer.
4. Fixed lighting shall be arranged so as not to: shine, reflect, or glare onto
surrounding properties or public streets.
5. The outside premises of any Fast Food Restaurant shall be cleared of all used
paper, trash, refuse and other waste materials at least once every six (6) hours
prior to closing.
6. Fast Food Restaurants shall not be permitted to install and maintain loud
speakers or jukeboxes in a manner which allows sounds coming there from to be
98
heard outside the restaurant building. This shall not, however, include
microphones and speakers necessary for ordering food at drive-thru windows.
7. Each Fast Food Restaurant shall be provided with a dumpster pad which shall be
located in the rear of the establishment and enclosed in a manner adequate to
conceal such from public view.
Section 6.0 Hospitals
Where permitted, Hospitals shall comply with the following regulations:
Submission of a site development plan which provides for:
1. A preliminary plan or engineering feasibility report providing for site grading,
storm drainage, sanitary sewers, and water supply, prepared by an Alabama
Registered Professional Engineer.
2. Where deemed necessary, by the Zoning Board of Adjustment, a traffic analysis
indicating the estimated traffic flows to and from the hospital prepared by an
Alabama Registered Professional Engineer.
3. For each bed in a hospital there shall be one hundred (100) square feet of outdoor
open space, exclusive of required front yards, side yards, buffer areas, parking
areas, loading spaces, or other purposes. Said outdoor space shall be open and
unobstructed from the ground upwards.
Section 7 .0 Nursing Care Facilities
Where permitted, a Nursing Care Facility shall comply with the following requirements:
Submission of a site development plan which provides for:
1. A preliminary plan or engineering feasibility report providi11g for: the site grading,
storm drainage, sanitary sewers, and water supply, prepared by an Alabama
Registered Professional Engineer.
2. Where deemed necessary by the Zoning Board of Adjustment, a traffic analysis
indicating the estimated traffic flows to and from the nursing care facility prepared
by an Alabama Registered Professional Engineer.
For each bed in the nursing facility there shall be two hundred (200) square fee
of outdoor open space, exclusive of: required front yards, side yards, buffer
areas, parking areas, loading spaces or other purposes. The said outdoor open
space shall be open and unobstructed from the ground upwards.
99
Section 8.0 Cemeteries
Where permitted, Cemeteries shall comply with the following requirements:
A site development plan which depicts the boundaries of the cemetery, existing zoning,
adjacent land uses, topography, drainage and buffers.
1. No part of a Cemetery shall be located closer than two hundred feet (200' ) from
any residential zone district in the City, nor closer than five hundred feet (500')
from any hospital or nursing care facility.
2. A six foot (6' ) high protective wall or fence shall be constructed on all property
lines, except at points of ingress and egress. Cemeteries shall be exempt from
any required buffering or screening along public rights-of-way. The facility shall
have installed gates with locks at points of ingress and egress.
3. No grave site shall be located closer than one hundred and fifty feet (150 ') from
a water line or underground water supply.
4. Mausoleums, crematoriums or any other buildings or structures accessory to or
incidental to a cemetery shall not be closer than two hundred feet (200 ' ) from any
property line.
Section 9.0 Home Occupations
Where permitted, Home Occupations shall comply with the following requirements:
1. The Home Occupation shall be clearly incidental to residential use of the dwelling
and shall not change the essential character of the dwelling or adversely affect the
uses permitted in the district of which it is a part. No Home Occupation shall be
permitted which might interfere with the general welfare of the surrounding
residential area due to potential noise, increased pedestrian and vehicular traffic
or any other conditions which would constitute an objectionable use of
residen ti ally zoned property.
2. Customary Home Occupations shall be limited to an office or a business of a
personal s~rvice nature.
3. The Home Occupation shall be confined to twenty-five percent (25%) of the
principal dwelling. However, no outside storage shall be used in connection with
a Home Occupation. In addition, no additional buildings or structures may be
constructed in connection with the Home Occupation.
4. Employment shall be limited to members of the family residing in the dwelling
and there shall be no employment of help other than members of the residential
family.
100
..
5. No display of products shall be visible from the street and only articles made on
the premises may be sold.
6. Instruction of music, art, dancing and similar activities shall pe limited to two (2)
students at a time and any noise created by the activity shall not be detectable
outside the premises.
7. The activity carried on as a Home Occupation shall be limited to the hours
between 7:00 A.M. and 10:00 P.M.
8. The Building Inspector of the City of Fultondale, and a representative of Public
Safety Department of the City, shall be permitted to make an inspection upon
receipt of the initial application; and, in addition, make annual inspections at
license renewal time or at any time, upon reasonable request, to enter and inspect
the premises covered for safety and compliance purposes.
9. The Building Inspector and/ or representative of the Public Safety Department shall
file with the Zoning Board of Adjustment a written inspection report of any
inspection to determine if the licensee is in compliance with this section or, if not
in compliance, to set out any area of non-compliance.
10. Should a Home Occupation licensee die or move to a new location, the existing
license shall automatically terminate, except that, in the case of death, should a
surviving spouse, or adult child then residing at the same residence desire to
continue the Home Occupation, the license would remain in effect if otherwise
in compliance.
11. Signs shall be in accord with the specifications set forth in Article X of this
ordinance.
Section 10.0 Mini-warehouses
A. Where permitted mini-warehouses shall comply with the following requirements:
1. No outdoor storage shall be permitted on the site.
2. No storage of volatile, toxic or explosive materials shall be permitted,
either inside the structure(s) or on the premises.
3. The facility or site shall not be used for wholesale or retail sales operations
or activities. However, this shall not include periodic auctions which are
held on the premises to dispose of items which have been abandoned
and/or for which the lease time has expired.
4. A minimum lot size of three (3) acres shall be required for a mm1-
warehouse development and such facility shall be limited to one (1) story
in height.
101
5. Screen fencing shall be installed around the perimeter of the project. The
said fencing shall be a minimum of eight feet (8 ' ) in height. The points
of access to the facility shall be provided with gates which shall be locked
when the facility is not open for business.
6. All outdoor lighting shall be shielded to direct light and glare only onto
the mini-warehouse premises and may be of sufficient intensity to
discourage vandalism and theft. The said lighting and glare shall be
deflected, shaded, and focused away from all adjoining property.
7. A resident manager shall be required on the site and shall be responsible
for maintaining the operation of the facility in conformance with the
conditions of approval and all applicable provisions.
8. A limit of thirty (30) mini-warehouses or 15,000 square feet of miniwarehouse
floor area per acre is required.
B. A site development plan is required, which provides for:
1. A preliminary plan or engineering feasibility report which addresses site
grading, storm drainage, water run-off, the availability of required utilities,
and the identification of areas to be buffered. A twelve foot (12 ' ) buffer
shall be provided along all property lines abutting any residential zone
district within the City.
Section 11.0 Private Tennis Courts
Where permitted, private tennis courts shall comply with the following requirements:
All tennis courts constructed in single-family or two family residential districts shall meet
the following minimum standards:
1. The tennis court shall be located in the rear yard.
2. The tennis court may not be located any closer than twenty-five feet (25') from
any property line and residential structure.
3. All fences shall meet the requirements of Article VII, Section 4.0.
4. Tennis courts for multifamily and commercial uses shall meet the standards
deemed appropriate by the Zoning Board of Adjustment during the review of each
specific proposal, including but not limited to required buffers.
5. If lighted, all exterior lighting fixtures shall be constructed in a manner so as to
direct the beam of light toward the facility itself and away from any adjacent
areas. Said fixtures shall not exceed twenty-five feet (25 ' ) in height.
102
Section 12.0 Industrial Parks
Where permitted, Industrial Parks shall comply with the following requirements:
1. An Industrial Park shall, for the purpose of this Ordinance, include all land forty
(40) acres or more in size, subdivided and platted into two (2) or more parcels,
and used or intended to be used for predominately industrial or commercial
purposes of an Industrial character.
2. A site development plan shall be required for each Industrial Park which provides
the following:
a. Access to an Industrial Park shall be by way of a major thoroughfare.
b. All streets or roadways within an Industrial Park shall have a minimum
right-of-way width of seventy feet (70'), a maximum gradient of five
percent (5 % ) and shall conform to the City of Fultondale standards for
commercial streets or as otherwise approved by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
c. Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with Article
IX of this Ordinance.
d. Outdoor storage in an Industrial Park shall be permitted ONLY when
accessory to a permitted principal use and only when storage areas are
suitably screened by either landscaping, fences or walls, and are located
at least one hundred feet (100 ' ) from any property line and at least one
hundred and fifty feet (150' ) from any street lines. Such storage areas
shall not cover more than fifteen percent (15 % ) of the site areas. The
Fultondale Zoning Board of Adjustment shall approve plans for the
location and screening of all outdoor storage areas before a building
permit shall be issued for their construction.
e. A buffer area not less than twenty feet (20 ' ) in width shall be provided
along all property lines of an Industrial Park which abuts any residential
zone.
f. Cul-de-sac streets shall not be permitted in Industrial Parks. Dead-end
streets, however, are permitted when not more than five hundred feet
(500 ' ) in length, as measured from the terminal point of the dead-end
street to the closest intersection, and when such terminal point is provided
with a paved vehicle turnaround area having a minimum right-of-way
radius of seventy feet (70 ' ).
g. Street lighting shall be provided in accordance with the City of Fultondale
street lighting standards with the location of street lights in conformance
with Alabama Power Company recommendations.
103
<
h. The vehicular approach to an Industrial Park site from a public street or
highway shall be so designed that uncontrolled left hand turns from the
street or highway shall be eliminated or reduced either by a frontage
roadway or other suitable means deemed adequate by the Zoning Board
of Adjustment and Street Department Superintendent.
i. Sight distances at all points of ingress and egress to public streets or
highways shall not be less than one thousand feet (1,000' ), except where
a traffic signal light is installed at the entrance to or exit from the
Industrial Park site unless otherwise determined by a study conducted by
the City Engineer or other persons qualified in this field.
j. Where points of ingress and egress to Industrial Parks from public streets
or highways having speed limits in excess of thirty (30) miles per hour are
located, acceleration and de-acceleration lanes shall be provided on such
public thoroughfares, with lane lengths, as indicated below:
Road Speed In Miles Per Hour:
Distance in Feet:
30 40 50 55
100 200 306 350
k. A report of subsurface soil conditions shall be provided to the City
Engineer, Superintendent of Streets, and Zoning Board of Adjustment by
an Alabama Professional Engineer as evidence of suitable bearing for
foundations in the construction of industrial structures of a nature intended
to be used within the proposed Industrial Park.
1. A preliminary plan or engineering feasibility report shall be submitted to
the City Engineer and Zoning Board of Adjustment which provides for the
site grading, storm drainage, sanitary sewerage and water supply, prepared
by an Alabama Professional Registered Engineer.
m. A copy of any deed restrictions shall be provided to the Planning
Commission.
Section 13.0 Transmission Towers (Commercial)
Where permitted, the distance between the base of the tower and property lines abutting
urban residential districts, public parks and roads must equal twenty percent (20%) of the tower
height; property lines adjacent to other uses (e.g. agricultural, industrial), require a setback equal
to the rear yard setback established for the underlying zone.
1. All applicants for such towers shall submit an engineering report to both the
Building Inspector and to the Planning Commission, documerrting all of the
following:
a. Height, design and building materials, including pertinent technical,
engineering, economic and other factors influencing the final design.
104
b. Total anticipated capacity of the structure, including the number and types
of antennas that can be accommodated.
c. Evidence of structural integrity.
d. Failure characteristics of the tower and demonstration that the site and
setbacks are of adequate size to contain debris.
e. Mitigation measures for ice and other hazards, including setbacks and deicing
equipment.
f. Where applicable, adequate parking shall be provided, along with buffers
where such tower site abuts any residential zone district. Such towers shall
be prohibited in any residential zone district of the City.
g. In all zones permitted, a security fence, around the tower base or along
the perimeter of the site, shall be required to prevent unauthorized entry,
vandalism and injuries.
h. In addition, all such structures shall be in full compliance with ALL
applicable local, State and Federal Regulations.
105
..
ARTICLE IX
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Section 1.0 Purpose of Off-street Parking and Loading Requirements
The primary purpose of these provisions is to reduce traffic congestion on public streets
of the City of Fultondale by requiring certain minimum parking and loading areas be provided
off-street. Further, these provisions insure safe and convenient access to and from each site,
as well as safe and efficient on-site traffic circulation and encourage the design of attractive,
efficient and harmonious facilities.
1.1 Off-street Parking and Loading Terms Defined
The following off-street parking and loading terms, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings defined in this section:
Access Boundary That portion of the parking area that consists of a travel lane
bounded on either side by an area that is not part of the parking area.
BR Bedroom or guest accommodations.
DU Dwelling unit
Employees The maximum number of persons employed at the facility regardless
of the time period during which this occurs or whether the persons are full-time
employees. The major shift may be a particular day of the week or a lunch or
dinner period in the case of a restaurant.
GLA Gross Leasable Area. The total floor area of a building designed for both
tenant occupancy and exclusive use. GLA includes both owned and leased areas
but does not include shared or common areas among tenants. Where the total
floor area of a building is occupied or where a building has no shared or common
area, GLA is the gross floor area measured by taking the outside dimensions of
the building at each floor level intended for occupancy or storage.
Inoperative Motor Vehicle A motor vehicle which cannot be driven upon the
public streets for reasons including, but not limited to, being unlicensed, wrecked,
abandoned, in a state of disrepair or incapable of being moved under its own
power.
Abandoned Motor Vehicle A vehicle that is in a state of disrepair and incapable
of being moved under its own power.
Loading Area That area used to satisfy the requirements of this Ordinance for
truck loading and unloading.
Loading Space An off-street space or berth used for the unloading or loading
of commercial vehicles.
Occupancy Load The maximum number of persons which may be
accommodated by the use as determined by its design or by fire code standards.
Parking Aisle That portion of the parking area consisting of lanes providing
access to parking spaces.
Parking Area An improved area on a lot exclusively used or designed for use
as a temporary storage area for motor vehicles, containing access driveways,
parking aisles and parking spaces.
Parking Space That portion of the parking area set aside for the parking of one
(1) vehicle.
SF Square Feet
Stacking Space An off-street space for the temporary stacking of vehicles with
an aisle intended to serve a drive-in teller window, take-out food window, dry
cleaning/laundry pick-up or similar type activity station.
1.2 Required Off-street Parking Spaces
Unless otherwise provided for, all uses shall conform with the minimum parking
space requirements outlined below. In situations where the required number of
parking spaces is not readily determinable by the below table, the Building
Inspector is authorized to determine the parking space requirements using the table
as a guide.
A. Agricultural Uses
1.
2.
Farms
Farm Stands
Required Parking Spaces.
1 per 1.5 employees
1per100 sq. ft. of display area
B. Residential Uses
1.
2.
Duplexes, Manufactured (Mobile) Homes,
Garden Homes, Townhouses, Single-Family
Residences, Apartment (multifamily) units
Elderly residential developments
107
2 per DU
0.5 per DU
C. Institutional Uses
1. Boarding Houses
2. Clubs
3. Community Centers
4. Country Clubs
5. Day Care Centers
6. Hospitals
7. Nursing Care, Domiciliary
Care Facility.
8. Places of Worship
9. Post Offices
10. Public Assembly Centers
11. Public Facilities
12. Schools-College or University
13. Schools-Elementary or Junior
High
14. Schools - Vocational or
High School
108
1 per BR
1per100 sq. ft. of non-storage
and non-service floor area.
1 per 300 sq. ft. of GLA
1 per 3 persons of occupancy
load.
1 per employee, plus 1 stacking
or parking space per 8 persons
enrolled of occupancy load.
1 per 2 patient beds plus 1.5
per emergency room bed plus
1 per employee.
1 per 2 employees of
occupancy load plus 1 per
employee.
1 per 3 persons seated in the ·
main sanctuary of occupancy
load.
1 per 300 sq. ft. of. GLA plus
1 per 1.5 employees.
1 per 3 persons of occupancy
load.
1 per .300 sq. ft. of GLA.
1 per 3 students of occupancy
load plus, 1per1.5 employees.
1 per 8 students of occupancy
load or 2 per classroom,
whichever is greater.
1 per 6 studeRts of occupancy
load, plus 1per1.5 employees.
..
D. Commercial Uses
1. Appliance Stores 1 per 400 sq. ft. of GLA
2. Banks 1 per 150 sq. ft. of GLA plus
4 stacking spaces per drive-in
window.
3. Billiard Rooms, Pool Halls 1 per table
4. Barber or Beauty Shops 1 per 100 sq. ft. of GLA
Bowling Alley 4 per alley
5. Car Washes 1 per 1.5 employees plus 4
stacking spaces per bay.
6. Clinics 6 per practitioner
7. Commercial Schools 1 per 3 students of occupancy
load plus 1per1.5 employees.
8. Convenience Stores 1 per 125 sq. ft. of GLA
Funeral Home 1 per 1.5
employees plus 1 per 3
chapel seats of occupancy load
plus 1 per company vehicle.
9. Farm Support Businesses 1 per 1.5 employees, plus 1 per
company vehicle.
10. Furniture Stores 1 per 500 sq. ft. of GLA
11. Gasoline Service Stations 1 2 per service bay plus 1 per
company vehicle plus 1 per 1.5
employees plus 2 stacking
spaces per fuel island.
12. General Retail Businesses or 1 per 200 sq. ft. of GLA
Personal Service Establishments
13. Home Improvement Centers 1 per 400 sq~ ft. of GLA
employees.
14. Hotels or Motels 1 per r;om .~fus 'l per 1.5
e ~vJJ?J~ e\ll_
109
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
Laundromats, Dry Cleaning
Establishments
Liquor Lounges (free standing)
Mini-Warehouses
Motor Vehicle Services
Offices, Business or Professional
Open Air Markets
21. Outdoor Recreation:
Golf Course
Carpet Golf
Golf Driving Range
Other
22. Restaurants
23. Shopping Centers
24. Stables
Add for Restaurants
Add for Theaters
25. Tourist Homes, Bed and
Breakfast Inns
110
1 per machine or
1 per 200 sq. ft. of
GLA, whichever is greater.
1 space per 4 seats plus 1 space
per 50 sq. ft. open to the
public.
1 per 20 units Motor Vehicle
Sales 1 per 200 sf of sales
area plus 1 per service bay
plus 1 per 2,500 sf of
outdoor display area.
1 per 200 sf of sales area plus
1 per service bay.
1 per 200 sf of GLA
1 per 100 sf of display area.
5 per hole
2 per tee
1 per tee
1 per 3 persons of occupancy
load.
1per100 sf of GLA plus 1 per
delivery vehicle plus 4 stacking
spaces per drive-in window.
5 1/2 Parking Spaces per 1,000
sf of GLA
1 per 100 sf of GLA
1 per 3 persons of occupancy
load.
1 per 3 persons of occupancy
load plus 1 per 1.5 employees.
1 per guest bedroom plus
1 per employee.
E. Industrial Uses
1.
2.
General Industry and
Manufacturing, Research
Laboratories and similar
uses.
Warehouses, Distribution
and Wholesale Businesses
1.3 Off-street Parkin2 Desi2n Requirements
1 per 1.5 employees
plus 1 per company vehicle but
not less than 1 per 1, 000
sf of GLA.
1 per 1.5 employees plus
1 per company vehicle but not
less than 1 per 500 sf of GLA.
A. The minimum Parking Space dimensions shall be as follows:
1. Each Parking Space shall contain a minimum rectangular area of
nine feet (9 ' ) wide and nineteen feet (19 ' ) long, except as
provided in (2) and (3) below.
2. In large parking areas of twenty (20) Parking Spaces, or more, up
to twenty percent (20 % ) of the Parking Spaces may be reserved for
compact cars. Such spaces shall contain a minimum rectangular
area of eight feet (8 ' ) wide and sixteen feet (16 ' ) long. These
spaces shall be conspicuously marked for compact cars only.
3. Parallel Parking Spaces shall contain a minimum rectangular area
of nine feet (9 ' ) wide and twenty-two feet (22' ) long.
4. Stacking Space shall contain a minimum rectangular area of ten feet
(10' ) wide and twenty feet (20 ' ) long and be separated from
parking aisles and spaces.
5. Handicapped Parking Spaces shall be provided and designed in
accordance with the applicable provisions of the Standard Building
Code, 199_4, Chapter 11, and as such may be amended with
regard to Accessibility For the Physicaily Disabled And/Or
Handicapped.
B. Parking areas shall be designed so that vehicles may exit such areas
without backing onto a public street. This requirement does not apply to
parking areas that serve one (1) or two (2) dwelling units, although
backing into arterial .streets shall be prohibited.
C. All parking areas, when adjoining a street right-of-way between adjoining
lots shall be physically separated from the right-of-way.
111
..
..
D. All lighting fixtures used to illuminate parking areas shall not direct lights
on adjoining streets or properties.
E. Parking areas for all developments shall be so designed that sanitation,
emergency and other public service vehicles can adequately and safely
serve such developments without the necessity of backing unreasonable
distances or making other dangerous maneuvers. Fire lanes may be
required by the Fire Code.
F. All parking areas shall be surfaced with dust-free materials (asphalt or
concrete).
G. Parking spaces (except those serving one (1) or two (2) dwelling units)
shall be demarcated with painted lines or other markings.
H. All parking areas shall be maintained in good condition, i.e. free of pot
holes, weeds, trash, refuse, etc.
I. Drainage in parking areas shall direct storm water back into the site from
adjacent properties toward adequate drainage channels. Large parking
areas of twenty (20) spaces, or more, shall provide on-site storm water
detention to retard the sudden discharge of high volumes of storm water
into the public drainage system. The quality and rate of runoff after
development shall not exceed the quantity and rate of runoff before
development, based on a twenty-five year (25) storm frequency. Drainage
plans shall be subject to approval by both the Planning Commission and
the City Engineer.
1.4 Location of Required Parkine
A. All required parking spaces shall be located on the same lot as the use
served by the parking, except as provided below:
1. Required parking within planned residential developments may be
provided in common parking areas.
2. If the number of required parking spaces cannot reasonably be
provided on the same lot as the served use, satellite parking may
be provided on an adjacent lot. The satellite parking spaces shall
be located within four hundred feet (400/) of the nearest public
entrance to the building housing the principal use. If the use is not
housed within a building, satellite parking spaces shall be located
within four hundred feet (400/) of the lot. A satellite parking
exception requires written legal documentation that the user of
such satellite spaces has the right to such spaces.
3. A joint parking area may contain required parking spaces for more
than one (1) use, provided the combined number of spaces
112
..
complies with the parking for all uses. If, however, the combined
uses wish to make use of the same spaces at different times, the
same spaces may be credited to each separate use. The applicant
for a combined use facility must present documentation of a
combined parking agreement; and, if sharing the same spaces, a
time schedule for allocation of such spaces.
1.5 Parkine Prohibitions
A. The keeping of an inoperative motor vehicle in a residential district
shall be within a fully enclosed building or structure or be completely
screened or shielded from public view. Moreover, no inoperative motor
vehicle shall be parked on any public street.
B. No vehicle exceeding 7 ,500 pounds gross weight and no boats, trailers,
recreational vehicles, campers and similar equipment, regardless of weight,
shall be kept within a residential district, unless such vehicle is parked
, behind the front building line.
C. The use of Off-street Parking in all residential districts for non- residential
purposes is prohibited.
D. The use of any required parking space for the storage of any motor vehicle
for sale, or for any purpose other than the parking of a motor vehicle for
employees or visitors is prohibited.
1.6 Access Controls
A. Proposed access points within the City shall be reviewed by the
Building Inspector, Street Department Superintendent, City Engineer and
shall be approved by the Planning Commission. The proposed location,
width, drainage structure, traffic conditions, site distances and resurfacing
shall be addressed in the request for approval.
B. Entrances shall _be held to a minimum and be located at points affording
maximum sight distances, minimum grades and maximum separation.
Combined or shared driveways and entrances or marginal access streets
may be required for highway service uses along major streets.
C. The maximum number of entrances for each site shall be limited on the
basis of street frontage as follows:
Street Frontaee Width
Less than 125 feet
125 to 300 feet
300 to 500 Feet
113
Maximum Number of Entrances
One
Two
Three
Street Frontage Width
500 to 1,000 Feet
More than 1, 000 Feet
Maximum Number of Entrances
Four
Five
D. Property which has frontage on two (2) streets, or more, may be allowed
entrances on each street in accordance with the above criteria.
E.
F.
G.
H.
The distance between openings shall be one hundred and twenty-five
feet (125 /), except for singie-family detached lots.
Entrances shall be located so that the curb openings are a minimum
of five feet (5 /) from the nearest edge of a street drainage inlet and fifty
feet (50/) from the comer radius.
Turning lanes or pavement widening at approaches to entrances may be
required if deemed necessary by the City Engineer to provide safe turning
movements.
Each parking area on a lot shall be physically separated from an
adjoining street right-of-way by a curb or equivalent barrier to control
vehicular access to and from the lot. Such barrier shall be located at or
along the front lot line, unless suitable barriers are located within the
street-right-of-way. Except for permitted access ways, such barriers shall
be continuous.
1. 7 Required Off-street Loading Spaces
A. Any use with a gross leasable area (GLA) of 6,000 square feet or more
which requires deliveries and shipments must provide off-street loading
spaces in accordance with the following table. In situations where the
required number of loading spaces is not readily determinable by the table,
the Building Inspector is authorized to determine the loading space
requirement, using the table as a guide.
GLA of Building Required Number Of Loading Spaces
6,000-24,999 1
25,000-79,999 2
80,000-127,999 3
128,000-198,999 4
99,000-255,999 5
256,000-319,999 6
320,000-391,999 7
Each additional 72,000 square feet 1
114
Every public assembly use, auditorium, convention hall, exhibition hall,
stadium, office building, funeral home, multifamily apartment buildings
of twenty (20) or more units, restaurants and hotels of 30,000 square feet
or more shall provide off-street loading spaces, as follows:
GLA Of Building Required Number of Loading Spaces
6,000-29,999 1
30,000-44,999 2
45,000-119,999 3
120,000-197,999 4
198,000-290,999 5
291,000-389,999 6
390,000-488,999 7
489,000-587,999 8
588,000-689,999 9
Each Additional 105,000 Square Feet 1
1.8 Off-street Loading Design Standards
A. Each loading space shall have a minimum rectangular area of twelve
feet (12 ' ) wide and fifty-five feet (55 ' ) long, exclusive of driver and
maneuvering space. Each space shall allow vertical clearance of fourteen
feet (14 ' ).
B. No loading space shall be located within the front yard or within five feet
(5 ' ) of any property line.
C. No loading space shall be used to meet the parking space requirement,
interfere with the on-site circulation of traffic, nor allow a truck to expand
into any right-of-way or over any property line.
D. All lighting fixtures used to illuminate loading areas shall not direct light
on adjacent streets or properties.
E. All required loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the principal
use served by the spaces, unless a satellite or joint use loading facility is
secured in equivalent as satellite or joint parking facilities, as provided by
Subsection 1.4, Location of Required Parking.
1.9 Change In Parking and Loading Requirements
Whenever there is an alteration of a structure, an expansion of a use, or a change
in use which increases the parking and loading requirements"'; the use shall
conform with the off-street parking and loading standards of this Ordinance to the
furthest practicable extent.
115
ARTICLE X
SIGN REGULATIONS
Section 1.0 Purpose and Intent
The purpose of these Sign Regulations are: to encourage the effective use of signs as a
means of communication in the City of Fultondale, to maintain and enhance the aesthetic
environment and the City's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth, to
improve pedestrian and traffic safety, to minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby
public and private property; and, to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these
regulations. This Sign Ordinance is adopted under the Zoning Authority of the City of
Fultondale in furtherance of the more general purposes set forth in the Zoning Ordinance.
1.1 Definitions Applicable To This Ordinance
The· following definitions are applicable to the Sign Section of this Ordinance:
A. Animated Sien Any sign that uses movement or change in lighting to
depict action or create a special effect or scheme.
B. Banner Any sign of light-weight fabric or similar material that is
temporarily mounted to a pole or a building by a permanent frame or one
(1) or more edges. National Flags, State and Municipal Flags or Official
Flags of any institution or business shall not be considered banners. See
Temporary Sign.
C. Bench Sien Shall mean any sign located on any part of the surface of
a bench or seat placed on or adjacent to a public right-of-way.
D. Billboard A non-point of sale sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or activity sold or offered for sale at a location other
than the premises upon which said billboard is located. See OffPremise
Sign.
E. Bulletin Board A sign which identifies an institution or organization on
the premises of which it is located and which contains the name of the
institution or organization, the name of individuals connected with it and
general information or announcements of events or activities occurring at
the institution or similar messages.
F. Chaneeable Copy Sien (Electronic) A sign board that is designed so that
the characters, letters or illustrations can be electronically changed or
arranged without permanently altering the face or the surface of the sign.
G. Chaneeable Copy Sien <Manual) A sign that is designed so that
characters, letters or illustrations can be manually changed or arranged
without permanently altering the face or surface of the sign.
H. Construction Sign Shall mean any sign giving the name or names of
principal contractors, architects and lending institutions responsible for
construction on the site where the sign is placed, together with other
information included thereon. See Temporary Sign.
I. Directory Sign A sign upon which the name and location of the
occupants or the use of a building is given.
J. Erect Shall mean to: build, construct, attach, hang, place, mount,
suspend or affix and shall include the painting of wall signs upon the
exterior wall surface of buildings or structures.
K. Free-standing Sign Any sign supported by structures or supports that are
placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that are independent from any
building or other structure.
L. Ground Sign Any sign which is supported by structures or supports in
or upon the ground and independent of support from any building. Also
qualifies as a free-standing sign.
M. Illuminated Sign A sign lighted by or exposed to artificial lighting either
by lights on or inside the sign face or directed towards the sign.
1. Indirect Light One reflecting light from a separate outside source
aimed toward it, including silhouettes on a background or reflected
light.
2. Direct Light One emitting light from a source within or affixed
to the sign face, and beaming outward from it.
3. Intermittent Light Any flashing, traveling light, including
arrangements that spell messages, simulate motion or form various
symbols or images.
N. Location Any lot, premises, building, structure, wall or any place
whatsoever upon which a sign is located.
0. Non-conforming Sign Any sign that does not conform to the
requirements of this Ordinance.
P. Off-premise Sign A sign that directs attention to a business, commodity,
service, entertainment or activity conducted, sold or offered for sale at a
location other than the premises upon which the sign is located.
Q. On-premise Sign A sign which advertises only goods, services, facilities,
events or attractions available on the premises where located, or identifies
the owner or occupant or directs traffic on the premises.
117
R. Permanent Sign A sign which is originally designed, constructed or
modified to be permanently affixed to a building, structure or to the
ground.
S. Person Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or
organization, singular or plural, of any kind.
T. Portable Sign Any sign which is not permanently affixed to the ground
or other permanent structure or a sign designed to be transported,
including, but not limited to signs designed to be transported by means of
wheels, signs converted to "A" or "T" frames, menu and sandwich board
signs, balloons used as signs, umbrellas used for advertising and signs
attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public rightof-
way, unless said vehicle is used in the day to day operation of a
business.
U. Premises A lot or tract of land upon which a sign is located or is to be
located.
V. Projecting Sign Any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a manner
that its leading edge extends more than six inches (6" ) beyond the surface
of such building or wall.
W. Principal Building The building in which is conducted the principal use
of the zone lot on which it is located. Zone lots with multiple principal
uses may have multiple principal buildings, but storage buildings, garages
and other buildings which are clearly accessory in nature shall not be
considered principal buildings.
X. Roof Sign Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof
of a building, supported by the roof structure.
Y. Roof Sign - Integral Any sign erected or constructed as an integral or
essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any design, such
that no part of the sign extends vertically abov_e the highest portion of
the roof and such that no part of the sign is separated ·from the rest
of the roof by a space of more than six inches (6n ).
Z. Sign A name, identification, image, description, display or illustration
which is affixed to, painted on, or represented directly or indirectly upon
a building, structure, or piece of land, and which directs attention to an
object, product, place, activity, facility, service, event, attraction, person,
institution, organization or business and which is visible from any street,
right-of-way, sidewalk, alley, park or other public property. Customary
displays of merchandise or objects and material without lettering placed
behind a store window are not considered signs or part of sign.
118
..
Z-1 Si2n Area The area of a sign, measured as follows:
A. Freestanding or projecting signs shall be measured as the area within
a single rectangle which encompasses the extreme limits of each and every
sign face, including all advertising surfaces, background, framing and
ornamentation~ but excluding structural members not forming an
integral part of the display or pole covers which contain no advertising
copy. The area of all such faces shall be totaled and such resultant area
shall be divided by two (2) to determine the total sign area.
B. All other signs shall be measured as the area within a single rectangle
which encompasses all letters, words, symbols or other graphic elements,
plus any background area which does not appear as a continuous portion
of the building surface.
Z-2 Sien Face The surface or surfaces used for the display of a sign message
as seen from only one direction.
Z-3 Sienable Wall Area The area within a rectangle which encompasses a
continuous portion of a building facade, unbroken by windows, doors or
major architectural interruptions of the building surface. For signs located
completely within a gable, signable wall area may be triangular in shape.
Z-4 Snipe Sien Shall mean any sign of any materials whatsoever that is
attached in any way to a utility pole, tree or any object located on public
right-of-way.
Z-5 Spacine Of Siens The distance between signs measured from points
directly opposite the signs along the nearest edge of the pavement or
roadway edge of the main thoroughfare or traveled way of the street or
thoroughfare to which said signs are directed.
Z-6 Temporary Sien Any sign not originally designed, constructed, or
intended to permanently be affixed to any building, structure or the
ground. Temporary signs shall be removed by the party or parties posting
or erecting them, and where stipulated, within the specified time period.
Z-7 Temporary Subdivision Sien A temporary sign advertising the sale of
property in an approved subdivision within the City.
Z-8 Wall Sien Any sign painted on or attached to and erected parallel to the
face of, or erected and confined within the limits of, the outside wall of
any building and supported by such wall or building and which displays
only one advertising surface. ,,.
119
Z-9 Window Sien Any sign, picture, symbol, or combination thereof,
designed to communicate information about an activity, business,
commodity, product, service, event, or sale that is placed inside a window
or upon the window pane or glass and is visible from the exterior of the
building.
1.2 General Reeulations Applyine To All Siens
In any zoning district within the City of Fultondale, the following regulations shall
apply:
A. No sign shall be erected or maintained at any location where by reason of
its position, working, illumination, shape, symbol, color, form or
character, it may obstruct, impair, obscure, interfere with the view of, or
may be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device, or
interfere with, mislead, confuse, or disrupt traffic flow of traffic safety.
B. · Signs incorporating any noisy mechanical device (whistles, horns, noise
makers, sirens or any other noisy audible devices) are expressly prohibited
within the City of Fultondale.
C. No sign of any type or foundation or support thereof shall be placed in
a public street right-of-way.
D. No sign having flashing, traveling, or animated illumination shall be
permitted in any zone district of the City except for permanent signs
located in commercial districts giving public service information such
as, but not limited to: time, date, temperature, news or weather.
E. All portable and temporary signs shall be set back at least twenty feet
(20' ) from the pavement edge of a public street or road; and, in no case
shall such signs be closer than ten feet (10 ' ) from the property line. No
portable or temporary sign of any type shall be permitted within thirty-five
feet (35 ' ) of an intersection of the pavement edge lines of two (2) public
streets or roads, or of the edge of pavement line of a public street or road
and the right-of-way line of a railroad.
F. No illuminated sign, other than a permanent subdivision identification
sign shall be permitted within fifty feet (50 ' ) of any residential zone
district of the City.
G. The area around all signs shall be kept clean and free of trash and all
vegetation, unless such is a part of the landscaping associated with the
sign. In this case, such shall be well maintained. In addition, it shall be
the responsibility of the sign owner/lessor or property owner to maintain
all signs in a safe and proper operating manner at all times.
120
G. The area around all signs shall be kept clean and free of trash and all
vegetation, unless such is a part of the landscaping associated with the
sign. In this case, such shall be well maintained. In addition, it shall be
the responsibility of the sign owner/lessor or property owner to maintain
all signs in a safe and proper operating manner at all times.
H. No person shall park any vehicle or trailer on a public street or public
parking area for the sole purpose of advertising.
I. Snipe signs shall not be permitted in any district, except as may be
authorized by the City Ordinance.
J. No permanent freestanding/pole mounted or ground sign of any type shall
be permitted within thirty-five feet (35 ' ) of the intersection of the
pavement edge lines of two (2) public roads, unless the same is mounted
at a height of at least ten feet (10') from the ground level at the base of
the sign and upon poles or other means of support which is adequately
designed and constructed to support said sign.
K. No sign shall occupy any portion of a parking space or aisle.
L. All signs shall conform with the Standard Building Code, Chapter XXIII,
or as may be amended, which provides a comprehensive set of construction
standards for signs. These specifications include wind loads, vibration
resistance, seismic loads, acceptable supports, allowable stresses and
electrical wiring and components.
M. Professional signs for Home Occupations, where permitted, shall not
exceed three (3) square feet in area. Such sign may be either a wall
mounted sign or a ground sign. However, if such is a ground sign, it shall
not be located any closer than twenty feet (20 ' ) from the street right-ofway.
1.3 Exempt Signs, Permit Exemptions
A. Except as may be otherwise provided for elsewhere in this Ordinance, the
following signs are exempt from sign pennit requirements and from
the provisions of this Ordinance, subject, however, to meeting all
applicable regulations and codes, as well as established City Policy
concerning any of these signs.
1. Permanent or temporary signs required to be posted by law.
2. Permanent or temporary warning signs and no trespassing signs.
No snipe signs allowed.
121
..
3. Permanent or temporary signs established by, or by order of, any
government agency or official body.
4. Signs indicating the location of bus stops, taxi stands and similar
transportation facilities.
5. Signs giving information concerning the location or use of accessory
off-street parking facilities or loading or unloading facilities.
6. Permanent or temporary signs required for the control of vehicular
or pedestrian traffic.
7. Temporary holiday signs, banners, displays and decorations, subject
to established City policy.
8. Routine sign maintenance and repair, including the changing of
copy on changeable copy signs.
9. Decorative flags and bunting for City-wide celebrations,
conventions, and commemorations, when authorized by the City
for a specified time period.
10. One (1) construction sign per street frontage located on property
where building is actually in progress under a current building
permit. This shall be a ground sign not to exceed thirty-two (32)
square feet in area, be non-illuminated, and may include the
names of persons and firms performing such services, labor or
supplying materials to the premises. Such sign must be removed
before a Certificate of Occupancy is issued.
11. Flags, banners or insignias of a governmental, religious, charitable
or fraternal organization, subject to established City Policy.
12. Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings, except
letters, trademarks, or moving parts.
13. Directory signs located inside the buildings they serve.
14. Signs not exceeding three (3) square feet in area and bearing only
property numbers, post office box numbers, or names of the
occupants of the premises to which the sign pertains.
15. Window signs located in commercial zone districts, which identify
or advertise activities, services, goods or products available within
the building, and which collectively cover twenty percent (20%)
or less of the window glass surface area.
122
16. Temporary political campaign posters, provided that they do not
create traffic hazards as a result of poor or improper placement,
and further provided that they are removed within twenty-four (24)
hours after the general or run-off election or political event to
which they pertain by the individual or individuals posting them.
Such signs shall not be illuminated in any manner whatsoever. No
snipe signs allowed.
17. Signs which advertise yard sales or garage sales, provided they are
not located in such a manner so as to obstruct or otherwise interfere
with motorists' vision and further provided that they are removed
within twenty-four (24) hours following the end of such sale. The
signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in sign area nor shall
such signs be illuminated in any manner whatsoever. No snipe
signs allowed.
18. Temporary, non-illuminated signs, located in residential and
agricultural districts, not to exceed four (4) square feet in sign
area, pertaining to agricultural products raised on the premises.
No snipe signs allowed.
19. Temporary, non-illuminated real estate signs which are used to offer
for sale, lease, or rent the property upon which said signs are
located. No snipe signs allowed.
20. Fuel price informational signs, in any district in which gasoline
sales are permitted and signs advertising the price of motor vehicle
fuel sold from a fuel dispenser located on the premises, including
logos, and advertising signs attached to, or painted onto, the fuel
dispensers themselves.
Section 2.0 Signs Pennitted In Residential Areas
The following types of signs are permitted in Residential Zone Districts of the City .of
Fultondale, subject to specified requirements, unless otherwise provided for elsewhere in this
Ordinance. Also, see Subsections 1.2, Regulations Pertaining To Signs, and subsection 1.3,
Exempt Signs, Permit Exemptions.
1. For detached or attached single-family, two-family and multifamily dwelling
districts, nameplates, not to exceed three (3) square feet in sign area shall be
permitted for each dwelling unit. Such nameplates shall indicate. nothing more
than the name and address of the premises, the occupants thereof, announcements,
etc. If lighted, such nameplates may be lighted with indirect illumination
only.
123
2. Professional signs for Home Occupations, where permitted, shall not exceed two
(2) square feet in area. Such signs may be either wall mounted or ground signs
and shall not be illuminated in any manner. If such sign is ground mounted, said
sign shall not be located closer than twenty feet (20 ' ) from the street right-ofway.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
Temporary ground signs, non-illuminated, advertising yard sales, garage sales
or the sale of personal property. Such signs shall not exceed four ( 4) square feet
in sign area and shall not be located any closer than twenty feet (20' ) from the
street right-of-way. Such signs shall be removed within twenty-four (24) hours
after such sale by the individual or individuals posting them.
Permanent subdivision identification signs. Such shall be ground signs, (which,
if illuminated, shall utilize only indirect illumination) which may include a
masonry wall, landscaping and other similar materials or features, designed and
intended to form a display for neighborhood or subdivision identification. Such
signs shall be limited to one (1) each at the principal entrance to the subdivision
and ·located along the main street leading to the subdivision. Such sign shall not
exceed forty-eight (48) square feet in sign area and shall not be located in such
a manner so as to create a traffic safety hazard with respect to placement. Such
sign shall not be located closer than fifteen feet (15 ' ) from the pavement edge of
the street or thoroughfare to which it is directed.
Temporary ground subdivision signs, which are non-illuminated. Such signs shall
be limited to one (1) each at the principal entrance to the subdivision and located
along the main traffic thoroughfare leading into the subdivision. Such a sign shall
not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in sign area and shall be displayed only
during such time as some portion of the property is unsold. Such signs shall be
located no closer than fifteen feet (15 ' ) from the property line of the street to
which it is directed and shall not be used concurrently with the permanent
subdivision sign referred to in (D) above.
For multiple-family and group dwellings: Identification signs, not to exceed nine
(9) square feet in sign area. Such signs shall indicate nothing more than the name
and address of the premises and name of the management.. Such signs shall be
attached flush with the principal building and, if illuminated, shall be indirectly
illuminated only.
Permanent church, school or other public building bulletin board or
identification signs, including manually-operated, changeable-copy signs not to
exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in sign area. Such signs may be illuminated
or non-illuminated and shall be located no closer than fifteen feet (15 ' ) from the
property line of the street to which the sign is directed.
124
..
8. Signs permitted in planned residential districts shall be determined during the site
plan review process.
NOTE: Billboards, portable signs and signs containing animated, traveling or
flashing lights are prohibited in all residential zone districts of the City
of Fultondale.
Section 3.0 Signs Permitted In the B-1 Neighborhood Business District
Permanent free-standing, on-premise, pole-mounted or ground-mounted sign, limited
to one (1) such sign per street frontage of a street of a lot, regardless of the number of
businesses located on the lot. These may include either:
1. A permanent, on premise, free-standing, pole-mounted sign, illuminated or
non-illuminated, provided such sign shall not exceed one hundred (100) square
feet in sign face area. Such sign shall not exceed a maximum height of thirty-five
feet. (35 ' ) from the ground level to the highest point on the sign. In addition,
such signs shall have a minimum clearance of ten feet (10') fr.om the ground level
to the lowest point on the sign and such sign shall be located no closer than fifteen
feet (15 ' ) from the edge of the property line. However, notwithstanding any of
the above requirements, no such sign shall, at any time, be located on public
right-of-way. See typical sign type below.
PDlMAHIHT ntlZSTAHDIHC. rouAt0tJHTl]J51Ct
2. A permanent, on-premise, ground sign, either illuminated or non-illuminated
which may include a masonry wall, landscaping and similar features or materials.
Such sign shall not exceed forty-eight ( 48) square feet in sign face area and fifteen
feet (15 ,) in height measured from the ground level to the highest point of the
sign. Such sign shall be located no closer than fifteen feet (15 ' ) from the
property line. However, notwithstanding any of the above, ground signs shall at
no time be placed on public right-of-way. See typical illustration of sign type
below.
n'MC.U. CROtnro SJCN
125
Attached, permanent on-premise signs, illuminated or non-illuminated. Each business
shall be limited to one (1) such sign per street front.age which may consist of the following:
1. Wall or fascia sign, either illuminated or non-illuminated. Such sign shall be
limited to one (1) such sign per street front.age, provided no other signs for such
establishment. are located on the same building wall. Such signs shall not extend
above the roof line of the building upon which it is mounted and shall not project
outward from the building more than twelve inches (12" ). Wall signs may also
be permitted which identify the rear entrance of the principal building, provided
such sign is non-illuminated and does not exceed ten (10) square feet in sign area.
See typical illustration of sign type below.
WALL OR FASCIA SiGN
--..i...l~a~"--/ _J _J ~bLU.l~~l!i!lliiii"~
2. Projecting sign, either illuminated or non-illuminated, which is attached to the
wall of the establishment it serves, provided no other signs for such
establishment are located on the same building wall. Such sign shall not project
outward more than thirty-six inches (36" ) from the face of the building upon
which it is mounted and shall have a minimum clearance of ten feet (10 ' ) above
the ground level or sidewalk to the lowest point on the sign. Such signs shall not
project into public right-of-way nor exceed sixteen (16) square feet in sign area.
See typical illustration of sign type below.
l'ROIECTINC SIGN trd§J
3. Roof Sign, either illuminated or non-illuminated, limited to one (1) such sign per
street frontage, per establishment. Each roof sign shall be located within a
selected signable area. Signable wall area for a roof sign shall not extend beyond
the dimensions of a mansard roof, penthouse or architectural eiement on which
the sign is located. See definition of Signable Wall Area. The vertical
dimensions of signable wall area shall not exceed six feet (6 ' ). The size of such
signs shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the signable wall area. See typical
illustration of sign type overleaf.
126
Signs Located In Shopping Centers and Unified Business Centers
1. There shall be an architectural harmony and unity of signs within a shopping
center or unified business center on a property. Sign type, color scheme, size,
and illumination within the site shall be coordinated and compatible with the
architecture of the center.
2. Either a permanent, free-standing, pole-mounted, or ground sign, illuminated
or non-illuminated, shall be permitted to identify such shopping center or unified
business center. In addition, wall or fascia signs for each establishment within
the center shall be permitted, with all signs subject to the height, dimensional
requirements and restrictions of Section 3.0, a-1, a-2 and b, as well as e. 1, e.
2 ore. 3.
3. Billboards are permitted in the B-1 Neighborhood Business District, subject tolt
provisions of Section 8.0.
4. Portable signs are permitted in the B-1 Neighborhood Business District,
subject to the provisions of Section 9.0.
5. Marquees, canopies or fixed awnings are permitted, subject to the provisions of
of the Standard Building Code, Chapter 22, § 2201.2 - 2201.6, or as may be
amended.
Section 4.0 Signs Permitted In the B-2 General Business District
The following signs are permitted in the B-2 General Business District, subject to all
specified requirements. Also, see Subsection 1.2, General Regulations Applying To All Signs
and Subsection 1.4, Exempt Signs, Permit Exemptions.
Permanent, free-standing, on-premise, pole-mounted or ground signs,
limited to one (1) such sign per street frontage of a lot, regardless of the
number of businesses on a lot. These may include either:
127
1. A permanent, pole-mounted, on-premise sign, either illuminated
or non-illuminated. Such sign shall not exceed one hundred and
fifty (150) square feet in sign face area. Such sign shall not exceed
a maximum height of forty feet (40 ' ) from the ground level to the
highest point on the sign and shall maintain a minimum clearance of ten
feet (10' ) from the ground level to the lowest point on the sign. Such
sign shall not be located closer than fifteen feet ( 15 ' ) from the edge of the
property line. However, notwithstanding any of the above, no sign shall
at any time be placed on public right-of-way. See typical illustration of
sign type below.
WALL OR FASCIA SiGN
IaLoo 1111c m /
2. A permanent, on-premise ground sign, illuminated or non-illuminated.
Such sign may include a masonry wall, landscaping and other similar
features or materials. Such sign shall not exceed forty-eight (48) square
feet in sign face area and fifteen (15,) feet in height measured from the
ground level to the highest point on the sign. Such sign shall be located
no closer than fifteen (15 ' ) feet from the property line. However,
notwithstanding any of the above, ground signs shall at no time be placed
on public right-of-way. See typical illustration of Sign Type below.
l'ROJECTING SIGN
Er~
128
In addition to either 1 or 2 above, attached, permanent, on-premise signs,
illuminated or non-illuminated, each business shall be limited to one (1) such sign
per street frontage and may consist of the following:
1. Wall or Fascia Sign, illuminated or non-illuminated. Such a sign shall
be limited to one (1) such sign per street frontage, provided no other wall
signs for such establishment are located on the same building wall. Such
sign(s) shall not extend above the roof line of a building upon which it is
mounted and shall not project outward from the building more than twelve
inches (12" ). Wall signs may also be permitted which identify the rear
entrance of the principal building, provided such sign is non-illuminated
and does not exceed (10) square feet in sign area. See typical illustration
of sign type below.
WALL OR FASCIA SiGN r1 I I I I I I I I ·1 ~ aw <m ,,,dft-~
2. Projecting Sign, either illuminated or non-illuminated, which is attached
to the wall of the establishment it serves, provided no other signs for such
establishment are located on the same building wall. Such sign shall not
project outward more than thirty-six inches (36" ) from the face of the
building upon which it is mounted and shall have a minimum clearance of
ten feet (10/) above the ground level or sidewalk to the lowest point on
the sign. Such signs shall not project outward more than thirty-six inches
(36" ) from the face of the building upon which it is mounted and shall
have a minimum clearance of ten feet (10 /) above the ground level or
sidewalk to the lowest point on the sign. Such signs shall not project into
public right-of-way nor exceed sixteen (16) square feet in sign area. See
typical illustration of sign type below.
l'ROJECTING SICN
~~;;=~·
129
..
3. Roof Sign, either illuminated or non-illuminated, is limited to one (1) such
sign per street frontage, per establishment. :Each roof sign shall be located
within a selected signable area. Signable wall area for a roof sign shall
not extend beyond the dimensions of a mansard roof, penthouse or
architectural element on which the sign is located. See definition of
Signable Wall Area. The vertical dimensions of signable wall area shall
not exceed six feet (6 /). The size of such signs shall not exceed forty
percent ( 40 % ) of the signable wall area. See typical illustration of sign
type below.
¢
ROOF SIGN
4. Billboards are permitted in the B-2 General Business District, subject
to the provisions of Section 8.0.
5. Portable signs are permitted in the B-2 General Business District,
subject to the provisions of Section 9.0.
6.
NOTE:
Marquees, canopies, or fixed awnings are permitted, subject to the
provisions of of the Standard Building Code , Chapter 22, § 2201 .2 -
2201 . 6, or as may be amended.
Permanent, free-standing, pole-mounted signs, located in close
proximity to Interstate Highway 65 Interchanges, may be allowed to
exceed the size and height restrictions imposed for such signs in other
areas as determined by the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
Section 5.0 Signs Permitted In The 0-1 Office Building District
Permanent, free-standing, on-premise pole or ground mounted signs, limited to one
(I) such sign per street frontage of a lot, regardless of the number of businesses on a lot. These
may include either:
1. A permanent, on-premise, pole-mounted sign, either illuminated or nonilluminated,
provided such sign shall not exceed one hundred (iOO) square feet
in sign area and shall not exceed a maximum of thirty feet (30 /) from the ground
level to the highest point on the sign. In addition, such signs shall have a
minimum clearance of ten feet (10 /) from the ground level to the lowest point on
the sign face and shall be located no closer than fifteen feet (15 /) from the
130
..
·.
property line. However, notwithstanding any of the above requirements, no such
sign shall, at any time, be located, on public right-of way. See typical
illustration of sign type below.
l"DlMAHENT flU:I. SfANOINC, rou MOU1'1'T[D SICZ
2. A permanent, on-premise, ground sign, either illuminated or non-illuminated,
which may include a masonry wall, landscaping and similar features or materials.
Such sign shall not exceed forty-eight (48) square feet in sign face area and shall
be located no closer than fifteen feet (15 ' ) from the property line. However,
notwithstanding any of the above requirements, no ground sign shall be placed
on public right-of-way. See typical illustration of Sign '.fype below.
'IYl"IC>.L CROUND S1CH
In addition to either 1 or 2 above, attached, permanent, on-premise signs, illuminated
or non-illuminated. Each business shall be limited to one (1) such sign per street frontage,
which would consist of either of the following:
1. Wall or Fascia Sign, either illuminated or non-illuminated. Such signs shall be
limited to one (1) such sign per street frontage, provided no' other signs for such
establishment are located on the same wall. Such signs shall not extend above the
roof line of the building upon which it is mounted and shall not project outward
131
..
from the building upon which it is mounted more than twelve inches (12"). Wall
signs may also be permitted which identify the rear entrance of the principal
building, provided such signs do not exceed ten (10) square feet in sign area. See
typical illustration of sign type below.
WALL OR FASCIA SiGN
/11111 /
a,® a:r
2. Projecting Sign, either illuminated or non-illuminated, which are attached to the
wall of the establishment it serves, provided no other signs for such establishment
are located on the same building wall. Such sign shall not project outward more
than thirty-six inches (36") from the face of the building upon which it is mounted
and ·shall have a minimum clearance of ten feet (10 ' ) above the ground level or
sidewalk to the lowest point on the sign. Such signs shall no_t project into public
right-of-way nor exceed sixteen (16) square feet in sign area. See typical
illustration of Sign Type below.
l'lt0JECl1NG SIGN
Er~
3. Roof Sign, illuminated or non-illuminated, limited to one (1) such sign per street
frontage, per establishment. Each roof sign shall be located within a selected
signable area. Signable wall area for a roof sign shall not extend beyond the
dimensions of a mansard roof, penthouse or architectural element on which the
sign is located. See definition of Signable Area. The vertical dimensions of
signable wall area shall not exceed six feet (6 ' ). The size of such signs shall not
exceed forty percent ( 40 % ) of the signable wall area. See typical illustration of
sign type below.
132
ROOF SIGN
ft
Signs In Unified Business Centers and Shopping Centers
1. There shall be an architectural harmony and unity of signs within a shopping
center or unified business (office) center on a property. Sign type, color scheme,
size and illumination within the site shall be coordinated and shall be compatible
with the architecture of the center.
2. Either a permanent, free-standing, pole-mounted or ground sign, illuminated or
non-illuminated, shall be permitted to identify such shopping center or unified
business center. In addition, wall or fascia signs for each establishment within
the center shall be permitted, with all signs subject to the height, dimensional
requirements and restrictions of Section 3.0. See typical illustration of Sign
Types below.
Signs In Unified Business Centers (Office Parks)
1. There shall be an architectural harmony and unity of signs within a Unified
Business Center on a property. Sign type, size and illumination within the site
shall be coordinated and compatible with the architecture of the center.
2. Either a permanent, free-standing, pole-mounted or ground sign, illuminated
or non-illuminated, shall be permitted to identify such unified business center.
In addition, .wall or fascia signs for each establishment within the establishment
within the -center may be permitted, with all -signs subject to the height and
dimensional requirements for such signs on page 129-130 of this Section.
3. Billboards are prohibited in the CP Office Building, subject to the provisions of
Section 9.0.
4. Portable signs are permitted, subject to the provisions of Section 9.0.
5. Marquees, canopies or fixed awnings, subject to the provisions l>f the Standard
Building Code, Chapter 22, § 2201.2 - 2201.6 or as may be amended.
133
Section 6.0 Signs Permitted in the M-1 Light Industrial District and the M-2 General
Industrial District
The following signs are permitted in the M-1 and M-2 Industrial Districts, subject to
specified requirements. Also see Subsection 1.2, General Regulations Applying To All
Signs, and Subsection 1.3, Exempt Signs, Permit Exemptions.
Permanent, free-standing, on-premise, pole-mounted or ground signs, limited to one
(1) such sign per street frontage of a lot, regardless of the number of businesses located on the
lot. Unless otherwise stipulated, these may include either:
1. A permanent, on-premise, pole-mounted sign, either illuminated or nonilluminated,
provided such sign shall not exceed one hundred and fifty (150)
square feet in sign area and shall not exceed a maximum height of forty feet
(40' ) from the ground level to the highest point on the sign. In addition, such
sign shall have a minimum clearance of ten feet (10' ) from the ground level to
the lowest point on the sign face. Such sign shall be located no closer than
fifteen feet (15 ' ) from the property line. However, notwithstanding any of the
above requirements, no such sign shall at any time be located on public right-ofway.
See typical illustration of Sign Type below.
,_
-
PERMANENT FREE STANDING. POLE MOUNTED SIG:
2. A permanent, on-premise ground sign, either illuminated or non-illuminated,
which may include a masonry wall, landscaping and similar features or materials.
Such sign shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet in sign face area and shall be
located no closer than fifteen feet (15') from the property line. However,
notwithstanding any of the above requirements, no ground sign""Shall at any time
be placed on public right-of-way. See typical illustration of Sign Type
overleaf.
134
..
. .
TYPICAL GROUND SIGN
3. Wall or Fascia Sign, either illuminated or non-illuminated. Such signs shall be
limited to one (1) such sign per street frontage. No other signs for such
establishment shall be located on the same wall. Such sign(s) shall not extend
above the roof line of the building upon which it is mounted and shall not project
outward from the building more than twelve inches (12 // ). Wall signs may also
be permitted which identify the rear entrance of the principal building, provided
such sign is non-illuminated and does not exceed ten (10) square feet in sign area.
See typical illustration of Sign Type below.
WALL OR FASClA SiGN n I I I I I I I ., __,;JP
aoo w ~
Signs In Unified Business Centers (Industrial Parks)
1. There shall be an architectural harmony and unity of signs within a Unified
Business Center on a property. Sign type, size and illumination within the site
shall be coordinated and compatible with the architecture of the center.
2. Either a permanent, free-standing, pole-mounted or ground sign, illuminated or
non-illuminated, shall be permitted to identify such unified business center
(Industrial Park). In addition, wall or fascia signs for each establishment within
the establishment within the park may be permitted, with all signs subject to the
height and dimensional requirements for such signs in a-1, a-2 and b of this
section.
3. Billboards are permitted in the M-1 and M-2 Industrial Districts, subject to the
provisions of Section 8.0.
4. Portable signs are permitted in the M-1 and M-2 Industrial Districts, subject to
the provisions of Section 9.0.
135
5. Marquees, canopies or fixed awnings are permitted, subject to the provisions of
of the Standard Building Code, Chapter 22, § 2201 .1 - 2201. 6, or as may be
amended.
Section 7.0 Signs Permitted In The AG Agricultural District
The following signs are permitted in the AG Agricultural District:
1. Those signs permitted in the Residential areas listed in Section 2.0;
2. Signs customarily incidental to uses permitted in the Agricultural District.
NOTE: Also, see Subsection 1.3, Exempt Signs, Permit Exemptions, as well as
Subsection 1.2, Regulations Pertaining To All Signs.
Section 8.0 Billboard Regulations
Billboards, where permitted, shall comply with the following regulations:
1. No billboard shall be permitted on any lot which has two (2) or more on-premise
signs pertaining to an establishment or establishments located on the same lot.
2. No billboard shall be erected closer than one hundred feet (100' ) from any
residential zone district of the City.
3. Any illumination of a billboard shall be of an indirect type and the beam of light
shall be directed toward the sign face area and away from adjacent areas and
thoroughfares.
4. No flashing, traveling, animated or intermittent illumination of billboards shall
be permitted.
5. No portion of any billboard shall project over or be located on public property
or public right-of-way.
6. Where permitted, no billboard shall be erected closer to another billboard or offpremises
pole sign than the following prescribed distances:
a. Interstate Hiehway 65 One thousand feet (1,000' ) between sign
structures located on the same side of the street, highway or thoroughfare.
b. Federal-Aid Urban Five hundred feet (500 ' ) between- sign structures
located on the same side of the street, highway or thoroughfare.
c. All Other Streets Seven hundred and fifty feet (750 ' ) between sign
structures located on the same side of the street or highway.
136
7. No billboard shall exceed the following specified height requirements for specific
types of thoroughfares or streets:
a. Interstate Hie;hways The maximum sign area shall not be more than
eight hundred (800) square feet (including embellishments), nor exceed
twenty-five feet (25 ' ) in height for an elevated grade nor forty feet (40' )
in all other locations.
b. Federal Aid Urban The maximum sign area shall not be more than four
hundred (400) square feet, (including embellishments), nor exceed twentyfive
feet (25') in height for an elevated grade nor forty feet (40') in all
other locations.
c. All Other Streets The maximum sign area shall not be more than three
hundred (300) square feet in area (including embellishments), nor exceed
twenty-five feet (25 ' ) in height for an elevated grade nor thirty feet (30 ' )
in all other locations.
d. Setbacks The setback of such signs shall be twenty feet (20') from any
front lot line and fifteen feet (15 ' ) from any side or rear lot line. Such
sign may be indirectly illuminated only.
Section 9.0 Portable Sign Regulations
Where permitted, portable signs shall conform with the following requirements and
regulations:
1. No portable sign shall contain flashing or traveling lights.
2. No portable sign shall contain lights that consist of those colors used by fire
department vehicles, law enforcement vehicles, emergency medical vehicles or
other official vehicles. This shall include the following colors: Red, Blue,
Orange and Yellow.
3. All portable signs shall be set back at least twenty feet (20' ) from the pavement
edge of a public road or highway and in no case closer than ten feet (10' ) from
the property line. Moreover, no portable sign shall be permitted within thirtyfive
feet (35') of the intersection of the pavement edge lines of two (2) roads,
streets, or right-of-way line of a railroad. Under no circumstances shall these
signs be placed on public right-of-way.
4. Portable signs shall be situated in such a manner which will not..-impede with or
interfere with motorists' vision at points of ingress and egress.
5. No portable sign shall exceed one hundred (100) square feet in area.
137
6. All portable signs shall be UL listed, when illuminated.
7. No portable sign shall be permanently or temporarily mounted on any roof, pole,
tree or other suspended structure.
Section 10.0 Construction and Maintenance of Signs
. .
All signs shall comply with the following construction and maintenance requirements and
regulations:
1. All signs shall conform with City Building and Technical Codes which provide
a comprehensive set of construction standards for signs. These specifications
include wind loads, vibration resistance, seismic loads, acceptable supports,
allowable stresses, materials and electrical wiring and components.
2. All signs and all components thereof, including structural supports, shall be kept
in a state of good repair.
3. The area surrounding the base of any free-standing sign shall be kept clean of all
trash, debris and undergrowth.
4. No person may, for the purpose of increasing or enhancing the visibility of any
sign, damage, trim, destroy or remove any trees, shrubs or other vegetation within
any right-of-way (unless express written authorization is obtained from the agency
having jurisdiction over the right-of-way) or on any area where landscaping is
required by City regulations.
Section 11.0 Required Permits, Fees And Inspections
Permits Required
1. Except where this article explicitly exempts a sign, all signs erected shall require
a sign permit issued by the Building Inspector.
2. Whether a sign is exempt or not, an electrical permit shall be required for all
illuminated signs.
3. All outdoor advertising signs to be located within six hundred and sixty feet
(660' ) of the nearest edge of the right-of-way of a highway on the Interstate or
Federal-Aid Primary Highway System shall file an application for a permit with
the State of Alabama Highway Department as required by the Highway
Beautification Act - Outdoor Advenising.
138
Application Each application for a sign permit shall include the following:
1. Name, signature and address of the property owner or authorized agent of the
property owner, if any, and sign contractor.
2. Address of the property owner where the sign is to be erected.
3. Lot area, sign district, zoning district and principal land use(s) on the lot subject
to the erection of the sign.
4. A complete description of the sign(s) to be erected, including, but not limited to:
number, type, method of illumination, size, height, etc.
5. A dimensioned sketch of the sign and a plot plan showing the location of each sign
on the lot.
6. Other details sufficient for the Building Inspector to determine compliance with
the requirements of this article, which may include a building elevation, survey
or other drawings or documentation satisfactory to assess a permit for the sign.
7. Application fees.
11.1 Issuance Denial
When a permit is denied by the Building Inspector, he or she shall given written notice
to the proper applicant of the denial with a written statement of the reason or reasons for
such denial. A copy of said statement shall be made as an attachment to the permit
application.
11.2 Appeals Of Permit Denial
Appeal may be taken to the Zoning Board of Adjustment upon denial by the Building
Inspector to issue a building permit.
11.3 Permit Fees
Applications for permits shall be filed with the Building Inspector, together with a permit
fee, as specified by the Building Inspector, for each sign in accordance with this
Ordinance. Building Permit fees for signs shall be determined by the City in the same
manner as other building permits issued by the City.
11.4 Inspection of Siens
The person erecting, altering, relocating, enlarging or converting any sign shall notify
the Building Inspector upon completion of the work for which permits are required and
issued. See subsection 1.3, Exempt Signs, Permit Exemptions.
139
11.5 Unlawful Siens
Every sign in the City of Fultondale shall be maintained in good structural condition at
all times. The building Inspector may inspect and shall have the authority to order the
painting, repair, alteration, movement or removal of signs which become dilapidated or
abandoned or which constitute a physical hazard to public safety. Any repair, painting,
alteration, relocation or removal shall be at the sign owners expense. See subsection
11.6.
11.6 Confiscation of Siens Located In Public Rieht-of-way
Any sign installed or placed on a public right-of-way, except in conformance with the
requirements of this Ordinance, shall be forfeited to the public and subject to
confiscation. In addition to other remedies provided for under this Article, the City shall
have the right to recover from the owner or person placing the sign the full costs of
removal and disposal.
Section 12.0 Abandoned Signs
Except as may otherwise be provided for in this Article, any sign that is located on
property which becomes vacant and is unoccupied for a time period of four (4) months or more,
or any sign which pertains to a time, event or purpose which no longer applies, shall be deemed
to have been abandoned. Permanent signs applicable to a business temporarily suspended
because of a change in ownership or management of such business shall not be deemed
abandoned unless the property remains vacant for a period of nine (9) months or more. An
abandoned sign is prohibited and shall be removed by the owner of the sign or owner of the
premises.
Section 13.0 Notification
All notices mailed by the Building Inspector shall be sent by certified mail. Any time
periods provided in this Section shall be deemed to commence on the date of the receipt of the
certified mail. The notice shall be mailed _ to the owner of the property on which the sign is
focated as shown on the latest available truc maps, as well as the occupant which the sign serves.
Any person or persons having an interest in the sign or the property may appeal the
determination of the Building Inspector ordering removal or measures necessary to bring the sign
into compliance with the provisions of the Ordinance by filing a written notice of appeal with
the Fultondale Zoning Board of Adjustment within thirty (30) days after the date of the mailing
of the notice.
Section 14.0 Removal Of Signs
The Building Inspector shall cause to be removed any sign that endangers the public
safety, such as: abandoned; dangerous; or materially, electrically or structurally defective sign;
or a sign for which no permit has been issued. The Building Inspector shall prepare a notice
140
which shall describe in detail the nature of the violation or violations involved and which shall
state that, if the sign is not removed or the violation is not corrected within thirty (30) days, this
sign shall be removed in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. However, the
following shall apply to signs placed in public rights-of-way: any sign installed or placed on a
public right-of-way, except in conformance with the requirements of this Ordinance, shall be
forfeited to the public and subject to confiscation. In addition to other remedies provided under
this Article, the City shall have the right to recover from the owner or person placing such a
sign the full costs of removal and disposal as described in subsection 11. 6.
141
..
ARTICLE XI
LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
Section 1.0 Interpretation Of Uses
In their interpretation and application the provisions of this Ordinance shall be considered
minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals,
conveniences, order, prosperity and general welfare of the City. Where other Ordinances or
regulations which may be adopted hereafter impose greater restrictions than those specified
herein, compliance with such other ordinances or regulations is mandatory, this Ordinance shall
not lower the restriction of plats, deeds or private contracts, if such are greater than the
provisions of this Ordinance.
Section 2.0 Savings Clause
If any section, clause, provision or position of this Ordinance shall be held to be invalid
or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect any other
section, clause, provision or portion of this Ordinance which is not in and of itself invalid or
unconstitutional.
Section 3.0 Repeal Of Existing Ordinances
All zoning ordinances heretofore adopted are hereby repealed, provided, however, that
nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to modify or in any manner permit, extend or
enlarge any non-conforming property or improvement at the time of adoption of this Ordinance,
but such non-conforming use shall continue to be subject to all restrictions and limitations
existing at the time of adoption of this Ordinance related to such non-conforming use. No nonconforming
use, existing at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, shall be enlarged, extended,
or expanded, unless such use is changed to a use which will conform to the regulations of the
district in which such property is located.
Section 4.0 Effective Date
This Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its adoption, approval and
publication, as provided by law.
CERTIFICATION
I, Jane L. Hazlegrove, City Clerk of the City of Fultondale,
Alabama, hereby certify that the foregoing Ordinance known as the
Zoning Ordinance of the City of Fultondale was published by posting
copies in <4) conspicuous places within the city limits of the City
of Fultondale, Alabama on this the o?.S~day of +r,'( , 1995.
Said public places of posting are;
1> City H~ll Lobby
2) ~mSouth Bank, Fultondale Branch
3) Fultondal~ Public Library
4> U.S. Post Office, Fultondale
oe:~g~~
In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand and the official
seal of the City of Fultondale, Alabama, this the c:;sff.day of
9'4c;{ 1'395.
EFFECTIVE DATE
This ordinance <number 433) shall take effect and be enforced from
and after the date of its adoption and publication required by law.
ADOPTED and APPROVED this the c91~ day of a,or;·/ , 1995.
ne L. Hat: l egr.
..) -
APPENDICES
VARIAN CE APPLICATION
CITY OF FULT01'.1DALE, ALABAMA
PART I. APPLlCANT FORM:
Name of Applicant: __________________________ _
Mailing Address of Applicant: _____________________ _
Telephone Number: _____________ _
Signature of Applicant: _______________________ _
PART II. PARCEL DATA:
Owner of Record:
-----------------------"""----~
Mailing Address: __________________________ _
Address of Property for which
Variance is requested: ________________________ _
Tax Map lD #: ___________________________ _
Existing Land Use: ______________ ExistingZoning: _____ _
PART III. REQUEST:
Section of Ordinance on which
Variance is requested
------------------------~
Nature of variance with reference to applicable zoning provisions: _____ _
PART JV. ENCLOSURES: (Check all required enclosures with this application)
NOTICE:
Written Justification for a variance
Vicinity Map
Plot Plan with variance noted or highlighted
Public hearing notices
Stamped legal-size envelopes addressed to adjacent property owners
$50.00 Administrative fee
The completed application, including all required attaclunents, must be filed al least thirty
(30) days before the Zoning Board of Adjustment hearing. The applicant must be present
at hearings.
FOR OFFICE USE ONLY:
Case It ----- Date Received:- ----- Received By:- -----------
Scheduled Public Hearing Date:
------------------~----
...
--~
APPLICATION FOR SPECIAL EXCEPTION USE
CITY OF FULTONDALE, ALABAMA
Part I. Applicant Form:
Name of Applicant:
Mailing Address:
Telephone:
Signature:
Part II. Parcel Data:
Owner of Record:
Mailing Address:
Tax Map ID II
Existing Land Use
Part Ill. Request:
Type of Special Exception Use Requested: ____________________ _
Part IV. Enclosures (Check All Required Enclosures With This Application):
A Vicinity map showing location of property.
Plot Plan, drawn to scale and dimensioned, showing the property boundaries and proposed
Development Layout.
Stamped legal-size envelopes addressed to adjacent property owners, as well as those
property owners within five hundred feet (500') of subject property.
A $75.00 Administrative Fee.
NOTICE: The completed application, including all required attactunents must be liled at least
thirty days (30) before the Fultondal~ Pln11~1h~g C?A1~m~~ie~ Pttl'llic Hearing. The
applicant must be present at the heanng.u"',...,~ cec,('io,
A'd Ju J-fi-na ,1~
FOR OFFICE USE ONLY:
Date Received:
---------~
Received _____________ By: _ ____________________ _
Scheduled public hearing date:
---------------------------~
-... _·f
APPLICATION FOR REZONING
FULTONDALE PLANNING COMMISSION
1. Date Application filed:- --------Requested Hearing Date:- --------
2. Applicant: ______________________________ _
Phone: ________________________________ _
Address: ________________________________ _
3. Owner: ________________________________ ~
Phone:
---------------------------------~
Address: _______________________________ _
4. Property Location: ___________________________ _
Tax Map Parcel Number (s)
-------------------------~
5. Acreage: ________ _ __ _
6. Exis ting Zoning Classification: _________ Existing Land Use: _ _ ___ _
Proposed Zoning Classification: _________ Proposed Land Use: ____ __ _
7. Check all required submissions with this application:
Application Fee
Reason for the Request
Legal Description of the subject Property
Vicinity Map
Availability of Required Utilities
Public Hearing Notices
Site Plan
Proffer of rezoning conditions (if any)
Signature of Applicant: ---- --- --- -------- ----
Signature of Authorization By Owner: _______________ _
FOR CITY USE ONLY:
$150.00 Administrative fee received on by receipt #
Scheduled Hearing Date: ------------- --- ------
Application Submitted by: ____________ on: ______ _
PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE
FULTONDALE PLANNING COMJ\flSSION
..
You are hereby noli fied of a public bearing of the Fultondale Planning Commission lo be held at the Fultondale City
Hall at P.M. on: , 19 . The purpose of this public hearing
is to receive public comments on an application submitted by:
for a proposed rezoning of land owned by:
and located at the following street address or location:
The proposal consists of rezoning from the District to the
-----------~ ------
__________________ District for the purpose of _____________ _
A written protest of the proposed amendment may be filed with the Secretary to the Planning Commission of the
City of Fultondale one ( 1) day prior to the proposed date of the public hearing for the consideration of the zoning
classification amendment. The protest must be signed by the property owner making such protest, and only one
protest shall be allowed for each separately-assessed unit of property.
This notice is sent by certified mail on , 19 , which is
at least seven (7) days before the fixed hearing date, to all adjacent property owners as well as those property
owners within five hundred feet (500' ) [including those directly across a public right-of-way], as obtained by the
applicant from the most recent records of the Jefferson County Tax Assessor.
Secretary To The Planning Commission
CITY OF FULTONDALE ALABAMA
PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE
YOU ARE HEREBY NOTIFIED OF
A PUBLIC HEARING OF THE FULTONDALE ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
To be held al ________ P.M. on ________ , 19 _ in the: _______ _
The purpose of the hearing is lo receive public comments on an application submitted by:
for approval of a variance to: _____________________________ _
on a. ______ acre parcel of land located at the following street address and location:
This notice is sent at least fifteen (15) days prior to the scheduled Zoning Board of Adjustment hearing to all
adjacent property owners (including those directly across a public right-of-way), as obtained by the applicant from
the most recent records of the Jefferson County Tax Assessor.
Chairman
Date of Mailing
PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE
FULTONDALE CITY COUNCIL
Notice To:
Address:
You are hereby notified of a public hearing of the Fultondale City Council to be held al the Fultondale City Hall,
at P .M. on: , 19 The purpose of the public hearing is to
receive public comments on an application submitted by:
for a proposed rezoning of land owned by:
and located at the following street address or location:
The proposed consists of rezoning from the __________ District to the ________ _
______________ District for the purpose of: ________________ _
A written protest of the proposed amendment may be filed with the Secretary lo the Planning Commission of the
City of Fultondale one (1) day prior to the proposed date of the public hearing for the consideration of the zoning
classification amendment. The protest must be signed by the property owner making such request, and only one
protest shall be allowed for each separately-assessed unit of property.
This notice is sent by certified mail on , 19 __ , which is at least
seven (7) days before the fixed hearing date, to all adjacent property owners, as well as those property owners
within five hundred feet (500' ) of the subject property (including those directly across public rights-of-way) as their
names and addresses appear in the Jefferson County Tax Assessor's office, as determined by the applicant.
Mayor
..