 
CITY OF LINCOLN 
PLANNING DOCUMENTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
      Comprehensive Plan  Adopted:   
         Zoning Ordinance  Adopted: 
Subdivision Regulations  Adopted: 
Lincoln, Alabama 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
LINCOLN 
ZONING ORDINANCE 
             
 
CITY COUNCIL 
 
Sadie Britt, Ward 1 
Billy Pearson, Ward 2 
Chris Watson, Ward 3 
Shelly L. Barnhart, Ward 4 
Jean B. Burk, Ward 5 
Claude “Bud” Kitchin, Mayor 
 
PLANNING COMMISSION 
 
Sadie Britt 
Kim Davidson 
Kris Haynes 
Chad Houze 
Bud Kitchin 
Clyde Lane 
James Phillips 
Bonnie Ponder 
Keith Yarbrough 
 
ADMINISTRATION 
 
Laura Carmack, City Clerk 
Kim Davidson, Planning & Revenue Clerk 
Adam Thrasher, Code Enforcement Officer 
Mike O’Brien, City Attorney 
             
 
SPECIAL THANKS TO 
 
Rex Veron, Rex Veron Designs, LLC -  Graphics 
 
             
 
CONSULTANTS 
 
EPIPHANY COLLABORATION, LLC 


ORDINANCE NO.      
 
AN ORDINANCE in pursuance of the authority granted by Title 11, Chapter 52, Articles 1 through 4 inclusive, of the Code of Alabama 1975, As Amended, to provide the establishment of districts within the corporate limits of the City of Lincoln, Alabama; to regulate within such districts the height, bulk, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures, the percentage of lot that may be developed, the size of yards and other open spaces, the density and distribution of population and the use of buildings, and structures.  Further regulated is the use of land for trade, industry, residence, recreation, agriculture, forestry, conservation, airports, water supply, sanitation, protection against floods, public activities, and other purposes, creating districts for said purposes and establishing the boundaries thereof.  Provisions are further provided for changes in these regulations, restrictions and boundaries for above mentioned districts. 
Said Ordinance shall repeal all existing Zoning Ordinances and provide methods for administration of this Ordinance and penalties for the violation thereof.  
THE PUBLIC WELFARE REQUIRING IT, be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Lincoln, as follows: 
 
ARTICLE I. TITLE, PURPOSE AND JURISDICTION.  
 
Section 100. Title. This Ordinance shall be known as and may be referred to as the “Lincoln Zoning Ordinance,” and includes maps of the City that depict the boundaries of zoning districts.  
 
Section 101. Legislative Intent.  
In enacting the Zoning Ordinance, special notice has been taken of the fact that the goals of citizens and landowners of Lincoln often conflict or compete. In the light of this situation, the first consideration has been to devise technical solutions, which minimize or eliminate conflicts.  
This Ordinance has been designed to protect and accommodate both competing interests. This has inevitably, and properly, led to some form of compromise. In arriving at these compromises, every possible consideration has been given to the public interest, individual property rights, and externalities. While compromise implies mutual concessions or losses, it also implies – and this Ordinance has been designed to provide – mutual gains and benefits. It is the goal of this Ordinance that both the burdens and the benefits it implies are rationally and fairly distributed among the citizens and property owners of Lincoln.  
Every effort has been made to make uses a matter of right subject to performance criteria capable of nondiscretionary, objective administrative evaluations, thus reducing the 
number of times that rezoning decisions need be made. This greatly increases the potential uses or choices available to individual property owners. The rezoning decisions that conventional zoning ordinances frequently necessitate appear to reduce the certainty of protection to neighbors and to increase the potential for adverse impacts to Lincoln. This Ordinance contains performance criteria intended to insure that neighbors are protected from adverse impacts. The Ordinance also contains performance criteria to protect the community’s general welfare. Zoning districts are few in number, and each has a clearly different purpose. The districts are sized to be adequate to handle Lincoln’s long-term needs and must be regularly updated as time passes. Where performance criteria severely limit the use of properties, the Ordinance has gone to considerable extremes to provide the landowners with a range of choices, flexibility, and options for development. 
 
Section 102. Purpose.  
The purpose of this Ordinance is the promotion of the health, safety, and general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of Lincoln by:  
A. Providing methods to preserve and maintain a healthful environment for the benefit of present and future generations by providing standards to control the amount of open space and impervious surfaces within a development; to control the intensity of development in areas of sensitive natural resources or natural features in order to reduce or eliminate adverse environmental impacts.  
B. Controlling and regulating the growth of Lincoln, concentrating development in areas where adequate sewerage facilities, roads, and schools can be provided, and limiting development in areas where these facilities are not and should not be provided.  
C. Regulating and restricting the location and use of buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry, residences, and other uses.  
D. Providing standards for all types of dwelling units so that all the people may have access to decent, sound, and sanitary housing in accordance with the goals of the Federal Housing Act of 1949, among which is the provision of adequate zoning to meet a fair share of the region’s housing needs.  
E. Lessening the danger of congestion of traffic on the roads and highways, limiting excessive numbers of intersections, driveways, and other friction points, minimizing other hazards, and insuring the continued usefulness of all elements of the existing highway system for their planned function.  
F. Securing safety from fire, panic, flood, and other dangers.  
G. Providing adequate privacy, light, and air.  
H. Securing economy in local governmental expenditures.  
I. Conserving property values throughout Lincoln.  
J. Protecting landowners from adverse impacts of adjoining developments.  
K. Dividing the incorporated area of Lincoln into districts according to the use of land and buildings, the intensity of such uses (including bulk and height), and surrounding open space. 
Each purpose listed above serves to balance the interest of the general public of Lincoln and those of individual property owners.  Decisions made through the application of this Ordinance shall be made in conjunction with the Lincoln Comprehensive Plan. 
 
Section 103. Jurisdiction. 
This Ordinance shall apply to all areas within the corporate limits of the City of Lincoln, Alabama. 


ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS 
 
 
Section 200.  Purpose.  It is the purpose of this Article to define words, terms, and phrases contained within this Ordinance. 
 
  
Section 201.  Word Usage.   In the interpretation of this Ordinance, the provisions and rules of this section shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly requires otherwise: 
 
A.  Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses and derivative forms.   
 
B.  Words in the singular number shall include the plural number and words in the plural number shall include the singular number.   
 
C.  The masculine gender shall include the feminine, and the feminine gender shall include the masculine.    
 
D.  The word “shall” is mandatory.   
 
E.  The word “may” is permissive.   
 
F.  The word “person” includes individuals, firms, corporations, associations, trusts, and any other similar entities.   
 
G.  The word “Lincoln” means The City of Lincoln, Alabama.   
 
H.  The words “governing body” refer to the City Council of Lincoln.   
 
I.   The words “Planning Commission” shall mean the Lincoln Planning Commission.   
 
J.   The word “Board” refers to the Board of Zoning Adjustment of the City of Lincoln.   
 
K.  In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this Ordinance and any caption, illustration, or table, the text shall control.   
 
L.  The word “permitted” refers to uses with the designation “P” as shown in Table 4-1.   
 
M.  The word “conditional” refers to uses with the designation “C” as shown in Table 4-1. 
 
N.  The words “Planning Department”, “Building Inspections” or “Inspections Department” shall refer to the department of Planning & Development Services.  
 
M.  The term “Building Code” shall refer to the Residential and Commercial building codes currently adopted by the City of Lincoln. 
Section 202.  Abbreviation. 
 
The following abbreviations are used in this Ordinance and are intended to have the following meanings: 
 
                FAR:  Floor Area Ratio 
                ISR:    Impervious Surface Ratio 
                OSR: Open Space Ratio 
                ADT:  Average Daily Traffic 
                AC:    Acre 
                LUI:  Land Use Intensity 
 
    
Section 203.  Definitions. 
 
 When used in this Ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:   
 
Abutting:  Having a common border with, or being separated from such common border by an alley or easement. 
 
Access:  Any means of ingress/egress to a parcel of property for pedestrians and/or vehicles. 
 
Access, Legal:  The form of access which qualifies a development site for a building permit or certificate of occupancy, attesting that such property is legally accessible from a public street by means of direct road frontage, or a recorded easement across one (1) or more intervening properties. (See Section 906).   
 
Accessory structure:  A detached subordinate structure or building, located on the same lot as the principal structure, the use of which is clearly incidental to that of the principal structure.  
(See Figure 1) 
 
Accessory use:  A use that is incidental and subordinate to that of the main building or use of land and that is located on the same lot, in the same zoning district and under the same ownership in all respects.  
 
Alcoholic Beverages:  See “Liquor”  
 
Alley:  A thoroughfare either used or shown on any recorded description of the subject parcel(s) which is at a minimum not more than 20 feet wide and which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
 
Alteration/Altered:  Any addition to the height, width, or depth of a building or structure; or any change in the location of any of the exterior walls.  A building or structure shall be classified as altered when it is repaired, renovated, remodeled or rebuilt at a cost in excess of 50 percent of its fair market value prior to the commencement of such repairs, renovation, remodeling, or rebuilding.   
 
Antenna:  Electronic devices, whose purpose is to receive or transmit signals directly from ground-based sources, which are freestanding or mounted on a structure.   
 
Apartment:  A building designed for occupancy by three (3) or more families living independently of one another.   
 
Appeal:  A means for obtaining review of a decision, determination, order, or failure to act pursuant to the terms of this Ordinance as expressly authorized by the provisions of Section 1009.   
 
Applicant:  One (1) individual who is duly authorized to submit development plans for review, request variances or changes in zoning classification, and apply for any form of development approval with respect to a development site.  An applicant may be the property owner(s), or any person having written authority from the property owner(s).  This written authority shall be provided in any form that the Planning Director determines to be appropriate. 
 
Arterial Roadway:  A roadway which typically has a relatively high traffic volume with traffic signals at major intersections.  The primary function of arterials is rapidly moving traffic. 
 
Assisted Living Facility:  A special combination of housing, support services, and personalized health care designed to assist individuals needing help with daily living activities 
 
Attic:  The non-habitable part of a building immediately below, and wholly or partly within, the roof framing. 
 
Basement:  The lowest habitable story of a building usually below, or partially below, ground level. 
 
Bed and Breakfast Inn:  A private, owner-occupied business with 4 to 20 guest rooms where overnight accommodations and a morning meal are provided to transients for compensation and where the bed and breakfast inn is operated primarily as a business. 
 
Bedroom:  A room marketed, designed, or otherwise likely to function primarily for sleeping. 
 
Brew Pub: Any premise upon which beer, malt or brewed beverage, is actively and continuously manufactured or brewed for consumption on the premise where manufactured, or for sale to any designated wholesaler licensee for resale to retail licensees. The brewpub must contain and operate a restaurant or otherwise provide food for consumption on the premises. 
 
Buffer/Bufferyard:  A unit of land, together with a specified type and amount of planting thereon, and any fence, wall, or berm which may be required between land uses to eliminate or minimize conflicts between them. 
 
Building:  A structure built, maintained, or intended for use for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, plant materials, or property of any kind.  The term is inclusive of any part thereof.   
 
Building, Accessory:  See Structure, Accessory. 
 
Building Area:  The portion of the lot occupied by the principal building including carports, porches, accessory buildings and other structures. 
 
Building Envelope:  Designated area within a lot, as shown on a subdivision plat for zero lot line, single family attached, and twin house development, wherein all principal and accessory structures (including swimming pools) will be built, except fences and/or walls enclosing yards or patio areas. 
 
Building Frontage:  The exterior wall of a building that faces a front lot line of the lot. 
 
Building Height:  See Height of Structure. 
 
Building Line:  A line shown on a plat indicating the minimum allowable distance between any structure and a lot line, as established by requirements of the developer and/or this Ordinance. 
 
Building Line, Front:  A line, generally parallel to the front lot line, which passes through the most forward point of the principal structure.  
 
Canopy:  A roof-like cover extending over a pedestrian way or right-of-way as a shelter or shield.  This definition shall include the term “awning” and shall apply regardless of the materials used in its construction. 
 
Carport:  An unenclosed and covered space for the private use of the owner or the occupant of a principal building and situated on the same lot as the principal building, intended for the storage of motor vehicles, with no facilities for mechanical service or repair of a commercial or public nature. 
 
Carrier/Provider:  See Wireless Communication Service Provider. 
 
Cellar:  An uninhabited room used for storage, usually beneath the ground or under a building.  
 
Certified Survey:  Scaled drawing of a parcel or lot, showing property lines, dimensions, building locations, and other features of the property, which has been signed and sealed by a professional surveyor licensed in the State of Alabama.   
 
Church:  See Place of Worship. 
 
City:  The City of Lincoln, Alabama. 
 
City Council:  Elected City Council of Lincoln, Alabama. 
 
Collector Road:  A road which serves as feeders between arterials as well as provides access to the local streets.  These are typically lower volume roadways that accommodate short distance trips. 
 
Conditional Use:  A use that, because of special requirements or characteristics, may be allowed 
in a particular zoning district only after review by the Commission and granting of conditional use approval imposing such conditions as necessary to make the use compatible with other uses permitted in the same zone or vicinity 
Condominium:  Property ownership arrangement in which a buyer receives a percentage interest in a development on an undivided parcel of land, resulting in the right to exclusive use of a specific dwelling unit or portion of the undivided parcel, such as a mobile home or recreational vehicle site.  Common areas of the site which are not assigned to a specific owner, such as pools, clubhouses, parking areas and other amenities, are the collective responsibility of all owners or members of the condominium development. 
 
Corner Lot:  See Lot, Corner.   
 
Curb Cut:  Vehicular entrance onto a public right-of-way. 
 
Day Care Center:  A commercial or non-profit facility whose purpose is to care for children in a group setting, where education may be involved and meals may be served.  Such facility shall be licensed by the State of Alabama. 
 
Dedication:  The transfer of property interests from private to public ownership for a public purpose.  The transfer may be of fee-simple interest or of a less than fee interest, including an easement.   
 
Density, Gross:  The quotient of the total number of dwelling units divided by the gross site area of the site, expressed as dwelling units per acre.   
 
Developer:  The legal or beneficial owner(s) of a lot or parcel or any land proposed for inclusion in a development, including the holder of an option, contract to purchase, or a lease.   
 
Development:  The division of a parcel of land into two (2) or more parcels (See Subdivision); the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any buildings; any use or change in use of any buildings or land; any extension of any use of land or any clearing, grading, or other movement of land, for which an approved development plan is required pursuant to this Ordinance or other regulations, codes and ordinances of the City.  
(See Also:  Article V “Landscape & Bufferyard Requirements” Section 504 Definitions) 
 
Development Site:  One (1) or more parcels of land included in a single development plan, and preferably under common ownership, which constitute the entire area of development shown on a site plan or subdivision plat.  The development site must include all land needed for required open space, bufferyards, landscaping, parking (except as provided for in Sections 610.03 & 610.04), internal access roads or driveways, and other physical design features needed to serve the proposed development.   
 
Drainage:  The removal of surface water or ground water from land by drains, grading, or other means.  Drainage includes the control of runoff to minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after development and includes the means necessary for water-supply preservation or prevention or alleviation of flooding. 
 
Drainageway:  Minor watercourses, natural or man-made, that are defined either by soil type or the presence of intermittent or perennial streams. 
 
Drive-In Restaurant:  See Restaurant, Fast Food. 
 
Duplex:  Residential structure, divided horizontally or vertically, and designed for or occupied by two (2) dwelling units, contained entirely under one (1) roof on one (1) lot. 
 
Dwelling:  Any building or portion thereof which is designated or used for residential purposes. 
 
Dwelling, Single-Family Detached:  See Single Family Detached Dwelling Unit. 
 
Dwelling Unit:  A room or group of rooms, providing or intended to provide living quarters for not more than one (1) family except as otherwise provided by this Ordinance.  All rooms within the dwelling unit shall have internal access, and the unit shall have no more than one electrical meter.   
 
Easement:  Authorization by a property owner of the use by another and for a specified purpose of any designated part of his property.  No easement shall be recognized under this Ordinance which has not been created through a valid legal instrument and recorded in the Office of the Judge of Probate of Talladega County and those established by the City through continuous historic use. 
 
Eave Height:  The distance as measured from grade level to the top of the fascia.   
 
Erosion:  The wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the movement of wind, water, and/or ice. 
 
Exterior Storage:  Outdoor storage of fuel, raw materials, vehicles, products and equipment.  In the case of lumberyards, exterior storage includes any impervious materials stored outdoors.  In the case of truck terminals, exterior storage includes all trucks, truck beds, and truck trailers stored outdoors.   
 
Family:  One (1) or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship plus one (1) unrelated person occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single housekeeping unit; or not more than three (3) unrelated persons occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single housekeeping unit in zoning districts where residential uses are permitted 
  
Family Child Care Home:  A child care facility which is a family home, and which receives not more than six (6) children for care.  Such facility shall be licensed by the State of Alabama.  Said child care facility may be administratively approved by Planning & Development Services, subject to meeting all requirements of Section 608.02.   
 
Filling:  The depositing of sand, gravel, earth, or other materials to alter the elevation of a given site. 
 
Floodplain:  For the purposes of this Ordinance, “Floodplain” shall mean areas adjacent to a river, stream, or other drainageway which lie within the 100-year flood elevation contour, as established by Flood Insurance Rate Maps or by certified survey.  (See Figure 2) 
 
Floor Area:  The sum of the gross floor area for each story of a building measured from the exterior limits of the faces of the structure.  The floor area of a building includes basement floor area and includes attic floor area only if the attic area meets the current building code standards of the City of Lincoln for habitable floor area.  It does not include cellars and unenclosed porches or any floor space in 
an accessory building or in the principal building, which is designed for the parking of motor vehicles in order to meet the parking requirements of this Ordinance. 
 
Floor Area Ratio (FAR):  An intensity measure expressed as a ratio derived by dividing the total floor area of a building by the base site area.  Where the lot is part of a larger development and has no buffer, that lot area may be used instead of the base site area.  (See Figure 3) 
 
Forestry:  A premises, or portion of a premises, occupied by an establishment primarily engaged in the commercial operation of timber tracts, forest nurseries and related activities such as reforestation services and the gathering of gums, barks, balsam needles, maple sap and other forest products. 
 
Garden Center:  A place of business where garden-related products and produce are sold to the retail consumer.  These centers, which may include a nursery and/or greenhouses, bring in most items offered for sale from other locations.  These items may include plants, nursery products and stock, fertilizers, potting soil, hardware, power equipment and machinery, hoes, rakes, shovels, and other garden and farm tools and utensils. 
 
Garage:  A deck or building, or part thereof, used or intended to be used for the parking and storage of motor vehicles. 
 
Gasoline Service Station:  Buildings and premises where gasoline, oils, greases, batteries, tires and automobile accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail (or in connection with private operation), where no part of the premises is used for paint spraying, body or fender repair, or the storage of dismantled or wrecked vehicle parts, and also where minor services are rendered; such as, sale and servicing of spark plugs, batteries, and distributors; tire repair and servicing, but no recapping; replacement of minor items of equipment such as mufflers, and tail pipes, water hoses, fan belts, brake fluid, etc.; radiator cleaning and flushing; minor servicing and replacing of carburetors; car washing and waxing. 
 
Gross Density:  See Density, Gross. 
 
Group Home:  Any home, located in an RE, or RS zoning district, in which three (3) or fewer disabled persons, including their caretaker, reside who may or may not be related to one another, (See Section 409.E.3).  Homes for the elderly or disabled persons in nonresidential zoning districts are addressed elsewhere in this Ordinance (See Assisted Living). 
 
Group Child Care Home:  A child care facility which is a family home and which receives at least seven (7), but no more than 12, non- resident children for care where there are at least two (2) adults present and supervising the activities.  Such facility shall be licensed by the State of Alabama. 
 
Height of Structure:  For the purposes of this ordinance, the height of a building shall be measured from the average finished ground elevation at the base of the structure to eave height.  Spires, belfries, cupolas, chimneys, antennas, water tanks, ventilators, elevator housing, mechanical equipment or other such structures, unless otherwise specified by this ordinance, placed above the roof levels and not intended for human occupancy shall not be subject to the height limitations. 
Home Occupation:  A business, profession, occupation, or trade conducted for gain or support and located entirely within a residential building, which use is accessory, incidental, and secondary to the use of the building for dwelling purposes and does not change the essential residential character or appearance of such building. 
 
Hotel:  A building, or portion of a building, containing sleeping units, which are occupied on a daily or short-term basis.  A hotel may include a restaurant and banquet or ballrooms, and one (1) self-contained dwelling unit for the use of a resident manager. 
 
Impervious Surface:  A surface that does not absorb water.  Buildings, parking areas, driveways, roads, sidewalks, and any areas of concrete or asphalt are impervious surfaces. For the purpose of this Ordinance, impervious surface measurements shall exclude the water surface area of swimming pools. 
 
 Impervious surface ratio (ISR):  A measure of the intensity of land use which is determined by dividing the total area of all impervious surfaces on a development site by the site area.  
(See Figure 4) 
 
Internal Access:  Physical design of a dwelling unit in which the kitchen, bathrooms, and all other rooms intended for human habitation, are connected internally. 
 
Junkyard:  Any land or structure used for a salvaging operation, including but not limited to the storage and sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal, and discarded materials and the collection, dismantlement, storage and/or sale and salvage of two (2) or more unlicensed, inoperative vehicles. 
 
Kennel:  Any place in or at which any number of dogs, cats or other domestic animals are kept for the purpose of sale or in connection with boarding, care or breeding, for which any fee is charged. 
 
Kindergarten (private):  See Day Care Center.   
 
Lakes and Ponds:  Natural or artificial bodies of water which retain water year round.  A lake is a body of water of two (2) or more acres.  A pond is a body of water of less than two (2) acres.  Artificial ponds may be created by dams or may result from excavation.  The shoreline of such bodies of water shall be measured from the maximum condition rather than from the permanent pool in the event of any difference.   
 
Liquor:  Any alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented, or other alcoholic beverage, or combination of liquors and mixed liquor, a part of which is spirituous, vinous, fermented, or otherwise alcoholic, and all drinks or drinkable liquids, preparations, or mixtures intended for beverage purposes, which contain one-half (½) of one percent (1%) or more of alcohol by volume, except beer and table wine as defined herein. 
 
Local Street:  A street the sole function of which is to provide access to the land uses that are immediately adjacent to the roadways. 
 
Lot:  Refers to a single undivided portion of land that is either legally recorded in the office of the Talladega County Probate Judge, or is being proposed in good faith by well-prepared plan drawings for 
the purpose of being legally recorded. It is the responsibility of the property owner (or his/her agent) to insure that the property is legally recorded with the office of the Talladega County Probate Judge.  
 
Lot Area:  The area contained within the boundary lines of a lot. 
 
Lot, Corner:  A lot abutting two (2) or more streets at their intersection.  If the two (2) streets form an angle of more than 135 degrees, as measured at the point of intersection of their center lines, the lot shall not be considered a corner lot. (See Figure 5) 
 
Lot Depth:  The distance between the midpoints of the front and rear lot lines. 
 
Lot, Double Frontage:  A lot, other than a corner lot, which has frontage on more than one street.  (See Figure 5) 
 
Lot Frontage:  Lot width measured at the street lot line.   
 
Lot Line:  A line bounding a lot which divides one lot from another or forms a street or any other public or private space.   
 
Lot Line, Front:  In cases where the lot fronts on only one street, the lot line adjacent to the street; for corner lots, the side meeting minimum width requirements.  For double frontage lots and corner lots meeting width requirements on both frontages, the property owner may choose one (1) as the front lot line for the purposes of front setback and placement of accessory structures.  (See Figure 6) 
 
Lot Line, Rear:  That lot line which is opposite to and most distant from the front lot line of the lot; in the case of an irregular, triangular, or gore-shaped lot, a line 20 feet in length, entirely within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum possible distance from, the front line shall be considered to be the rear lot line.  (See Figure 6) 
 
Lot Line, Side:  Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.  (See Figure 6) 
 
Lot Line, Street:  In the case of a lot abutting only one street, the street line separating such lot from such street; in the case of a double frontage lot, each street line separating such lot from a street shall be considered to be the front lot line, except where the rear yard requirement is greater than the front yard requirement in which case one of the two opposing yards shall be a rear yard.   (See Figures 5 & 6) 
 
Lot of Record:  Any validly recorded lot meeting current requirements for size and/or width.   
 
Lot Width:  The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured at the required front setback. 
 
Lounge:  Any premise upon which beer, wine and liquor is served. May permit dancing or provide other lawful entertainment on the licensed premises. No person under 19 years of age shall be admitted on the premises of any lounge liquor licensee as a patron or employee, and it shall be unlawful for any such licensee to admit any minor to the premises as a patron or employee. 
 
Malt or Brewed Beverages:  Any beer, lager beer, ale, porter, or similar fermented malt liquor containing one-half of one percent (.5) or more of alcohol by volume and not in excess of five (5) percent alcohol by weight and six (6) percent by volume, by whatever name the same may be called. 
 
Manufactured Home:  A dwelling, transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode is eight (8) body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is 320 square feet or more, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any dwelling which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary (HUD).  For mobile homes built prior to June 15, 1976, a label certifying compliance to NFPA 501, in effect at the time of manufacture is required.   
 
Manufactured Home Park:  A parcel of land under single management which has been planned and improved for the provisions of services for manufactured homes for transient and/or non-transient use.  A manufactured home park may not be platted or otherwise divided by fee simple ownership; however, the sale of interests or memberships on a condominium basis is permitted.  All facilities and amenities, including roads, clubhouse or recreation facilities, and bufferyards, are privately owned or owned in common by residents of the park.   
 
Marina:  An establishment for mooring, servicing, and storing recreation boats, as well as for providing supplies, provisions, and fueling facilities.  A marina may include a restaurant and/or boat and motor sales store.  Boat building or facilities for the dry docking or repair of watercraft exceeding two tons in weight are not included. 
 
Master Development Plan:  A conceptual plan, meeting the requirements of Section 605 and depicting a mixture of land uses, showing an entire development site and all component stages or phases which express the overall development concept for the site at build-out.   
 
Minimum Finished Floor Elevation:  The lowest elevation permissible for the construction, erection, or other placement of any floor, including a basement floor. 
 
Mini-Warehouse:  A building, or group of buildings, in a controlled-access and fenced compound that contains varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized stalls or lockers for the “dead” storage of a customer’s goods or wares.  (See Section 409.M.7) 
 
Mixed-Use Development:  The development of a tract of land and/or structure with two (2) or more uses of different land use categories.  Such developments include, but are not limited to, combinations of residential, office, retail, public entertainment, and/or manufacturing uses in a compact urban form such as an office or research park.   
 
Mobile Home:  See Manufactured Home. 
 
Modular Building:  (Also known as a "manufactured building.") A factory fabricated transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation into a permanent structure to be used for other than residential purposes, including without limitation commercial and industrial purposes, and which bears a seal of compliance with the regulations of the Alabama Manufacturing Housing Commission. Modular buildings must be constructed to meet the requirements of the city's building code and construction regulations as well as any other design standards the city may adopt which apply to conventional construction.   
 
Modular Home:  (Also known as a "manufactured home" and a "modular home.") A factory fabricated transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation into a permanent structure to be used for residential purposes and which bears a seal of compliance with the regulations of the Alabama Manufacturing Housing Commission. Modular panelized homes must be constructed to meet the requirements of the city's building code and construction regulations as well as any other design standards the city may adopt which apply to conventional construction.   
 
Motel:  See Hotel. 
 
Nonconforming/Nonconformity:  See Article VIII. 
 
Nonconforming Lot of Record:  Any lot, validly recorded in the public records of Talladega County, which complied with all applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations in effect on the recording date.  See also Lot of Record.   
 
Nursery for Children:  See Day Care Center.   
 
Nursery:  An enterprise which conducts the retail and wholesale sale of plants grown on the site, as well as accessory items (but not power equipment such as gas or electric lawnmowers and farm implements) directly related to their care and maintenance.  The accessory items normally sold are clay pots, potting soil, fertilizers, insecticides, hanging baskets, rakes and shovels.   
 
Nursing Home:  A building in which nursing care and related medical facilities are provided for individuals who because of illness, disease, injury or physical or mental infirmity need such care.  
Office-Warehouse:  A facility combining office and warehouse functions in a single structure, for the primary purpose of wholesale trade, display, and distribution of products.  Said facility is characterized by occasional truck deliveries and does not create nuisances such as dust, noise, or odors.  Any warehouse activity with heavy trucking activities or nuisances shall be considered under the term “warehousing or wholesaling” (See Section 409.M.8) 
On-Site:  Located within the boundaries of the development site.   
 
Open Space:  Any parcel or area of land or water, either publicly or privately owned, set aside, dedicated, designated, or reserved for the private use or enjoyment of owners or occupants of land adjoining such open space, or for the public at large. 
 
Owner:  The person or persons having the right of legal title to, beneficial interest in, or a contractual right to purchase a lot or parcel of land. 
 
Package Store:  Those liquor retail licensees who declare to the ABC Board that their primary business shall be the sale of alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption. 
 
Parcel:  See Lot, Development Site. 
 
Parking Lot or Garage:  An open area or a structure used exclusively for the temporary off-street storage of motor vehicles.  Such area or structure may be an independent business or may be used in conjunction with any other business or commercial use.  A fee may be charged. 
 
Perennial stream or Perennial River:  is a stream or river (channel) that has continuous flow in parts of its bed all year round during years of normal rainfall. 
 
Place of Worship:  A building used for regular religious worship, by the congregation or parts thereof, of an organized religion.   
 
Pond:  See Lakes and Ponds. 
 
Principal Building:  See Structure, Principal.   
 
Principal Use:  See Use, Principal. 
 
Private Club:  A corporation or an association organized or formed in accordance with the Code of Alabama. 
 
Provider/Carrier:  See Wireless Communication Service Provider. 
 
Public Improvement:  Any improvement, facility, or service, together with customary improvements and appurtenances thereto, necessary to provide for public needs as:  vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems, storm sewers, flood control improvements, water supply and distribution facilities, sanitary sewage disposal and treatment, public utility and energy services.   
 
Rain Garden:  See Article V “Landscape and Bufferyard Requirements” 
 
Recreational Vehicle:  A vehicle or a unit that is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle primarily designed for temporary living.  Recreational vehicles include travel trailers, camping trailers, truck campers, and motor homes.  (See Section 409.I) 
 
Recreational Vehicle Park:  A lot on which campsites are established for occupancy by recreational vehicles of the general public as temporary living quarters for purposes of recreation or vacation.  No recreational vehicle park shall be platted or otherwise divided by fee simple ownership; however, the sale of memberships and assignment of campsites on a condominium basis is permitted.  All facilities and amenities, including roads, clubhouse or recreation facilities, and bufferyards are privately owned. (See Section 409.I) 
Restrictive, More (Less):  A regulation imposed by this Ordinance is more (less) restrictive than another if it prohibits or limits development to a greater (lesser) extent or by means of more (less) detailed specifications.  For example, regulations governing single-family uses would be more restrictive than the regulations governing business uses. 
 
Restaurant, Fast Food:  An establishment whose principal business is the sale of food and/or beverages in a ready-to-consume state:  (1) for consumption within the restaurant building, or within a motor vehicle parked on the premises or off the premises as a carry-out order; or (2) to be served through a drive-up window, and whose principal method of operation includes the following characteristics:  food and/or beverages are usually served in edible containers or in paper, plastic, or other disposable containers.   
 
Restaurant, Standard Sit-Down:  An establishment whose principal business is the sale of food and/or beverages to customers in a ready-to-consume state, and whose principal method of operation includes one or both of the following characteristics:  (1) customers, normally provided with an individual menu, are served their foods and beverages by a restaurant employee at the same table or counter at which food and beverages are consumed; (2) a cafeteria-type operation where food and beverages generally are consumed within the restaurant building.     
 
Resubdivision:  See Subdivision. 
 
Right-of-way:  An area dedicated to public use for pedestrian and vehicular movement, which may also accommodate public utilities. 
 
Satellite Dish Antenna:  Parabolic or spherical antenna whose purpose is to receive and/or transmit audio and/or television signals to or from satellites. 
 
Setback:  The required minimum distance between a structure and the front, side, or rear lot line. 
 
Shopping Center:  A group of commercial-retail establishments planned, developed, and managed as a unit, under single ownership or control, and built in accordance with a unified architectural plan and with off-street parking provided on the property.   
 
Shopping Center, Neighborhood:   A mixture of uses or structures on the same lot designed and built to contain commercial uses compatible with residential neighborhoods, including but not necessarily limited to variety stores, hardware stores, grocery stores, etc. 
 
Shopping Center, Regional:  A shopping center having in excess of 500,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
 
Shoreline:  The shortest horizontal straight line that can be established between points on the side lot lines at the waterfront end of a lot or parcel abutting a lake or stream.  At least one point along the horizontal straight line must line on the ordinary high-water mark, and its entire extent must lie wholly within the lot or parcel.  (See Article V Landscape & Bufferyards) 
 
Shrub:  For the purpose of meeting landscape-planting requirements under this Ordinance, any species listed in Table 5-1 as either a deciduous or evergreen shrub. 
 
Sign:  See Article VII. 
 
Single-Family Detached Dwelling Unit:  Freestanding structure, completely separate from all other structures, designed to house one (1) family as a single housekeeping unit.  Single-family detached units may be constructed in subdivisions pursuant to Section 603. 
 
Site Plan:  A plan, drawn to scale by a licensed engineer or other qualified professional, showing uses, structures, and all other physical features proposed for the development site, including but not limited to, bufferyards, parking, landscaping, drainage facilities and utilities, in accordance with the requirements of Section 902.  Site plans shall include, in written form, all information necessary to determine whether the proposed development meets the requirements of this Ordinance, such as proposed use(s) of the site, impervious surface and floor area, number of employees, hours of operation, and calculations of parking requirements.   
 
Steep Slopes:  Land area where the inclination of the land’s surface from the horizontal is 30 percent or greater.  Slope is determined from on-site topographic surveys prepared with a two-foot contour interval. 
 
Stream, Perennial:  A natural watercourse which contains flowing water, year around.   
 
Street:  Any public or private way dedicated or set aside for public travel.  
 
Street Centerline:  That line surveyed and designated by the City as the centerline of a street. 
 
Structure:  Anything constructed or erected that requires rigid and permanent location on or attachment to the ground; including, but not limited to, buildings, signs, towers, monuments, statues, walls and fences; but not including telephone and other utility poles, overhead wires, retaining walls and terrace walls, wire fences, and any other object less than three (3) feet in height.   
 
Structure, Accessory:  A subordinate structure, detached from but on the same development site as the principal structure, the use of which is incidental and secondary to that of the principal structure. (See Section 608; See Also Accessory Structures/Accessory Uses) 
 
Structural Alteration:    Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as the bearing walls, beams, or girders, or any change in the dimension or configuration of the roof or exterior walls.  Also, see Alteration/Altered. 
 
Structure, Principal:  A building in which is conducted, or in which is intended to be conducted, the main or principal use of the lot on which it is located.  There shall be internal access to all interior portions of a single family detached dwelling unit.  An outlying structure shall be considered an accessory building unless connected to the principal building by fully enclosed living space.  (See Figure 1) 
 
Subdivision:  Any division or re-division of a tract, parcel, or lot of land into two (2) or more parts by means of  platting of boundaries in accordance with the City of Lincoln Subdivision Regulations.   
 
Telecommunications Facilities, Wireless:  Any and all buildings, structures, fixtures or other accessories (such as electrical boxes, equipment sheds, guy wires, etc.)  Installed, used or intended for use in conjunction with any of the following:   
 
A.  Cellular Communications facilities – low power transmitters used to transmit signals in a cell of cellular radio-telephone services (cellular phones), personal communications services (PCS), enhanced specialized mobile radios (ESMR), trunk mobile cellular radios, paging services and similar cellular-based communications to the general public.   
 
B.  Commercial Satellite facilities – satellite earth stations which are greater than two (2) meters in diameter, and are used to send and/or receive satellite signals and similar communications.   
 
C.  Microwave Relay facilities (Repeater) – used to transmit radio signals between two or more fixed points by microwave antennas and similar transmission services. 
 
Telecommunications Tower:  Any ground-mounted structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more Communications Antennas.  Communications Towers shall include: 
 
A.  Monopole Towers – cylindrical self-supporting towers constructed as a single spire.   
 
B.  Self-Supporting or Lattice Towers – self-supporting towers with multiple sides of open-frame supports.   
 
C.  Guyed Towers – towers anchored with guy wires.   
 
D.  Camouflaged Towers – self-supporting towers concealed such that they blend with their surroundings.  Such towers may be constructed to resemble objects, such as a tree or a street light, or may be concealed within another structure, such as a clock tower, church steeple or lamp post.    
 
Temporary Use:  See Use, Temporary.   
 
Town House:  A single residential unit sharing a common wall with at least one other unit in a structure consisting of not less than three (3) or more than six (6) dwelling units and having no other dwelling unit directly above or below.  Such units shall be developed under Performance Residential standards set forth in Section 603. 
 
Twin House:  Residential dwelling units sharing a common side wall with one (1) other unit, and located in a structure containing no more than two (2) units.  Such units shall be developed under Performance Residential standards set forth in Section 603.   
 
Travel Trailer:  A vehicular portable structure designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation use. For purposes of these regulations, the term includes pick-up campers, camping trailers, pop-up-trailers, and motorized home living facilities constructed as integral parts of self-propelled vehicles.   See Also Recreational Vehicle 
 
Traditional Downtown Development:  A development type, typically found in city centers and historic downtowns, characterized by structures built at, or very close to, the street and covering the lot from side lot line to side lot line.  Structures may have adjoining walls with the buildings on neighboring lots or have narrow alleys along one or more property lines. 
 
Understory Tree:  For the purpose of meeting landscape planting requirements under this Ordinance, any species listed in Table 5-1 as either a deciduous or evergreen understory tree. 
 
Use:  The purpose or activity for which land or any building thereon is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained. 
 
Use, Accessory:  An accessory use is one which: (1) is subordinate to and serves a principal structure or a principal use, (2) is subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principal structure or use served, (3) is located on the same development site as the principal structure or use served, and (4) is customarily incidental to the principal structure or use.  See Section 608; See also Accessory Structures/Accessory Uses above.  
 
Use, Principal:  The specific primary purpose for which land is used.   
 
Use, Temporary:  A temporary use is one established for a fixed period of time with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of such time.  Such uses do not involve the construction or alteration of any permanent structure.   
 
Variance:  Permission to depart from the literal requirements of this Ordinance granted pursuant to Section 1008.   
 
Warehouse:  A building intended for the storage, wholesale, and distribution of manufactured products supplies, and equipment. 
 
Wetland:  An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that, under normal circumstances, does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.  (Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas).   
 
Wine:  All beverages made from the fermentation of fruits, berries, or grapes, with or without added spirits, and produced in accordance with the laws and regulations of the United States containing not more than 24 percent alcohol by volume, and shall include all sparkling wines, carbonated wines, special natural wines, rectified wines, vermouths, vinous beverages, vinous liquors and like products.  Fortified Wine – Any wine containing more than 14.9 percent alcohol by volume, but not more than 24 percent.  Table Wine – Any wine containing not more than 14.9 percent alcohol by volume.   
 
Wireless Communications Service Provider:  Any private company, corporation or similar such entity providing two-way interactive communications services to the general public by way of Cellular Communications facilities. 
 
Woodland:  An area of natural vegetation or planted material, at least 50 feet in depth, covering one (1) acre or more and consisting substantially of canopy trees. 
 
Yard:  The open space between a lot line and building line.  
 
Yard, Front:  A yard extending the full width of the front of a lot between the front (street) right-of-way line and the front building line.  (See Figure 6) 
 
Yard, Rear:  A yard extending the full width of the lot in the area between the rear lot line and the rear building line.  (See Figure 6) 
 
Yard, Side:  The yard extending along a side lot line, from the front yard to the rear yard, between the side building line and a side lot line.  In the case of corner lots, the yard along all established or future street lines shall be termed a front yard and shall meet requirements herein for such.  (See Figure 6) 
 
Zoning Certificate:  A permit, license, certificate of occupancy or other form of approval issued or signed by Planning & Development Services or his/her designee after all Zoning Ordinance requirements, as stipulated in Section 904, have been met, which permits a requested use at a specific location. 


ARTICLE III. ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS  
 
 
Section 300. Establishment of Zoning Districts.  
 
The City of Lincoln, Alabama is hereby divided into zoning districts of such number and character as are necessary to achieve compatibility of uses within each district, to implement the Official Zoning Map of Lincoln, and to serve the other purposes of this Ordinance, which are detailed in Article I. 
 
 
Section 301. Zoning Districts.  
 
For the purpose of this Ordinance, all land and water areas in Lincoln are hereby divided into fourteen (14) “General” zoning districts, as follows:   
 
Residential Estate 
 RE-1, RE-2 
 
Residential “Single Family”  
 RS-1, RS-2 
 
Residential High Density 
 RHD 
 
Manufactured Housing 
 MH 
 
Office-Institutional: 
 O-I 
 
Neighborhood Business  
 NB 
 
General Business 
 GB 
 
Highway Commercial 
 HC 
 
Leisure Commercial 
 LC 
 
Downtown Historic 
 DH 
 
Manufacturing, Light 
 M-1 
 
Manufacturing, Heavy 
 M-2 
 
 
Additionally two Reserved Districts have been established, as follows: 
 
 
Flood Protection Areas 
 FP, FW 
 
Special District 
 SD 
 

 
   
 
 
 
Section 302. Map of Zoning Districts.  
 
Zoning districts established by this Ordinance are bounded and defined as shown on the Official Zoning Map of Lincoln, which, together with all explanatory materials contained thereon, is hereby made a part of this Ordinance. 
 
 
Section 303. Interpretation of District Boundaries.  
 
In the event of uncertainty with regard to their location, it is the duty of the Planning & Development Services, or his/her designee, to interpret the location of the zoning district boundaries.  Where a district boundary line divides a lot held in single and separate ownership at the effective date of this ordinance, the Planning Commission shall determine, based on findings of fact from the Planning & Development Services, the disposition of said boundary line.   
 
The following rules shall be used to determine the precise location of any zone boundary shown on the Official Zoning Map of Lincoln: 
 
303.01. Boundaries shown as following, or approximately following, the limits of any municipal corporation shall be construed as following such limits.  
 
303.02. Boundaries shown as following, or approximately following, streets shall be construed to follow the centerlines of such streets.  
 
303.03. Boundary lines which follow, or approximately follow, platted lot lines or other property lines as shown on the Lincoln Tax Maps shall be construed as following such lines. 
 
303.04. Boundaries shown as following, or approximately following, section lines, half-section lines, or quarter-section lines shall be construed as following such lines.  
 
303.05. Boundaries shown as following, or approximately following, railroad lines shall be construed to lie midway between the main tracks of such railroad lines. 
 
303.06. Boundaries shown as following, or approximately following, shorelines of any lakes shall be construed to follow the mean high waterlines of such lakes, and, in the event of change in the mean high waterline, shall be construed as moving with the actual mean high waterline. 
 
303.07. Boundaries shown as following, or approximately following, the centerlines of streams, rivers, or other continuously flowing water courses shall be construed as following the channel centerline of such water courses taken at mean low water. In the event of a natural change in the location of such streams, rivers, or other watercourses, the zone boundary shall be construed as moving with the channel centerline.  
 
303.08. Boundaries shown as separated from, and parallel or approximately parallel to, any of the features listed in paragraphs 303.01 through 303.07 above shall be construed to be parallel to, and at such distances from, such features as are shown on the map. 
 
 
Section 304.  Maintenance of Official Copy of Zoning Map. 
 
At least one official copy of the zoning map shall be maintained in the office of the Planning & Development Services, upon which shall be recorded, after the passage thereof, every amendment to this ordinance which effects a change in any zoning district boundary.  Such official copy of the zoning map shall be attested by the City Clerk, and shall be available at all times for inspection by the general public. 
 
The Planning & Development Services may distribute copies of the zoning map to the general public and other officials, for reference purposes.  However, the official copy of the zoning map maintained in the office of the Planning & Development Services, plus official records of the City Clerk regarding actions of the City Council to amend district boundaries shall constitute the only official description of the location of zoning district boundaries, and persons having recourse to this ordinance for any purpose are hereby so notified. 
 
 
Section 305. Statement of Purpose and Intent of Zoning Districts. 
The following sections specify the purpose and intent of the zoning districts established by this Ordinance. 
 
305.01. Residential Estate Districts (RE-1 & RE-2). The intent and purpose of these districts is to provide for and protect the quiet, rural character of very low density, single family residential development, as well as agricultural and forestry uses and the accessory uses normally compatible with such uses.  The standards developed for these areas are designed to permit development compatible with the preservation of their rural character while not permanently foreclosing future development.  This zoning district, as the lowest intensity district, will be utilized as the default zone for all annexed property until such time as it is rezoned to a more appropriate district. 
 
305.02. Residential Single Family Districts (RS-1 & RS-2). These districts are intended to provide for, and protect, the quiet and peaceful character of residential development and accessory uses normally necessary and compatible with such development.  Regulations that apply within these districts are designed to encourage the formation and continuance of a stable, healthy environment for residential dwellings and to discourage any encroachment by commercial, industrial or other uses capable of adversely affecting the residential character of the district. 
Residential Single Family Districts are also intended to provide for future development of land where a residential district is deemed the most appropriate zoning classification, and a 
preliminary or final plat for development of the land has been approved by the Planning Commission.  
 
305.03. Residential High Density District (RHD).  This district is intended to provide for medium and high density residential areas permitting progressively higher population densities, characterized by duplex, twin house, patio & garden homes, townhouses, apartments and other multiple-family structures. Certain structures and uses required to serve governmental, educational, religious, noncommercial recreation, and other needs of such areas may be permitted as outright or as conditional uses within such districts, subject to restrictions and requirements intended to preserve and protect the residential character of the districts. 
 
305.04. Manufactured Housing District (MH).  This district is intended to provide for the development of new and maintenance of existing manufactured home parks along with their associated accessory uses and amenities.  New and redeveloped manufactured home parks shall be developed in accordance with the standards set out in Section 604; existing manufactured home parks will be treated as nonconforming uses unless redeveloped to meet the standards of Section 604.  Any expansion of an existing manufactured home park must also comply with Section 604. 
 
305.05. Office-Institutional District (O-I).  This district is intended to provide areas for the development of public, semi-public and private offices; schools, healthcare and child care facilities; places of worship and special residential development.  Such uses are supportive of the surrounding residential community and should gain access via an arterial or major collector road. 
 
305.06. Neighborhood Business District (NB).  This district is intended for small sites in or near residential neighborhoods. The zone encourages the provision of small scale retail and service uses for nearby residential areas. Some uses which are not retail or service in nature are also allowed so a variety of uses may locate in existing buildings. Uses are restricted in size to promote a local orientation and to limit adverse impacts on nearby residential areas. Development is intended to be pedestrian-oriented and compatible with the scale of surrounding residential areas. Parking areas are restricted, since their appearance is generally out of character with the surrounding residential development and the desired orientation of the uses. 
 
305.07. General Business District (GB):  This district is intended to be located along the arterial and collector roadways in Lincoln which serve a lower traffic volume and have not been developed to a point to accommodate the heavier uses allowed in the Highway Commercial District.  Uses in this district shall depend chiefly on local traffic rather than the larger trade areas outside Lincoln.  This district may also serve as an extension of established commercial areas and act as a buffer between more intense commercial uses and residential areas.  Such districts shall generally be located along major arterials and/or collector roadways radiating out from the City Center.  Commercial uses developed or expanded after 
the adoption of this Ordinance shall be required to provide landscaping and buffer areas to mitigate the impact of the use on surrounding areas and street views.   
 
305.08. Highway Commercial District (HC). This district is intended to be located along the arterial roadways in Lincoln which serve higher traffic volumes and are intended for the higher intensity development.  Uses in this district are intended to provide goods and services to the City as well as serving the larger trade area of Lincoln.  Uses permitted outright or conditionally in this district may include shopping centers, restaurants, and large commercial retail establishments.  Because these uses are subject to the public view and are often located at or near City gateways, which is a matter of concern to the entire City, they should provide adequate parking, controlled traffic movement, suitable landscaping and protection for abutting residential areas from the traffic and visual impacts associate with these types of commercial activities.  All storage and display shall occur inside a fully enclosed building and/or outdoors behind the front building line.  The Planning Commission may require that outdoor storage and display of equipment or merchandise, be surrounded by an opaque screen, the height and location of which shall be determined by the Commission.  Vehicular display areas are exempt from this standard.   
 
305.09. Leisure Commercial District (LC).  This district is specifically intended to accommodate commercial leisure activities and their amenities.  Uses found in this district may include, but are not limited to, amusement parks, indoor firing ranges, recreational vehicle parks, outdoor theaters, water parks and other leisure commercial activities.  Such uses should gain access via an arterial or major collector road, and should provide adequate parking, controlled traffic movement, suitable landscaping and protection for abutting residential areas from the traffic and visual impacts associate with these types of commercial activities.   
 
305.10. Downtown & Historic District (DH).  The purpose and intent of the Downtown & Historic District is to promote the preservation of buildings, structures and sites of historic and architectural value within the city.  Development and redevelopment within this district should reflect the historic character and scale of existing development.  Uses within this district will include both commercial and residential of appropriate type and design to be compatible with existing uses and may be found as individual freestanding, and/or mix used development types.  Design and function will play a major role in the review and approval of uses in this district.   
 
305.11. Manufacturing Districts (M-1 & M-2). These districts are intended to accommodate commercial areas that must be segregated, because of negative impacts that cannot be made compatible with other uses through the application of performance standards. The creation of these separate districts for manufacturing/industrial uses recognizes not only nuisances, but also infrastructure and operational incompatibilities between their permitted uses and those of other districts. Accordingly, the standards for these districts are designed to accommodate intensive industrial uses that generate nuisances, which either cannot be handled by technology or which are nearly impossible to police. Location criteria for these districts focus on transportation, requiring that sites have access to a railroad, an airport or a major highway.  
 
305.12. Special District.  Special districts are hereby authorized for the purpose of providing optional methods of land development, which encourages imaginative solutions to environmental design problems and provide for a mixture of uses and density of uses with associated open space and amenities.  Areas so established shall be characterized by a unified building and site development program providing for coordinated open space and architectural treatment. The special districts authorized by this Article are also intended to provide means for the establishment of uses, which are generally considered to be incompatible with most other land usage.  
 
305.13. Flood Protection Areas.  It is the intent of the flood protection area to provide protection in the floodway and flood fringe from the hazards and losses caused by flooding to residences, businesses, industries and public uses and to protect the natural flood environments that might be increased or significantly altered by improper use or development. 
 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Ordinance.  
 
The degree of flood protection required by this Ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations.  Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions.  Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.  This Ordinance does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard, or uses permitted within such areas, will be free from flooding or flood damages.  This Ordinance shall not create liability on the part of Lincoln or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made there under.   
 
 
 


ARTICLE IV.     GENERAL REGULATIONS  
   
 
Section 400.  Introduction.   
 
The purpose of the regulations contained in this Article is to allow maximum utilization of land while insuring against detrimental impacts on the environment, neighboring properties, and the public interest.  This insurance is provided by separating the incorporated area of the City of Lincoln into various zoning districts and permitting specified land uses within each, provided that a use meets all the additional criteria specified in this Ordinance.  This regulatory approach has been termed “performance zoning,” because it permits a use to be developed on a particular parcel only if that use meets “performance” standards, which have been enacted to insure against the use causing, or having the potential to cause, the negative impacts mentioned above.   
 
The format of the regulations in this Ordinance, and particularly in this Article, differs somewhat from that of traditional zoning ordinances, because performance zoning requires that consideration be given to site parcel characteristics and the range of impacts that any land use may have. 
 
 
Section 401.  Use Regulations.   
 
Section 402 specifies which uses are permitted in each zoning district and defines the use categories used in this Ordinance.  The purpose of this Section is to indicate which land uses may locate in each zoning district and which uses may not locate therein.  A further distinction is made between uses that may locate in a given district only upon obtaining a conditional use permit to do so.  The uses generally described in Section 402 are specifically listed in Sections 404 through 408.   
 
 
Section 402.  Uses Permitted by Right, Uses Permitted Conditionally and Uses Not Permitted. 
 
Except as otherwise provided by law or in this Ordinance, no building, structure, or land shall be used or occupied except in the zoning districts indicated and for the purposes permitted in this Section.  The general use categories specified by Table 4-1 are defined in Sections 404 through 408.   
 
Uses permitted by right or as a conditional use shall be subject, in addition to use regulations contained in this Ordinance, to all performance criteria and other regulations governing yards, lot size, lot width, building area, easements, provisions of off-street parking and loading, and to such other provisions as are specified in other Articles herein.  In particular, the laws of the State of Alabama and the regulations of the Talladega County Department of Health regarding water supply and waste disposal shall be adhered to.  Further, no permits shall be issued until approval is obtained from the Talladega County Department of Health for water supply and sewage disposal, unless the premises are served by public water and/or sewage facilities.     
 
  
 
All permitted uses and uses requiring conditional use approval pursuant to Section 903 are listed in Table 4-1.  In addition, the table notes uses for which special development standards apply, regardless of whether such uses are designated as permitted or conditional.  Special development standards are listed in Section 409. 
 
A use listed in Table 4-1 in any district denoted by the letter “P” is a use permitted by right, provided that all other requirements of State law and this Ordinance have been met and provided that a zoning certificate has been issued in accordance with Section 904.  A use listed in Table 4-1 denoted by the letter “C”, may be permitted as a Conditional Use, provided that the requirements of Article IX have been met.   
 
In addition to Table 4-1, the following regulations regarding permitted uses are established:   
 
A.  Existing garage apartments in the Residential (R), Office-Institutional (O-I), and Downtown Historic (DH) Districts are permitted uses and may be improved within the existing structure, but there shall be no increase in the number or size of dwelling units in the structure.  No new garage apartments are permitted in any district in the City.  When existing garage apartments are improved, off-street, paved parking spaces shall be provided and any required bufferyards shall be installed.  
 
B.  Uses not listed in Table 4-1 or Section 404 are not permitted in any district except pursuant to Article X, which provides for interpretation of uses, or Article VIII, which provides for nonconformities.   
 
C.  Although a use may be indicated as permitted or conditionally permitted in a particular 
district, it does not follow that such a use is permitted or permissible on every parcel in such district.  No use is permitted or permissible on a parcel unless it can be located thereon in full compliance with all of the standards this Ordinance and any other regulations applicable to the specific use and parcel in question. 
 
 
PLEASE SEE TABLE 4-1 
INSERT TABLE 4-1 HERE (1 of 4 PAGES) 
   
PLEASE SEE TABLE 4-1 
INSERT TABLE 4-1 HERE (2 of 4 PAGES) 
 
PLEASE SEE TABLE 4-1 
INSERT TABLE 4-1 HERE (3 of 4 PAGES) 
 
PLEASE SEE TABLE 4-1 
INSERT TABLE 4-1 HERE (4 of 4 PAGES) 
 
 Section 403.  Use Categories Defined.   
 
The categories of uses utilized by this Ordinance are defined in Sections 404 through 408.  The uses not enumerated in these sections are not necessarily excluded.  Article X empowers Planning & Development Services to make interpretations of use. 
 
 
Section 404.  Agricultural Uses.   
 
404.01.  Agriculture.  Agricultural uses include farms (and farm residences); fish or poultry hatcheries; fur-bearing animal ranches; orchards; raising of livestock, horses, or poultry; truck farming; and all other agricultural uses.  It does not include uses that may be accessory to agriculture, such as retail stores, nor does it include industries or businesses that support or are supported by agriculture.     
 
404.02.  Forestry.  This use includes commercial logging and pulping operations, clearing or destruction of forested or woodland areas, selective cutting or clearing for commercial or other purposes, clearing for agriculture or other prospective land uses, and clearing of vegetation in reserved open space or resource protection areas.  This does not include authorized clearing in accordance with plans approved pursuant to this Ordinance, removal of sick or dead trees, or removal of trees on non-contiguous lots of one (1) acre or less. 
   
 
Section 405.  Residential Uses.   
 
405.01.  Conventional residential.  Conventional residential uses consist of all single-family detached dwelling units.  All conventional residential development approved after enactment of this Ordinance shall conform to the requirements of Section 603.01.   
 
405.02.  Alternative residential.  Alternative residential uses consist of all residential developments, including manufactured home parks approved after enactment of this Ordinance, except those included within the conventional residential use category.  This use category permits the residential builder considerable freedom by allowing varied types of dwellings, lot sizes, and design.  It also insures adequate open space in each development. 
 
 
Section 406.  Recreational, Institutional, and Special Residential Uses.  
 
406.01.  Outdoor recreational.  Outdoor recreational uses include arboretums; areas for cycling, hiking, and jogging; commercial stables; golf courses; nature areas; parks (private); picnic areas; play fields; playgrounds; outdoor swimming pools; tennis courts; wildlife sanctuaries; and all other outdoor recreational uses.  Specifically excluded are outdoor movie theaters, miniature golf courses, and golf driving ranges.  This use is basically an open-space use.  



 
406.02.   Indoor recreational.  Indoor recreational uses include aquariums, community or recreation centers; gymnasiums; indoor skating rinks (ice or roller); arcades or billiard parlors; indoor swimming pools; tennis, racquetball and handball courts. 



 
406.03.   Institutional and Special Residential Uses.  These uses include boarding houses; day or youth camps; cemeteries; places of worship; convents or monasteries; dormitories; day care centers; group child care homes; day or nursery schools; group homes; private libraries or museums; nursing homes; or private schools; schools or facilities for the physically or mentally handicapped and all other institutional and special residential uses.   



 
These uses are all supportive of the residential community.  They provide indoor space for recreation, hobbies, meetings, education, and worship, as well as cultural facilities, group quarters for religious groups and the infirm or elderly.  Some uses may be operated for private profit.   
 
 
Section 407.  Commercial Uses. 
 
407.01. Office.  Office uses include governmental offices, business or professional offices, medical offices or clinics, and all other office uses. 
 
407.02. Commercial and entertainment.  This use category includes general retail commercial uses, primarily occurring indoors and serving a wide range of customers and requiring high-visibility locations.  These uses include veterinary offices with indoor kennels; auto parts/accessory stores (no repairs); auto detailing; banks and other financial institutions (without drive through windows); blueprint and copy stores; bowling alleys; commercial or trade schools (e.g., dance studios, schools for martial arts); currency exchanges; funeral homes and mortuaries; grocery stores and supermarkets (excluding convenience stores, e.g., “7-Eleven” stores); ice cream stores or stands; laundries and/or dry cleaners; light mechanical repair stores (e.g., watch, camera, bicycle, TV); stores selling liquor, or beer (in sealed containers, not for consumption on premises); lodges for fraternal orders; package stores; taverns, lounges and private clubs; pharmacies, restaurants  (standard sit-down, not fast food); restaurant-lounges; restaurant pubs; retail sales or stores; service businesses or stores (e.g., catering, duplicating, photography, shoe repair, tailoring, travel agency, upholstering); shopping centers; theaters and auditoriums (indoor); upholstery stores; building materials sales (excluding asphalt or concrete mixing) with no outdoor storage; carpet and rug cleaning plants; extermination shops; equipment rentals (no outdoor display); automated free-standing walk-up facilities; barbershops and beauty shops; hotels and motels; and all other commercial and entertainment uses.   
 
407.03. Commercial recreational use.  These uses include amusement parks, drive-in theaters, fairgrounds, golf driving ranges (including miniature golf), outdoor theaters (or amphitheaters), race tracks  (e.g., auto, dog, go-kart, harness, horse, motorcycle), archery ranges, sport arenas, stadiums, and all other commercial recreation uses.  This group includes recreational uses that are greater nuisances than conventional outdoor recreational activities, because of their size and scale, traffic volumes, noise, light, or physical hazards such as flying objects or use of weapons.   
 
407.04. Recreational rental dwelling uses.  These uses include travel trailer parks, recreational vehicle parks, camps or campgrounds with overnight camping or vacation cottages, rental cabins, vacation cottages, and all other recreational rental uses.  These uses are all short-term rental facilities oriented toward leisure activities for the vacationer or organized activities such as summer camps.   
 
407.05. Road service.  This use category includes commercial uses having a high degree of customer turnover, outdoor activity or outside storage of merchandise.  These uses include boat rental and/or storage facilities; body shops; convenience stores (e.g., “7-Eleven” stores); gasoline service stations; hotels or motels; retail sales with small engine repair as an accessory use, such as lawn mower stores; fast-food restaurants and any bank with drive through windows; parking garages/lots; vehicle rentals; vehicle repair (body) shops; vehicle sales, supplies, and service (new or used auto, boat, bus, equipment, motorcycle, truck); and all other road services.   
 
407.06. Public service.  These uses include hospitals, emergency services (e.g., ambulance, fire, police, rescue), service buildings or garages, utility or broadcasting stations or towers, utility service yards or garages, public schools, public libraries/museums/art centers, public parks, public animal shelters, and all other public utility and public service uses.   
 
407.07. Agricultural support.  These uses include farm equipment sales and repair, farm produce sales and supply (feed, grain, fertilizer), farm product processing (cider mill, dairies, poultry, or meat processing), and all other agricultural support uses.   
 
407.08. Nurseries.  This category includes nurseries with or without retail sales or greenhouses.  A nursery is basically an open-space use, which generates little traffic and has few nuisances, such as late hours or customer or truck noise, associated with it.  Nurseries are distinguished from more intensive garden center uses.   
 
407.09. Regional shopping center.  This category includes commercial land development consisting of 500,000 or more square feet of gross floor area.   
 
407.10. Commercial support.  This use category includes uses, which support the City’s retail economy by providing merchandise distribution, storage, and repair services.  These uses include beverage distributors; blacksmith shops; bulk materials or machinery storage (fully enclosed); large equipment rental/sales/service; contractors’ offices and equipment storage yards; dry cleaning and laundry plants serving more than one (1) outlet; fuel, oil, ice, coal, and wood sales; furniture cleaning plants; furniture refinishing shops; manufacturing (including the production, processing, cleaning, testing, and distribution of materials, goods, foodstuffs, and products in plants with less than 30,000 square feet of floor area or fewer than 100 employees on every shift); mirror supply and refinishing shops; monument works; ornamental iron workshops; printing plants; publishing plants; trade shops (including cabinet, carpentry, planing, plumbing, refinishing, and paneling); small engine repair as a principal use; veterinary offices with open or partially enclosed runs, yards, pens; and/or kennels; wholesale business and storage; warehouses, office-warehouse, and mini-warehouses; and all other commercial support uses.   
 
407.11. Neighborhood Shopping Center.  A commercial development site containing one or more commercial buildings, together with all required parking, landscaping, buffering, signs, drainage facilities, and other design features to accommodate the uses permitted on the site.  The purpose of the neighborhood shopping center is to serve the limited commercial needs of nearby residential development.  It is not intended to provide commercial services to customers from other areas of the City.   
 
Permitted uses shall include branch banks; small garden supply stores; grocery stores or supermarkets; ice cream stores; laundries and/or dry cleaners; light mechanical repairs such as cameras, watches, or televisions; barber or beauty shops; standard sit-down restaurants (no fast food establishments); gasoline service stations; and similar retail stores and service businesses. 
 
 
Section 408.  Industrial Uses. 
 
408.01. Industry.  This use category includes asphalt or concrete mixing plants; bulk material or machinery storage (unenclosed); fuel generation plants; grain elevators; meat packing plants or slaughterhouses; recycling facilities; truck, motor, or rail terminals; dyeing plants; food processing and packing plants; lumber yards; pilot plants; scientific (e.g., research, testing, or experimental) laboratories; also, those uses listed above as commercial support, any industrial use having 30,000 or more square feet of floor area or having 100 or more employees on any shift, and all other industrial uses.   
 
This group contains uses that have severe potential for negative impact on any uses that would locate relatively close to them.   This group differs from commercial support uses in that it includes uses that require enclosed structures, which are large, tall, and unsightly, such as concrete batching plants.  These uses also have severe potential for generation of odor and may involve large amounts of exterior storage; because of their scale, they are likely to have a regional impact.   
 
408.02. Extraction and junkyard uses.  This category includes junk, scrap, or salvage yards and all extraction uses.  These uses create major disruptions to the area’s environment, even when carefully regulated.  Dust, dirt, noise, and unsightly conditions can be anticipated.  None of these uses are an acceptable neighbor in an urban environment.   
 
408.03. Airports, Landing Strips and Heliports.  This category includes any facility used for take-off, landing, storage, maintenance, and/or repair of aircraft.  It also includes aviation-related activities, such as radar and communications facilities, flight schools, and cargo loading and storage areas. 
 
 
409. Special Development Standards.   
 
Certain uses have unique characteristics that require the imposition of development standards beyond those minimum standards which may pertain to the general group of uses encompassing the use.  These uses are listed below, together with the specific standards that apply to the 
development and use of land for the specified activity.  These standards shall be met in addition to all other standards of this Ordinance, unless specifically exempted.   
 
 
A.  Agricultural Uses.   
 
Forestry: 
 
1.  Subject property shall not be located within the area bounded by Spring Road/Colvin Road/Drew Avenue/Magnolia Street on the north, I-20 on the south, AL-77 on the east and the Coosa River on the west. 
 
2.  Minimum lot size shall be 25 acres. 
 
3.  No trees shall be harvested within 15 feet of the perimeter of the site.    
 
4.  Harvesting activities shall conform to the Best Management Practices of the Alabama Forestry Commission.   
 
B.      Conventional Subdivision.  See Section 603.01.   
 
Bed & Breakfast Inn: 
 
1. Only an existing dwelling unit that meets the following standards may be used as a bed and breakfast establishment.   


 
2. The owner of the establishment must reside on the premises.   


 
3. The residence designated as a bed and breakfast establishment cannot contain more than eight (8) guest rooms.   


 
4. All guest rooms must be contained within the principal dwelling unit; except that when a bed and breakfast use is established in an historic district and the premises include accessory structure such as a carriage house, such accessory buildings may contain guest rooms provided that the total of rooms in the accessory and the main buildings does not exceed eight guest rooms.   


 
5. Breakfast must be provided daily on the premises for the guests.   


 
6. The owner of the establishment must obtain a business license from the City of Lincoln Revenue Department.   


 
7. A sign, not to exceed six (6) square feet, shall be permitted in a location to be determined by the Planning & Development Services Department.  Such sign may be illuminated to an intensity not to exceed one (1) foot candle with lights that are 


focused on the sign in such a way that they do not create any glare to the surrounding area.   


 
8. In addition to the off-street parking required by the dwelling unit, one parking space shall be required for each guest room.  This additional parking does not have to be paved but shall have a surface that is approved by the Planning & Development Services Department. 


 
9. In the absence of the resident owner(s) a resident manager(s) may be permitted to operate the inn.  Such arrangement shall be limited to a maximum of three (3) months in any given calendar year.   


 
C.      Alternative Residential Development.  See Section 603.02.   
 
D.      Manufactured Housing.  See Section 604.   
 
E.       Institutional, & Special Residential Uses.   
 
1.  All new institutional uses must front on a road with a functional classification of Collector or Arterial, as designated on the Major Street Classification Map of the Lincoln Comprehensive Plan. 
 
2.  Place of Worship: 
 
a)  Any new principal structure shall be set back no less than 50 feet from any   adjoining property under different ownership. 
 
b)  Related accessory uses, such as student centers, day care centers, dormitories, schools, boarding houses, and recreation centers, shall be prohibited in Residential (R) Districts. 
 
c) For existing places of worship in Residential (R) districts, uses are limited to sanctuaries, educational buildings (Sunday school classrooms) and fellowship halls.  The addition of such uses shall require the installation of all required bufferyards and landscaping, as well as compliance with all other applicable regulations.   


 
d) All required parking shall be located on the development site, and not separated from the site of the principle structure by any public right-of-way.  


 
3. Group Homes: 


 
Group Homes proposed to be located in residential zoning districts shall provide documentation of the following criteria to the Department of Planning & Inspections prior to being issues a business license in the City of Lincoln: 
 
a) An approved license or authorization from the State of Alabama, or other authorizing agency, to operate a group home facility must be presented along with an application for a Lincoln business license. 



 
b) No more than three (3) unrelated persons may reside in the home; however, non-resident caretakers will be permitted. 



 
c) A parking plan showing sufficient off-street parking to accommodate residents and caregivers must be provided and approved by Planning & Development Services.  A garage may be counted toward off-street parking. 



 
d) When the applicant for a group home use is not the owner of the subject property, a letter from the property owner approving the operation of a group home on their property shall be provided. 



 
e) Waivers, exceptions or modifications of these standards may be requested through a request to the Board of Zoning Adjustment.  



 
F.       Commercial and Entertainment Uses.   
 
1.  Auto accessory store:  no repair work to be done on premises. 
 
2.  Building material sales/home improvement centers:  all building materials shall be kept within an enclosed structure or completely surrounded by a wood stockade or other opaque fence at least six (6) feet in height. 
 
3.  Restaurant-pub and restaurant-lounge: 
 
a)  Must meet licensing requirements of the Municipal Code of Lincoln, Alabama. 
 
b)  Shall comply with all applicable regulations of the State of Alabama. 
 
4.  Veterinary office/kennel:  no outdoor pens, runs or cages shall be permitted.  Outdoor exercise areas will be allowed and shall be designated as such on the site plan.  
 
 
G.  Road Service Uses.  Any outside display of vehicles, equipment or other merchandise for sale, lease or storage shall be on a paved surface.  No display of merchandise shall be allowed on the right-of-way or in any required bufferyard.   
 
1.  Auto repair, paint/body work: 
 
a)  Vehicles undergoing repair, painting or bodywork shall remain inside an enclosed structure at all times. 
 
b)  Unlicensed, untitled vehicles shall not be permitted on the site at any time.  No body or chassis shall be stored on the site at any time. 
 
c)  All parts, including body parts, shall be stored within a completely enclosed structure.   
 
2.  Flea Market: 
 
a)  Flea markets shall be permitted only on property fronting on an arterial road, as designated in Appendix A with all major points of ingress/egress connecting to that road. 
 
b)  At least one enclosed building of 300 square feet or more in size shall be constructed on the property. 
 
c)  Minimum lot size shall be five (5) acres, with a minimum width of 200 feet and a minimum depth of 300 feet. 
 
d)  No merchandise shall be sold or displayed less than 100 feet from adjoining residential property or 50 feet from non-residential property. 
 
e)  Parking shall be provided at the rate of one (1) space per 50 square feet of sales area, as designated on an approved site plan.  Parking areas shall have a smooth, stabilized and dustless surface; provided that no more than 50 percent of the required parking spaces may be grass or other suitable material in overflow and remote locations.  Unpaved spaces and driving aisles shall be organized for efficient traffic flow, using tire stops, railroad ties, or other objects approved by the City Engineer.  Parking spaces within 150 feet of any structure on the development site shall be paved with asphalt, concrete or other rigid paving material. 
 
f)  A bufferyard shall be provided along all property lines.  General and parking lot landscaping shall be required. 
 
3.  Gasoline and/or auto service station: 
 
a)  Site.  The minimum frontage on an arterial street shall be 150 feet.  
 
b) Service Area.  Pits, hoists, and all lubricating, washing, and repair equipment and workspace shall be enclosed within a building. 
 
c) Bulk Storage.  Liquid petroleum fuels shall be stored in underground tanks. 
 
d) Structures.  Structures shall conform to the following standards: 
 
1. Vehicular canopy structures shall abide by applicable building setbacks. Accordingly, the maximum height of all such structures shall be noted on the 
site plan.  The area under such canopies shall not count against the permissible Floor Area Ratio (FAR) allowed for such developments but shall count toward the allowable Impervious Surface Ratio (ISR)  
 
2.  Pump islands, underground fuel storage tanks, and above ground tanks for propane re-fueling or other gaseous fuels shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from any property line. 
 
4.  Hotel/motel:  Permitted only as a conditional use on property fronting on an arterial roadway, or on a collector road, as designated on the Major Street Classification Map of the Lincoln Comprehensive Plan. 
 
5.  Outdoor/Drive-in theatre:  Accessory uses permitted shall be limited to a refreshment stand or booth, a souvenir stand or booth, and/or a children’s playground, which are for the exclusive use of patrons of the drive-in theater.   
 
6.  Small Engine Repair:  Equipment under repair or not operational shall be screened from public view or stored indoors at all times. 
 
H.  Commercial Recreational Uses.   All commercial recreational uses shall be subject to the following requirements:   
 
1.  No commercial recreational use shall be located within 300 feet of existing residential development. 
 
2.  Minimum lot size shall be 40,000 square feet or as required in Table 4-3. 
 
3.  No building, trailer, vehicle, or mechanical equipment supporting the use shall be located within 50 feet of any property line. 
 
4.  For a golf driving range, the following standards shall be met: 
 
a)  The site plan required pursuant to Section 902 shall show the layout of the property and indicate the location of all driving ranges, putting greens, fences, and structures. 
 
b)  Accessory uses permitted shall be limited to a clubhouse, refreshment stands, maintenance shed, a miniature golf course, and a pro shop. 
 
I.  Recreational Rental Dwellings.                
 
1. Recreational Vehicle Park: As defined in Article II. 


 
2. Definitions: 

a. Accessory structure.  Any structural additional to the recreation vehicle or site, including awnings, cabanas, carports, garages, porches, storage cabinets, storage sheds, and similar appurtenant structures. 



b. Impervious Surface:  An impervious surface area includes any hard surface, man-made area that does not readily absorb or retain water, including but not limited to building roofs, parking and driveway areas, sidewalks and paved recreation facilities. 

c. Impervious Surface Ratio (I.S.R):  The total area of all impervious surfaces divided by the net area (excluding right-of-way) of the lot. 

d. Sewer Sample well/port/box:  Ground level access to the effluent flow through a sewer system for the purpose of testing for non-biodegradable contamination. 

e. Recreational Vehicle:  Any properly licensed vehicle that is intended for use on a temporary basis by campers, vacationers, or travelers which shall include travel trailers, fifth wheel campers, park models, camping trailers, and motor homes.  Under no circumstances may a vehicle of this nature be used as full-time living quarters. 

f. Recreational Vehicle Park:  Any lot, tract, or parcel of land upon which accommodation is provided for two or more recreational vehicles for use by the general public as temporary living quarters for purposes of recreation or vacation whether a charge is or is not made.  No recreational vehicle park shall be platted or otherwise divided by fee simple ownership.  All facilities and amenities, including roads, clubhouse or recreation facilities, and buffer yards are privately owned. 



 
3. Required Land Area:  To qualify as a Recreational Vehicle park the total park area must have a minimum of three (3) contiguous acres available land area.  Lakes, and ponds cannot be included in the required three (3) acre minimum. 


 
4. Vehicle Site Requirements: 


 
a. The maximum number of recreational vehicles sites shall be fifteen (15) per acre. 



 
b. The minimum vehicle site area shall be 1,200 square feet, with a minimum width of 20 feet and a minimum depth of 40 feet.  All RV sites and the boundaries of each site shall be permanently defined and shown on the site plan for the park. 



 
c. The minimum distance between recreational vehicles shall be 10 feet.  The minimum allowable distance between recreational vehicles shall, for the purpose of this section, be measured from and between the outermost structural parts, when fully extended, or attached accessory features. 



 
d. The minimum distance between a recreational vehicle and any permanent, conventional structure shall be 20 feet. 



 
e. Parks shall not exceed the following performance criteria: 



 
. Maximum Gross Density:  15 units/acre 

. Maximum I.S.R. for entire park: .25 

. Maximum I.S.R. for any RV site: .60* 

. Maximum building height:  35 feet 


(for conventional structures) 
 
*For purposes of site plan review it shall be assumed that impervious surfaces cover 60 percent of each designated RV site unless otherwise specified by the site plan. 
 
f. The removal of wheels, tongue and/or the installation of skirting materials around the base of a RV shall be prohibited.  A recreational vehicle shall not be permanently affixed to the ground or any structure. 



 
5.  Utilities: 


(Note:  The City of Lincoln subscribes to and enforces the International Building Code as adopted.) 
 
a. Water Supply:  Each site within an RV park shall be provided with a connection to the City water supply if available.  If City water supply is not available then a permit from Talladega County Health Department to install and maintain a well shall be obtained.  The City must approve all proposed water facility plans prior to construction.  The water distribution system shall be as follows: 



 
. The water supply system, fixtures and other equipment must be installed in accordance with applicable codes adopted by the City. 

. A commercial master water meter shall be installed to serve the RV Park.  Approval of the Planning Commission is required before any sub-metering or re-metering of RV site is allowed. The sole purpose of sub-metering or re-metering is for identification of excess water usage at a site and not for billing of individual sites. 

. A reduced pressure principal backflow preventer will be required to be placed at the property line on the discharge side of the master meter.  In addition, one (1) must be placed at each of the connections for each RV site and located on the left side of the site. 

. Water riser service branch lines shall be extend at least twelve (12) inches above ground elevation.  The branch line shall be at least ¾ inch. 

. Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of service lines, valves and riser pipes. 

. Surface drainage shall be diverted from the location of utility connections at each site. 

. The owner/operator shall have complete maintenance responsibility for the water system within the RV Park.  The City has not maintenance responsibility for service lines within the RV Park.  The responsibility of the City stops at the property line/water meter. 


 
b. Wastewater facilities:  Each site within the RV Park shall be provided with a connection for wastewater if available.  The City must approve all proposed wastewater plans prior to construction.  The wastewater distribution system shall be installed as follows: 



 
. The wastewater system and materials must be installed in accordance with applicable codes adopted by the City. 

. Sewage grinder pumps, basins, controls, etc. as needed by the design of the system and approved by the City shall be located on the RV Park property.  The system shall be owned, operated and maintained by the RV Park management. 

. Each site shall be provided with a four-inch diameter wastewater riser which shall extend above grade four (4) to six (6) inches.  The wastewater riser pipe shall be so located on each stand so that the wastewater connection to the RV drain outlet will approximate a vertical position.  Each inlet shall be provided with a gastight seal when connected to a recreational vehicle and have a gastight seal plug when not in service.  The plug shall be that of a spring loaded device. 

. The wastewater connection to each site shall consist of a single four-inch service line without any branch lines, fittings, or connections.  All joints shall be water tight. 

. Surface drainage shall be diverted away from the riser.  The rim of the riser pipe shall extend at least four (4) to six (6) inches above the ground elevation. 

. The owner/operator shall have complete maintenance responsibility for the wastewater system within the RV Park.  The responsibility of the City stops at the property line. 

. Each RV Park shall be required to install at the property line, where connection to the City sewer is made, a sample well site.  The sample well site shall be installed according to City Code. 

. All chemicals entering the City sewer shall be biodegradable. 

. A RV Septic Dumping station shall be located within the RV Park for use by the park tenants only. 


 
c. Electrical Service:  Each site within the RV Park shall be provided with electrical service.  All electrical service shall be underground and installed in accordance with the National Electrical Code.  The electrical service shall be installed as follows: 



 
. A master electric meter shall be installed to serve the RV Park.  Individual lot meters, sub-metering or re-metering of RV sites may be permitted if approved by the Planning Commission.  If approved, a master service disconnect for the RV Park must be provided. 

. If the RV Park is not entirely on a gravity-flow system then a single sewer system electrical disconnect shall be provided at an accessible location. 


. The location of all underground lines shall be clearly marked by surface signs at approved intervals. 

. Power supply to each site shall be a minimum of one 20-amp and one 50-amp power supply. 

. Outlets (receptacles or pressure connectors) shall be housed in an Underwriters’ laboratories, Inc., approved weather proof IN-USE outlet box. 

. A water tight seal shall be provided for underground conduit in floodplain installations and a riser extending a minimum of two (2) feet above the floodplain elevation shall be provided. Defer to Coosa Valley Electric. 


 
d. Sanitary facilities and bathhouses:  Unless the Master Plan specifically excludes all RVs not fully self-contained in regard to sanitary facilities (i.e. toilet, shower and washing); each RV Park shall provide the following sanitary facilities: 



 
. One (1) toilet or stool for the female sex for every twenty (20) sites or fraction thereof (minimum of one (1) is required) for the first one hundred and twenty (120) sites, and one per forty (40) sites thereafter. 

. One (1) toilet or stool and one (1) urinal stall for the mail sex for every twenty (20) sites or fraction thereof (minimum of one (1) is required) for the first one hundred and twenty (120) sites, and one per forty (40) sites thereafter. 

. One (1) washbasin shall be provided within the toilet room for every two (2) toilets or fraction thereof (a minimum of one (1) is required). 

. One (1) shower shall be provided for each sex for each twenty (20) sites or fraction thereof (minimum of one (1) is required for each sex) for the first one hundred and twenty (120) sites, and one (1) per forty (40) site thereafter. 

. All toilets and shower facilities shall be placed in properly constructed buildings and located not more than two hundred (200) feet from any recreational vehicle site.  This building will be located outside of any 100 year flood plan. 

. Buildings shall be well lit at all times, day or night, well ventilated with screened openings, and constructed of moisture proof materials to permit rapid and satisfactory cleaning, scouring and washing. 

. The floors shall be of concrete or other impervious material, elevated not less than four (4) inches above grade, and each room shall be provided with floor drains. 

. A slop sink or basin with water supply shall be in each restroom (male and female) and at least one (1) in the laundry facility, and shall be constructed in accordance with design, size and materials approved by the building official. 

. Toilet and bathing facilities shall be in separate rooms or partitioned apart in any manner as to provide privacy and promote cleanliness.  


Each toilet provided in a community toilet house shall be partitioned apart from any other toilet in the same room.  The floor surface around the commode shall not drain into the shower floor. 

. Bathhouses and/or other public restroom facilities, including all fixtures and improvements (i.e. toilets, showers, sinks, floors and walls) shall be of impervious commercial grade bath materials. 

. If no primitive sites are included in the RV Park Master Plan and primitive camping is not allowed, then site plan approval of an RV Park with no sanitary facilities and/or bathhouse must be granted conditional use approval. 


 
6. Drainage Requirements:  Surface drainage plans for the entire tract shall be reviewed by the City Engineer, who shall determine whether the proposed plan is compatible with the surrounding existing drainage pattern and any relevant drainage plan of the City, prior to issuance of building permits. 


 
7. RV, Trailer or Boat Storage Area.  Separate areas shall be allotted for the storage of all RVs trailers and boats, etc.  This storage area shall be in an area that is away from the actual camper sites that are serviced with utilities.  Storage space shall be provided at a minimum rate of thirty percent (30%) of the total number of RV rental spaces available in the park. 


 
8. Open Space.  An open space area shall be provide which is easily accessible from all vehicle sites.  The minimum size of such open space area shall be 20 percent of the entire tract area or 20,000 square feet, whichever is greater. 


 
9. Propane Containers.  The only propane containers that shall be allowed in the park shall be the ones that are contained with the RV, or directly associated and connected to the RV.  There shall be no other propane containers allowed in the park other than one that may be in use for the park owner or park manager. 


 
10. Allowable Accessory Uses: 


 
a. Clubhouse, bathhouse, camp store, laundry, swimming pool, and other shared facilities for the common use of the residents of a development.   



 
b. No more than one (1) dwelling unit of conventional construction, at least 800 square feet in size, for the use of a resident manager. 



 
c. Except as provided for above, no structure or accessory structure may be used for residential rental or used as human living quarter even on a temporary basis. 



 
d. The addition or attachment of any accessory structure/apparatus such as awnings, porches, carports, or individual storage facilities not specifically 



designed and included as a standard part of the original RV shall be expressly prohibited. 



 
e. Individual sites within the RV Park are not allowed to have accessory structures as defined herein unless included as part of the overall master plan and constructed by the developer.  The developer may provide said accessory structures as an amenity to all sites, or identify on the master plan an area of “premium sites” for which such structures are provided. 



 
11. Undercarriage Requirements.  All wheels and towing devices shall remain attached to the RV and the RV shall remain mobile at all times. 


 
12.  Duration of Stay.  No Recreation Vehicle should remain on the same site for an unlimited period of time.  (Ord. 05-28) All recreational vehicles placed on sites must be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, fully licensed and ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and have no permanently attached structures or additions. 


 
13. Landscaping/Bufferyards/Lighting.  The following criteria shall be met for landscaping, lighting and bufferyards unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission at the time of master plan approval. 


 
a. Ground Cover:  Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every vehicle site area or other vehicle parking area shall be grassed, paved or covered with gravel to prevent soil erosion. 

b. Bufferyards:  Bufferyards shall be provided along all property lines where the park adjoins a road, vacant property, or a different land use. Bufferyards shall be twenty (20) feet wide and shall include five (5) canopy trees, five (5) understory trees and twenty-five (25) shrubs per 200 linear feet of property line. 

c. Lighting Plan:  A lighting plan shall be required as part of the overall master plan for the RV park.  Said plan should include any planned street lights, security lighting or other site lighting.  If no such lighting is planned for the development it should be so stated on the master plan. 



 
All lighting must be directed away from adjacent properties, or shielded so as to focus lighting onto the use as established and away from adjacent properties. 
 
14. Storage, collection and disposal of refuse and garbage.  Each RV Park shall be provided with safe and adequate facilities for the collection and removal of waste and garbage.  Storage, collection, and handling shall be conducted so as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, or fire hazards.  Trash dumpsters shall be screened on three (3) sides. 


 
15. Distance from Streets. All camper sites, RVs and storage areas must be a minimum of 45 feet from the ROW line of a County, State, or Federal Highway.  The minimum distance away from all other streets shall be 35 feet from the ROW line. 


 
16. RV Park Enlargement.  All amendments or additions to the originally approved site plan shall require approval through the normal site plan approval process described in Section 902. 


 
17. Access and Internal Streets.  Access to the RV Park shall be via a fifty foot (50’) wide paved road.  Said access shall be taken directly from a paved public right-of-way (i.e. city, county, state or federal).  The length of the access road shall be part of the master plan approval process. 


 
RV sites within the RV Park shall be served by internal streets and shall not have direct access to public streets.  Internal streets shall be fully contained within the boundaries of the RV Park.  Maintenance of private internal streets and roads within the park shall be the responsibility of the developer and/or owner of the property. 
 
18. Off-Street Parking and maneuvering Space.  The internal circulation system of a RV park shall be designed so that parking, loading or maneuvering of vehicles shall not necessitate the use of any public street, sidewalk, right-of-way, or any private grounds not part of the designated parking area.  Sufficient maneuvering space and off-street parking facilities shall be provided at each site to accommodate a towing vehicle. 


 
19. Fire and Other Emergency Precautions.  It shall be the responsibility of the park owner to provide well maintained travel surface and maneuvering area for emergency vehicles to safely access and exit the park.  With the exception of grass or sod, no vertical vegetation shall be allowed within ten (10) feet of the edge of travel surfaces. 


 
A Standard numbering system for the lots is needed and to shall be posted at the site for emergency vehicles and that system needs to be coordinated with 911 or the Fire Chief.  
 
Additionally, the park owner shall provide signs indicating the location of fire extinguishers and emergency evacuation routes. 
 
20. Ownership.  RV parks may not be platted or otherwise divided by fee simple ownership.  All facilities, including roads, shall be privately owned.  The City of Lincoln shall not be responsible for maintenance and/or repair of common facilities within any recreational vehicle park. 


 
21. Site Plan.  Any application for the required permits to establish, construct, alter or extend a recreational vehicle park in Lincoln, Alabama shall include a detailed site plan for review and approval by the Planning Commission.  Said site plan shall conform to all requirements of Section 903 of this Ordinance. 


The Planning and Development Services Department, or other responsible party, shall insure that all necessary agencies, including but not limited to the Talladega County health Department, Alabama Power Shoreline Management, FEMA, etc., have reviewed and approved the proposed development plan as it relates to installation of septic systems, flood hazard mitigation, etc. prior to said plan being submitted to the Commission for review. 
 
Before a Certificate of Occupancy can be issued, all conditions listed in this section must be met and site plan approval granted. 
 
22. Initial Drawings.  The owner must submit to the Planning and Development Services Department, an application for approval along with six (6) complete sets of drawings showing all proposed vehicle sites, storage areas, restroom and bathing facilities, trailer storage area, boat storage area and all accessory structures.  Said application and drawings with all accompanying support materials must be received before submission can be made to the Planning Commission for consideration of site plan approval and before issuance of any permits.  (See Section 902 Site Plans) 


 
23. Existing Manufactured Home Parks with Recreational Vehicle Sites.  Existing manufactured home parks that have spaces for recreational vehicles existing prior to the adoption of this ordinance shall be permitted to allow these spaces to continue to be occupied by said recreational vehicle.  However, once the existing recreational vehicle has been removed, another recreational vehicle will not be permitted to occupy the space.  New manufactured home parks approved to be developed inside the city limits shall not be permitted to provide recreational vehicle spaces or allow recreational vehicles to locate on any site within the approved park, except as part of an approved Special District Master Plan.  The same shall apply to a recreational vehicles proposed to be located elsewhere within the city limits of Lincoln.  Recreational vehicles shall be allowed only in recreational vehicle parks.   


 
24. Temporary Use of Recreational Vehicles.  The City Council of the City of Lincoln, upon recommendation by the Planning Commission, may grant to an applicant permission to park and/or use a recreational vehicle upon the premises on which a building or home is being constructed during the time of construction and may qualify, limit or terminate such permission at any time without notice.  The permit shall be issued showing permission with a specific time period allowed for building of home to be both started and completed.  If sincere construction is not started by the allotted start date or if the construction is not continuing on a reasonable basis as determined by the Council, the permit shall be revoked unless a plea is made to the Council by the applicant for an extension and that extension is granted.   


 
J.  Public Service Uses.   
 
1.  TV Broadcast/TV/Radio and Telecommunications Towers:  See Section 602.   
 
2.  Hospital:  Development site shall have ready access to an arterial road, as designated in Appendix A.  
 
3.  Utility Services Yards:  Shall be landscaped in compliance with Article V. 
 
 
K.  Agricultural Support Uses.   
 
1.  Farm equipment sales/repair:  All structures and equipment storage areas shall be located at least 200 feet from the nearest residential structure under different ownership.  All repairs shall be performed within a fully enclosed structure.   
 
2.  Farm produce sales:  Limited to sales of produce grown on the same property.   
 
3.  Farm product processing in Residential Estate Districts (RE)  
 
a)  All such uses must front on a road with a functional classification of Arterial, as designated on the Major Street Classification Map of the Lincoln Comprehensive Plan. 
 
b)  Minimum lot size:  five (5) acres 
 
c)  The total floor area of all nonresidential structures shall be limited to 10,000 square feet.  All machinery shall be kept within a fully enclosed structure. 
 
d)  Outdoor pens or cages for animals shall be set back 150 feet from all property lines. 
 
e)  Processing facilities shall not operate between the hours of 11 p.m. and 7 a.m. 
 
L.  Nurseries. 
 
1.  Retail sales of gardening supplies in AG district: 
 
a)  Property must front on a road with a functional classification of arterial, as designated on the Major Street Classification Map of the Lincoln Comprehensive Plan. 
  
b)  Bufferyards shall be provided along all property lines as required. 
 
 
M.  Commercial Support Uses. 
 
 1.  Bottling plant/bakery: 
 
             a)  Minimum lot size shall be 80,000 square feet. 
 
              b)  Structures shall be set back 50 feet from all lot lines.   
 
2.  Contractor storage yard:   
 
All equipment and building materials shall be screened from outside view by an opaque fence no less than six (6) feet in height.   
 
3.  Printing/publishing: 
 
a)  Minimum lot size shall be 80,000 square feet. 
 
b)  Structures shall be set back 50 feet from all lot lines.   
 
4.  Recycled materials collection/storage: 
 
a)  Materials collected for recycling purposes shall be limited to inert solids such as plastic, glass, paper and metal.  No liquids, or objects containing liquids, shall be stored on the site.  Toxic chemicals or hazardous materials of any kind shall be prohibited. 
 
b)  All materials collected for recycling purposes shall be stored within a completely enclosed structure.   
 
5.  Sales/minor storage of gaseous fuels:  No more than 500 gallons shall be stored on the site at any time.   
 
6.  Sales/rental/repair of heavy equipment: 
 
a)  All repair work shall be performed within a completely enclosed structure. 
 
b)  Equipment or vehicles under repair or not operational shall be screened from public view or stored indoors at all times.   
 
7.  Mini-Warehouse: 
 
a)  After receiving conditional use approval, the mini-warehouse shall be the sole use of the structure(s) in which it is located.  Other activities in place of or in addition to the mini-warehouse shall not be permitted within those structures.  No sales, service, or repair activities, other than the rental of dead storage space, are permitted on the premises.  
 
b)  Where an applicant proposes additional uses on the same development site, the mini-warehouse use shall be physically separated from all other uses.  The conditional use approval shall be assigned to a specific portion of the site, established by an internal 
boundary shown on the site plan.  Within that area, no use other than mini-warehouses shall be permitted. 
 
c)  No storage bay or unit in a mini-warehouse shall be used as a place of business, and no business license shall be approved for the property other than that of the mini-warehouse owner/operator. 
 
d)  No storage bay shall contain plumbing or more than one (1) electrical outlet. 
 
e)  A minimum of three (3) spaces shall be provided in the vicinity of the office and a 27 foot minimum drive aisle shall provide access to all storage unit doors.   
 
f)  The mini-warehouse facility shall be completely surrounded by a fence at least six (6) feet in height, such that access to the site can be restricted.  A masonry wall or wood stockade fence shall be provided where required under Article V; otherwise, chain link may be substituted. 
 
8.  Office-Warehouse: 
 
a) The office/showroom component of this use must comprise at least 25 percent of the total floor area of the use  

b) No single building shall contain more than five (5) units. 


 
c) No equipment other than standard (2 axle) vehicles shall be parked long term in required parking and/or in front of the units. 


 
d) There shall be no exterior display or storage of equipment and materials.  All equipment and materials shall be housed inside the structure, or behind an eight (8) foot privacy fence to the rear of the structure. 


 
 
N.  Neighborhood Shopping Center, Up to 100,000 Square Feet.   
 
1.  Gasoline station in a neighborhood shopping center:  See Gasoline and/or Auto Service Station under Road Service Uses.   
 
2.  Neighborhood Shopping Centers shall meet the following requirements: 
 
a)  A neighborhood shopping center shall be located only on an arterial roadway or at the intersection of an arterial road and a collector street, as designated in Appendix A.  For this purpose each quadrant of such an intersection shall be considered a separate location. 
 
b)  The total site area of a neighborhood shopping center shall be not less than three (3) acres. 
 
c)  A combination of two or more natural materials such as wood, brick, stone, and stucco shall be used on the exterior surface of all structures. 
 
d)  Shall consist of multiple structures or if less than 15,000 sq. ft. in size may be one structure, either of which shall have articulated roof lines and varying façade elevations and offsets.  (See Figure 7) 
 
e)  All utility meters, ground-mounted air conditioning and similar mechanical units shall be screened so as not to be visible beyond the boundaries of the site. 
 
f)  A master signage plan for the overall proposed development, complying with Article VII, shall be submitted and approved in conjunction with the required site plan. 
 
O.  Industrial Uses.   
 
1.  Bulk storage of chemicals or fuels: 
a)  Minimum lot size shall be 100,000 square feet. 
 
b)  Storage tanks or structures shall be at least 100 feet from all property lines.   
 
2.  Commercial incinerator: 
 
 a)  Minimum lot size shall be 100,000 square feet. 
 
b)  Structures shall be at least 100 feet from all property lines.   
 
3.  Food processing/packaging: 
 
a)  Minimum lot size shall be 100,000 square feet. 
 
b)  Structures shall be at least 100 feet from all property lines.   
 
4.  Manufacture of explosives: 
 
a)  Minimum lot size shall be 150,000 square feet. 
 
b)  Structures shall be at least 150 feet from all property lines.   
 
 
5.  Storage of sand/gravel/blocks:  Stored materials shall be completely surrounded by an opaque fence no less than ten (10) feet in height.  Said fence may be constructed along property lines, but shall be set back no less than 25 feet from the right-of-way of any abutting public roads. 
6.  Auto Salvage yard, junkyard or storage area: 
 
a)  Storage of Materials                                  
 
1.  Material that is not salvageable shall not be permitted to accumulate, except in bins or containers, and shall be disposed of in an approved sanitary landfill.  The period of accumulation is limited to two (2) months. 
 
2.  In no case shall material that is not salvageable be buried or used as fill. 
 
3.  Any items, which can be recycled or salvaged, shall be accumulated in bins or containers to be sold to a recycling firm. 
 
4.  Recyclable material, which cannot be stored in bins or containers, may be stored in the open. 
 
5.  Junkyard operators shall be responsible for compliance with all applicable Federal and State regulations pertaining to the handling, storage, and disposal of waste fluids.  In no case shall disposal of waste fluids be permitted on-site. 
 
6.  In any open storage area, it shall be prohibited to keep any ice box, refrigerator, deep-freeze locker, clothes washer, clothes dryer, or similar air-tight unit having an interior storage capacity of one and one- half (1.5) cubic feet or more, from which the door has not been removed. 
 
7.  Facilities not having conditional use approval as a Junkyard Use will not be allowed to accumulate materials for more than 30 days. 
 
 b)  Screening.  All auto salvage yards, junkyards and storage areas shall comply with the following screening requirements:   
 
1.  All outdoor storage facilities shall be completely surrounded by a continuous fence or wall of masonry, wood or other opaque material, which shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height without openings of any type, except for one entrance and/or one exit which shall not exceed 25 feet in width. 
 
2.  Gates at entrance or exit shall be of a material without openings. 
 
3.  The screen shall be constructed of the same type of material throughout. 
 
4.  No screen shall be constructed of metal that will rust. 
 
5.  Screens shall be maintained and in good repair at all times.   
 
 
 
7.  Mine/quarry: 
 
a)  Minimum parcel size shall be 100 acres. 
 
b)  A 300-foot buffer zone shall be established around the perimeter of the property.  Within this area, the natural or existing vegetation shall be maintained or improved, and no digging, dredging, blasting, storage of tailings, or other mining-related activities shall be allowed.  Where no natural vegetation exists the Planning Commission or their designee may require additional buffering as deemed necessary. 
 
c)  No structures, vehicles, equipment, or parking areas shall be located within 100 feet of a property line. 
 
PLEASE SEE TABLE 4-2 
INSERT TABLE 4-2 HERE (1 OF 3 PAGES) 
PLEASE SEE TABLE 4-2 
INSERT TABLE 4-2 HERE (2 OF 3 PAGES) 
PLEASE SEE TABLE 4-2 
INSERT TABLE 4-2 HERE (3 OF 3 PAGES) 
Table 4-3:  Table of Dimensional Standards – Non Residential Uses. 
 
Zoning 
District 
 Maximum Height Of Structure 
(feet) 
 Minimum Setbacks (in feet)1 
 
Front  
Yard 
 Rear 
Yard 
 One 
Side2 
 Total  
Side 
 
RE 
 353 
 50 
 50 
 50 
 100 
 
O-I 
 50 
 25 
 25 
 10 
 20 
 
NC 
 40 
 25 
 20 
 10 
 20 
 
GC 
 40 
 25 
 20 
 10 
 20 
 
HC 
 50 
 40 
 25 
 10 
 20 
 
LC 
 40 
 25 
 20 
 10 
 20 
 
DH 
 35 
 4 
 4 
 4 
 4 
 
M-1 
 60 
 5 
 5 
 5 
 5 
 
M-2 
 60 
 5 
 5 
 5 
 5 
 

 
1 See Table 6-1 and Section 603 for Residential Setbacks 
2 Side Yard on Street shall be equal to Front Yard setback 
3 Inhabited Structures Only 
4 No setbacks required for traditional downtown development.  All other development types should be treated as conditional uses. 
5Equal to Height of Structure 
 
 
Section 410.  Resource Protection Standards    
 
A.  All development shall be preceded by the identification of any environmental or natural feature described below and shall meet the specified standards for environmental protection.   
 
B.  Site alterations, re-grading, filling and clearing or planting vegetation prior to approval of the plans for development shall be a violation of this Ordinance.  Reference in this section to “open space” is intended to mean the term as it is defined by Article II and described in Section 415.   
 
C.  Perennial Streams – 50’ from top of stream bank on either side shall remain undisturbed unless otherwise permitted by the City Engineer.   
 
D.  Steep slopes.   
 
1. Areas with slopes of 33 percent (3:1) or greater:  not more than 15 percent of such areas shall be developed and/or re-graded and/or stripped of vegetation with the exception that no more than five (5) percent of such areas may be disturbed in the case of erosion-prone soils, as defined by the Natural Resources Conservation Service. 
 
2.  When identifying “steep slope” areas of a development (rise/run >  33%) the engineer shall use a topographic map or site plan having a contour interval of not less than 2 feet to determine changes in elevation (rise).  Unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission and Engineering staff a length (run) of not more than 100 feet shall be used to calculate the approximate slope of the area under consideration.   
 
3. When a proposed development will not meet the standards of Section 410.D.1 above, a development plan must be submitted for the review of the City Engineer and approval of the Planning Commission.  Approval of this development plan shall be based on its consistency with the intent of this Ordinance.  
 
   
Section 411.  Reclamation of Undeveloped Land.   
 
In the event that construction of a development has not been completed within one year of date of approval of the preliminary plat or development plan; said development shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission and Engineering staff to determine if reasonable progress toward completion of the development is being made.  Evidence of reasonable progress may include, but shall not be limited to, installation of streets, utility lines and stormwater management facilities; laying structural foundations; and completion of any stage of a development approved under a staging plan pursuant to Section 902.09.  However, the clearing and grubbing of land, in the absence of other improvements, shall not by itself constitute evidence of reasonable progress.  
 
Upon a determination that reasonable progress is not being made, the Planning Commission may require the owner of the development site to restore the land to the same condition that existed prior to the initiation of the development, and place a time limit on completion of said restoration.   
 
If such restoration is not feasible, the City Engineer and the Planning & Development Services shall work with the property owner to determine an acceptable condition or degree of reclamation; at the very least, the site shall be sodded or planted in grass, and appropriate measures shall be taken to prevent or eliminate soil erosion.  In all cases, restoration activities shall be consistent with appropriate Best Management Practices as recommended by the Alabama Forestry Commission, the Alabama Department of Environmental Management (ADEM) and/or the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS).   
 
 
Section 412.  Areas Subject to Flooding.   
 
The boundaries of special flood hazard areas shall be identified by referencing the most current FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), an approved Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) or an approved Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA). 
  
The boundaries of any special flood hazard area shall be clearly denoted on all development plans for parcels subject to flooding.  Said boundaries shall be determined using a site specific, topographic survey of the parcel and the appropriate FIRM, LOMR, or LOMA. 
 
On those parcels for which no base flood elevation (BFE) has been developed, it shall be the responsibility of the owner to have a registered professional engineer or hydrologist to establish a BFE. 
 
On-site topographic surveys shall be performed to locate the precise floodplain line on a parcel prior to any development.  The survey shall use the flood profile contained in the sources listed above or, if no such profile exists, by performing standard runoff calculations such as those contained in Standards and Specifications for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control, prepared by the Natural Resources Conservation Service.   
 
412.01.  Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance.  All provisions of the current Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance (Ord. # 2012-07), of the City of Lincoln as amended, shall be applicable to development in the floodplain. 
 
412.02.  Permanent open space.  All such areas shall be permanent open space.  No uses or improvements other than those permitted herein shall be permitted in any area consisting of floodway as defined by this Ordinance.   
 
412.03.  Permitted uses.  The following uses are permitted within the floodway fringe as a matter of right:   
 
            A.  All uses that are permitted in designated open spaces.   
 
            B.  All uses that are classified as agriculture, nurseries, and outdoor recreation.   
 
C.  Piers, bridges and bridge approaches, picnic shelters, and stormwater detention facilities, so long as the building permit application shows that a licensed engineer has certified that such structures are designed to withstand the forces exerted by the 100-year flood event at that location.   
 
412.04.  Building Elevation.  All other buildings or any residential, institutional, office, commercial and entertainment, commercial recreation, recreational rental dwelling, or nursery uses (other than those specifically named in this Section) may be permitted as conditional uses pursuant to Section 903, provided that all habitable floor area shall be raised so that no floor, or its structural supports, or any utility line has less than one (1) foot of clearance between its lowest point and the 100-year flood elevation.  Any reduction of cross-sectional area due to vertical supporting members shall be offset by compensatory storage.  Vehicular access to such structures shall be at or higher than the 100 year base flood elevation (BFE).   
 
Exceptions to 412.04 above may be as follows subject to the approval of the City Engineer: 
A.  A non-residential building may have its finished floor elevation below the BFE as long as it fully complies with FEMA requirements. 
 
B.  A non residential building may have parking or parking access below BFE as long as it fully complies with FEMA requirements. 
 
Note:  Evidence of full compliance with FEMA requirements must be provided at time of submission. 
 
412.05.  Installation of fill materials.  Fill may be placed within the floodway fringe only when allowed as a conditional use pursuant to Section 903.  An application for such conditional use shall be accompanied by detailed fill plans, showing existing and proposed conditions.  If a structure is to be placed on the fill, the plans shall show the structure as well.  In considering the application, the Planning Commission shall determine whether the proposed fill meets the general standards set forth in Section 903, and the following additional standards:   
 
A.  The cross-sectional area of a riverine floodplain shall not be reduced by more than two and one-half (2 ½) percent on either side of the centerline of the watercourse; an inland depressional floodplain may have its location and contours altered through cut and fill over 30 percent of its surface area.   
 
B.  Compensatory storage shall be provided to offset the storage lost through the filling.   
 
C.  All changes in velocity, depth of flood elevation, or storage shall be limited to the property owners who have been granted flood or flow easements, provided that in no event shall an increase in flood elevation be permitted if it would affect any existing building or bring any building to within one (1) foot of the flood elevation.   
 
D.  In no instance shall the depth of fill in a riverine floodplain exceed five (5) feet, nor shall any fill be placed within 50 feet of the top of the stream bank or in a location which might be endangered by or accelerate a meander.  In an inland depressional floodplain the depth of fill measured from the natural grade to the new surface shall not exceed five (5) feet.   
 
E.  Fill shall consist of soil or rock materials only; sanitary landfills shall not be permitted in the floodplain.  Further, all fill areas shall be stabilized with material that will insure and protect against erosion hazards, undercutting, and undermining. 
 
412.06.  Filling in Floodway.  See Section 903.   
 
412.07.  Structural anchoring.  Any structure placed in the floodplain shall be anchored firmly to prevent floodwaters from carrying it downstream.  Such anchoring shall be sufficient to withstand a flood velocity of six (6) feet per second.  The Planning Commission shall require the applicant to submit the written opinion of a registered professional engineer that the proposed structural design meets this standard. 
 
 
Section 413.  Lakes and Ponds.     
 
All such areas that serve a stormwater or flood retention purpose shall be permanent open space maintained by the developer, property owner or other legally bound and authorized agent.  No development or diverting of these bodies of water shall be permitted without a development plan approved by the City Engineer.  Alteration of lakes and ponds shall be permitted only if surface area and flood retention volumes remain unchanged or are enlarged.  
 
Lake Shorelines:  The shorelines of lakes [two (2) acres or greater in size], consisting of the area within 100 feet from the shorelines, shall contain no more than 15 percent impervious surfaces.  At least 75 percent of all such areas shall be permanent open space.  
 
Pond Shorelines:  The shorelines of ponds [less than two (2) acres in size], consisting of the area within 50 feet from the shorelines, shall contain no more than 15 percent impervious surfaces.  At least 75 percent of all such areas shall be permanent open space.  
 
 
Section 414.  Drainageways.   
 
Re-grading, stripping of vegetation, or filling in drainageways is permitted only after review and written approval by the City Engineer, provided that the resultant drainageway has less velocity than existed previously or reduces stream bank erosion through the provision of erosion control measures. 
 
 
Section 415.  Open Space.   
 
Land that is required by this Ordinance to remain as open space may be used for the recreation, agriculture, resource protection, amenity and other purposes specified in this Section.  Open-space land shall be freely accessible to all residents of a development, with the exception that agricultural land uses shall be permitted to restrict access to that land to those solely engaged in agricultural pursuits.  
 
Open space shall have qualities making it useful to residents of the development for either passive or active recreation, and will be developed to serve that purpose. Open spaces shall serve an important environmental/resource protection or visual role in separating the development from existing public ways or from other existing or potential developments; or shall be of value in dividing the development into coherent sub-areas.  Non-recreational buildings, except those related to agricultural uses permitted under Section 415.01(C) shall not occupy open-space land.  
 
415.01.  All developments required by this Ordinance to provide open space shall meet the following requirements.   
 
A.  Land designated as open space shall be maintained as open space and may not be separately sold, subdivided, or developed, and no structures shall be built on such land, except as provided below.  All such properties shall be owned and maintained by the developer, owner of the development site, homeowners association, or other private entity approved by the City Attorney. 
  
B.  An open-space plan shall be submitted as a part of the application for a site plan or subdivision approval.  This plan shall designate and indicate the boundaries of all open-space areas required by this Ordinance.  The plan shall:   
 
1.  designate areas to be reserved as open space.  The specific design of open-space areas shall be sensitive to the physical and design characteristics of the site.   
 
2.  designate the type of open space, as established in this Section, to be provided.   
 
3.  specify the manner in which the open space shall be perpetuated, maintained, and administered in accordance with Section 415.02.  
 
4.  include proof of a mandatory and functioning Home Owners Association and contact information for same.  The Lincoln Planning & Development Services Department shall be provided an annual update of said contact information  
 
C.  The types of open space that may be provided to satisfy the requirements of this Ordinance, together with the maintenance required for each type, are as follows:   
 
1.  natural areas are areas of undisturbed vegetation or areas replanted with vegetation after construction.  Woodlands and wetlands are specific types of natural areas.  Natural watercourses are to be maintained as free flowing and devoid of debris.  Stream channels shall be maintained so as not to alter the base flood elevation.   
 
2.  agricultural uses specified in Section 404.01.   
 
3.  garden plots are the division of open space into plots for cultivation as community gardens.  Any change of use for the open space must be with the approval of the adjoining land owners and the Home Owners Association. 
 
4.  recreational areas are areas designed for specific, active recreational uses having minimal requirements for structures, such as tennis courts, swimming pools, softball fields, and golf courses.  An enclosed structure shall be permitted in a recreational area only where it directly supports a specific facility and does not require off-street parking.  Recreational areas shall be accessible to all residents of the development.   
 
5.  greenways are linear green belts linking residential areas with other open-space areas.  These greenways are encouraged to designate developed bicycle paths, footpaths, bridle paths, fitness trails, or other similar development.  Inter-connecting the greenway system between residences and recreational areas is encouraged.   
 
D.  Open space shall be appropriately located and large enough to address the open space characteristics cited throughout Section 415.   
 
1.   No dwelling unit shall be located more than 750 feet from designated open space.  The Planning Commission may waive this distance requirement where the developer proposes a major recreational facility which will occupy at least 50 
percent of the required open space for the development.  No more than ten (10) percent of the dwelling units in the development may be occupied before this facility is completed and available for use.   
 
Where intervening non-recreational properties separate a dwelling unit from an open space area, the Planning Commission or their designee may require an easement or other means of access for non-motorized traffic to avoid the need for pedestrians to cross or travel on roads carrying vehicular traffic.   
 
2.  No parcel of property, or portion thereof, less than 40 feet wide and 7,500 square feet in size shall be counted toward the designated open space requirement.   Open space areas containing paved or stabilized paths for pedestrians and/or bicycles shall be exempt from this requirement if such paths are part of a comprehensive circulation system serving a portion of the development or are included in connecting Greenways.   
 
3.  All open space shall be easily visible and freely accessible.   
 
4.  The following shall not count toward fulfillment of designated open space requirements:   
 
a)  platted lots for residential use or designated sites for manufactured homes or recreational vehicles; 
 
b)  easements for roads, driveways or any other use which is not consistent with the purposes of open space as established in this Section; 
 
c)  parking areas, including adjacent areas containing required landscaping; 
 
d)  public or private right-of-way; 
 
e)  private roads and driveways; 
 
f)  areas of required spacing between structures, manufactured homes or recreational vehicles; 
 
g)  Commonly owned lawns consisting of grass with or without trees.  
(i.e. condominiums, townhouses, patio homes, etc.) 
 
h)  areas which have been cleared of vegetation, excavated, filled, or otherwise altered from their natural state unless such alteration is consistent with the proposed use of the open space parcel approved as part of an overall development plan; 
 
i)  any development site (as established by a site plan) containing a clubhouse or a non-recreational use including, but not limited to, office, restaurants, gift shops, and groundskeeper storage buildings; 
 
k)  any other areas which the Planning Commission or their designee finds to be inconsistent with the intent of this Section.   
 
In addition, no lake, pond, or other permanent water body shall constitute more than 25 percent of the total open space required for the development.  No golf course shall constitute more than 60 percent of the total open space required for the development.   
 
415.02.  Preservation of open space.  Open-space areas shall be maintained so that their use and enjoyment as open space is not diminished or destroyed.  Where open space is to be provided within a subdivision, such areas shall be designated by creating separate parcels within the perimeter of the plat.  These parcels shall be given a sequential lot number, labeled as to their intended use, and the plat shall note the entity or entities having ownership and maintenance responsibility.   
 
Where open space is provided within a development site, which is the subject of a site plan, and is under different ownership than the rest of the site, it shall nevertheless remain part of the development site pursuant to Section 902.11.  Unless the site plan is modified or terminated in accordance with Section 902.08, the open space areas shall be used only as provided in Section 415.  The site plan shall note the entity or entities having ownership and maintenance responsibility.   
 
Open-space areas may be owned, preserved, and maintained as required by this Section by any of the following mechanisms or combinations thereof:   
 
A.  Common ownership of the open space by a homeowner’s association, which assumes full responsibility for its maintenance. 
 
B. Deed-restricted private ownership that shall prevent development and/or subsequent subdivision of the open-space land and provide the maintenance responsibility.  This arrangement shall be noted on the site plan and/or subdivision plat.  Full and proper written legal documentation of said ownership and maintenance responsibilities shall be submitted to the Planning & Development Services and be approved by the City Attorney prior to commencement of development activities. 


  
 
Section 416.  Transportation Impact Report.   
 
416.01.  Purpose.  The transportation impact report shall identify the traffic impacts of a proposed use.  The report shall show improvements required to:  insure safe ingress to and egress from a proposed development; maintain adequate street capacity, and eliminate hazardous conditions.  The report also will be used to determine whether the proposed development is consistent with transportation-related policies of the City of Lincoln. 
 
416.02.  Applicability.  The City Engineer, particularly in the following cases, may require a transportation impact report:   
 
A. Any development that proposes to take direct access to any collector or arterial road. 
 
B. Any residential development that proposes the construction of 30 or more dwelling units. 
 
C. Any use that will generate in excess of either 100 trips per acre per day or 250 trips per day.  Trip generation rates for proposed uses shall be determined by consulting the latest edition of Trip Generation published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers, and/or the City Engineer.   
 
416.03.  Contents of transportation impact report.  The transportation impact report shall contain, as a minimum, the following data and information:   
 
A. General site description.  A detailed description of the highway network within one (1) mile of the site, a description of the proposed land uses, the anticipated stages of construction, and the anticipated completion date of the proposed land development shall be provided.  This description, which may be in the form of a map, shall include the following items:  (a) all major intersections, (b) all proposed and existing ingress and egress locations, (c) all existing roadway widths and rights-of-way, (d) all existing traffic signals and traffic-control devices.   
 
In addition, any changes to the highway network within one-half (1/2) mile of the site, proposed by any governmental agency, shall be described.  This description shall include the above items, as well as any proposed construction project that would alter the width and/or alignment of the present highway.  Such information can be obtained from the City Engineer, County Engineer and Office of the Division Engineer, Alabama Department of Transportation.   
 
B. Description of existing traffic conditions.  A report based on the following shall be provided:  A 24-hour traffic count shall be conducted for a period of five (5) weekdays (Monday – Friday) on all roadways that have direct access to a proposed development site.  The existing average daily traffic (ADT) volume and the highest average peak hour volume for any weekday hour between 3 PM and 6 PM shall be recorded.  These traffic volumes shall be averaged to determine the average hourly peak traffic volume for the five days Monday through Friday.   
 
C. Transportation impact of the development.  The average weekday trip generation rates (trip ends) and the highest average hourly weekday trip generation rate between 7 AM and 9 AM and between3 PM and 6 PM for the proposed use shall be determined from the latest edition of Trip Generation published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers, or from figures provided by a qualified traffic engineer.  A report shall be made detailing the nature and extent of the trip generation expected to result from the proposed development.   
 
D. Analysis of transportation impact.  The projected total future peak hour traffic demand shall be calculated for all roads fronting on a proposed site and all major intersections within one-half (1/2) mile of the site.  This demand shall consist of the anticipated traffic that will be generated by the proposed development, plus an assumed normal increase of traffic volume of one (1) percent per year, unless traffic-engineering studies indicate a different rate of change.  An analysis shall be undertaken to determine if roadways and intersections will operate at the appropriate level of service following completion of the development given the future peak hour traffic that will be generated by the proposed development.   
 
416.04.  Traffic control devices.  Whenever, as the result of additional traffic generated by a proposed development, it is determined that there is a need for a traffic signal, a regulatory sign, additional right-of-way or acceleration/deceleration lanes, the developer shall make such planned improvements a part of his development plans and shall propose a schedule to the Planning Commission for making such improvements  Anticipated improvements required by future development, and the developer share in those improvements, are listed in the following paragraphs.   
 
A. Traffic signs.  Include the normal stop, yield, caution, and street signs, but also may include special signs such as “watch for traffic entering”, “blind hill” and “pedestrian crossing”, may also be required.  Such signs will be placed by the developer entirely at the developers’ expense.  These signs shall be specified, installed, and maintained in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.   
 
B. Traffic signals.  Include any and all lighted signals.  Such installations will be placed at the direction of the agency having jurisdiction.  This paragraph also applies to signalization and improvement of railroad crossings.  Because of the timing of the actual installation of signals by authorized agencies, the developer will be required to post a bond guaranteeing the estimated cost of improvements covered by this paragraph. 
  
 
Section 417.  Clear View of Intersection Streets.   
 
To provide a clear view of intersecting streets to the motorist, there shall be a triangular area of clear vision formed by the two intersecting streets.  The size of this triangular area is a function of traffic volume and speed and is depicted for right-angle intersections in Figure 8.  At oblique intersections, in which two roads form an angle of 60 degrees or less, required clear areas shall be determined by the City Engineer, based on design criteria set forth in the most recent edition of A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, prepared by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO).   
 
Where, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, there are unusual and/or specific circumstances relating to a street intersection such that the application of Figure 8 may not be 
appropriate, the intersection shall be referred to the City Engineer who shall recommend a triangular area of clear vision using the standards contained in the current edition of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.   
 
On any portion of a lot that lies within the triangular area defined according to this section, nothing shall be erected, planted, placed, or allowed to grow in such a manner as materially to impede vision between a height of two and one half (2.5) feet and ten (10) feet above the grade at the intersection of the street center lines. 
 
  
Section 418. Traffic Management.   
 
418.01. Curb Cuts.   
 
Because frequent curb cuts and driveways providing access to numerous adjoining properties are a severe impediment to the proper functioning of major streets, on-site circulation and cross-access agreements between lots are required, to control the problem when land is subdivided.  There shall be a minimum spacing of 300 feet for driveways and other curb cuts on arterial streets and 300 feet on collector streets.  In areas where single-family detached homes abut collector streets, an average distance of 125 feet shall be allowed between curb cuts. 
 
New single-family residential lots shall not be allowed direct access to collector and arterial roadways without approval of the City Engineer. 
  
The following table summarizes required distances between curb cuts and street corner property lines:   
 
Development Type 
 Street Type 
 
 
 Arterial 
 Collector 
 Local 
 
Non-Residential 
 125’   
 100’ 
 100’ 
 
Multiple Unit Development per §603.02(e) 
 125’ 
 100’ 
 100’ 
 
All Other Residential 
 125’ 
 100’ 
 25’ 
 
 
  
  
  
 

 
 
Where an intersection contains a left-turn stacking lane, any driveway opposite such lane shall be designed to permit entrance and exit by right turn only.  Such "right turn" entrances shall be constructed with raised islands to prevent left-turn movements.  No left turns shall be permitted where such turning motions would cross an acceleration or deceleration lane in proximity to an intersection. 
 
Required distances between curb cuts, and between curb cuts and street corner property lines, shall be measured from the edge of the curb cut. 
 
   
418.02. Access for Lots of Record and Redevelopment.  
 
In the interest of public safety, lots of record, as defined by this Ordinance, shall be afforded vehicular access at the direction of the City Engineer and in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD).  This access may take the form of a curb cut, or shared curb cut, directly onto a public right-of-way or may be limited to cross-access via an adjoining lot (see Section 418.04).  The City reserves the right to adopt access plans for thoroughfares in rapidly redeveloping areas in order to facilitate traffic management and public safety.  The Planning Commission and City Council shall approve such plans. 
   
418.03. Acceleration/Deceleration Lanes.    
 
Acceleration/deceleration lanes shall be provided by the developer at the direction of the City Engineer.  Such improvements must be designed and constructed to city, county or state standards.  The cost of such improvements will be borne entirely by the developer. 
   
 
418.04. Cross-Access Requirements.   
 
Adjoining lots with frontage upon collector or arterial roads may be required to provide cross-access and permanent ingress/egress easements to adjacent properties in the interest of accommodating the curb-cut requirements, public safety and facilitating vehicular traffic.  Such access shall be required at the discretion of the City Engineer. 
   
 
418.05. Median Cuts.    
 
Center medians are designed and constructed both for traffic safety and aesthetic considerations.  Such public improvements are constructed at great expense to the public and, therefore, any alteration of the existing or planned roadway medians shall be allowed solely at the discretion of the City Council, and/or ALDOT; and only where such alteration is in the interest of public safety.  Where such alterations are allowed, the entire cost shall be borne by the applicant.  The improvement of other medians or similar traffic control devices in proximity to the proposed development may be required in consideration for any allowed median alteration. 
 
 
418.06. Additional Right-of-way.    
 
Additional right-of-way required by a specific governmental plan for the improvement of a given existing or proposed roadway shall, where possible, be divided equally between adjoining property owners on both sides of the existing roadway, and shall be dedicated to the City.  Said right-of-way may be required at the time of subdivision or site plan review. 


ARTICLE V.     LANDSCAPE AND BUFFER REQUIREMENTS  
 
 
Section 500.  Introduction. 
  
This article recognizes the importance of trees and landscaping throughout the city and their relationship with the economic, ecological and cultural processes that give Lincoln its tradition and identity. Through preservation, replacement, and maintenance of the urban forest, this ordinance will provide a better quality of life for the citizens of Lincoln. 
 
Urban landscaping aids in preventing soil erosion, siltation of streams and reservoirs and flood damage. Trees are essential in providing shade and natural cooling, preventing air and noise pollution, as well as preserving community character.  
 
 
501.  Purpose.   
 
The purpose of this chapter is to: 
 
. protect the public health, safety and welfare by mitigating incompatibility between adjacent uses through the establishment of buffers between non-compatible land uses;  


 
. improve the quality of life for Lincoln citizens through the reduction of noise, glare, heat and air pollution;  


 
. preserve, protect and maintain the healthy existing vegetation and encourage, where possible, the incorporation of native plant materials and ecosystems into landscape design and discourage the proliferation of invasive plant species; 


 
. establish and maintain sustainable amounts of tree canopy on public and private lands in the City; 


 
. improve community character by encouraging aesthetically pleasing sustainable design practices, while allowing innovative, diverse and cost conscious approaches for design, installation and maintenance of landscaping; 


 
. promote the conservation of local waterways and aquifers by encouraging the planting of native species, or site specific species;  


 
. provide means for natural aquifer recharge and prevent excess runoff through the provision of landscaping and bufferyards;   


 
. facilitate compliance with Local, State and Federal legislation relative to water and air quality, including, but not limited to, the Clean Air Act (Title 42, Chapter 


85 of the U.S. Code) and the Clean Water Act (Title 33, Chapter 26 of the U.S. Code). 


 
 
502.  Scope. 
 
This article does not contain all the regulations and requirements for development activities, design and construction for the City of Lincoln. Approval of a landscape plan pursuant to the provisions herein does not serve as a substitute for obtaining and complying with all other applicable city ordinances, regulations, building and other related codes, zoning restrictions, subdivision and other applicable regulations.   
 
The provisions of this ordinance shall have applicability to all site and land development projects and development activities within the corporate limits of the City, including the development of subdivisions (but not individual lots within subdivisions).   
 
 
503.  Applicability. 
 
This ordinance shall apply to all land located within the Corporate Limits of the City of Lincoln, Alabama as well as land to be annexed if developed prior to annexation.  
 
A. The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to all new construction, redevelopment, or change of use for any multifamily residential, commercial, or industrial use and shall become applicable to any property for which any land development permit is required. The requirements shall remain applicable at all times once land has become subject to these provisions. 


 
B. All development for which this ordinance is applicable shall provide a detailed landscape plan along with all other required submission materials. 


 
Prior to any development on any property in the City, the developer or person in charge or control thereof shall make application to the  Planning Commission and have a landscape plan approved as part of the overall development approval process.  A landscape plan must be submitted, along with the Land Development Plan, and approved by the Planning Commission or their designee prior to the issuance of any land development permits, (i.e. zoning certificate, building permit, etc.) 
 
The Land Development Plan shall be in conformance with Section 902 of this Ordinance and, in accordance with the provision of this ordinance, shall adequately and sufficiently address traffic, parking, stormwater, sanitary sewer, erosion, use of BMPs, etc. 
  
504.  Definitions.   
 
The following definitions are provided for clarification of terms used in Article V. 
 
Application:  A form provided by and submitted to the Department of Planning by a developer desiring a landscape plan to engage in development as herein defined. 
 
Applicant:  A developer as herein defined, including applicant or developer’s representative, who is applying for approval of a landscape plan.   
 
Bioswale: Vegetated surfaces that are designed to treat sheet flow from adjacent surfaces.  Bioswales function by slowing runoff velocities and filtering out sediment and other pollutants, and by providing some infiltration into underlying soils. 
 
Buffer: An area of land, including landscaping, berms, walls, fences and building setbacks, or any combination thereof, that is located between land uses of different character and is intended to mitigate negative impacts of the more intense use on a residential or vacant parcel. 
 
Caliper:  The American Association of Nurserymen standard for trunk measurement of nursery stock, as measured at six inches above the ground for trees up to and including four-inch caliper size, and as measured at 12 inches above the ground for larger sizes.  
 
Canopy Trees:  See Tree 
 
City: The City of Lincoln, Alabama, whose address is 150 Magnolia Street, Lincoln, Alabama 35096. 
 
Critical Root Zone: An area on the ground around a tree that is within the drip line of a tree. 
 
DBH (diameter at breast height): refers to the diameter of a tree four and one-half feet above ground level. 
 
Developer.  Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal entity engaged in or seeking to engage in development activity as herein defined. 
  
Development: For the purposes of this article only, any manmade or earth change to property including, but not limited to, preparation of land for the construction of buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, regarding, paving, clearing, excavating, or drilling operations. This definition also includes changes or improvements to any property subject to these regulations such as curb and gutter, storm drainage structures, streets, drainage facilities, sidewalks, and related public or private roads and the installation of utilities.  
 
 
Drip Line:  A vertical line extending downward from the outermost tips of the tree branches to the ground. 
 
Erosion: The wearing away of land by the action of wind, water, gravity or a combination thereof. 
 
Evapotranspiration:  loss of water from the soil both by evaporation and by transpiration from the plants growing thereon. 
 
Grading: Altering the shape of the ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling & shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
 
Hedge:  A row of closely planted shrubs, bushes or any kind of plant forming a boundary or fence. 
 
Land Development Permit or Permit (LDP): A written document which authorizes development in accordance with the provisions in this article and subject to any additional or specific requirements that may be stated therein. 
 
Land Development Plan or Plan: A properly documented written plan, prepared, signed and stamped by a registered professional engineer, licensed in the state, consisting of a completed application with supporting documents demonstrating that development as herein defined will occur upon an identified parcel of land within the area in compliance with all provisions of the City. 
  
Landscape Administrator: The staff member(s), or Planning Commission Committee, designated by the Planning Commission to administer this article.  
 
Landscaping: Refers to the treatment of grade, groundcover, vegetation and ornamentation for a given area; including, but not limited to, plant materials such as trees, shrubs, groundcovers, perennials and annuals; and any other materials such as rocks, water, walls and fences; and any other feature affecting layout and use of the site. 
 
Lot—Parcel—Property: Refers to a single undivided portion of land that is either legally recorded in the office of the Talladega County Probate Judge, or is being proposed in good faith by well-prepared plan drawings for the purpose of being legally recorded. It is the responsibility of the property owner (or his/her agent) to insure that the property is legally recorded with the office of the Talladega County Probate Judge.  
 
Low Impact Development (LID): comprises a set of approaches and practices that are designed to reduce runoff of water and pollutants from the site at which they are generated by means of infiltration, evapotranspiration, and reuse of rainwater. LID techniques manage water and water pollutants at the source and thereby prevent or reduce the impact of development on rivers, streams, lakes, coastal waters, and ground water. 
 
Parking Lot or Garage:  An open area or a structure used exclusively for the temporary off-street storage of motor vehicles.  Such area or structure may be an independent business or may be used in conjunction with any other business or commercial use.  A fee may be charged. 
 
Parking space: a delineated area reserved for the parking of a single vehicle. 
 
Perimeter Planting Strip: Land area located within the boundary of a lot and required to be set aside and used for landscaping upon which only limited encroachments are authorized. 
 
Property Line: A line dividing one lot from another or from a street or any public or private space. 
 
Rain Garden: Vegetated surfaces that are designed to treat sheet flow from adjacent surfaces. Filter strips function by slowing runoff velocities and filtering out sediment and other pollutants, and by providing some infiltration into underlying soils.  
 
Redevelopment:  The demolition and/or rebuilding or expansion of a site’s physical development.  
 
Right-of-way: A general term denoting public ownership or interest in land, usually in a strip which has been acquired for or devoted to the use of a street or alley. 
 
Runoff: The water from rain or melted snow that flows over the ground. 
 
Shoreline:  The shortest horizontal straight line that can be established between points on the side lot lines at the waterfront end of a lot or parcel abutting a lake or stream.  At least one point along the horizontal straight line must line on the ordinary high-water mark, and its entire extent must lie wholly within the lot or parcel.   
 
Shrub:  A low growing usually multi-stemmed, woody plant. 
 
Stormwater: The flow of water resulting from precipitation and occurring immediately following rainfall or a snowmelt.  
 
Street Trees:  Any existing tree or any tree to be planted on the street right-of-way. 
 
Tree: A usually tall, woody plant, distinguished from a shrub by having comparatively greater height and, characteristically, defined as: 
 
Canopy (Large Maturing) — Single trunk whose height is greater than 35 feet at maturity, or 
 
Understory (Small Maturing) — Single trunk or multi-stem whose height is less than 35 feet at maturity. 
Tree, Understory:  See Tree 
 
Utility Easement: A non-possessory interest given to or acquired by a utility, governmental agency, or private agency for the use of real property in the possession of another for a stated purpose such as locating utilities, including all types of pipelines, television cable, telephone and electric cables. Also includes corridors on public rights-of-way occupied by overhead utility lines. 
 
Vegetated:  Any ground surface covered with plant life. 
 
Woodland:  An area of natural vegetation or planted material, at least 50 feet in depth, covering one (1) acre or more and consisting substantially of canopy trees. 
 
 
505.  Landscape Plan Submittal Requirements. 
 
505.01.  Approval.  A landscape plan must be submitted and approved by the Planning Commission and/or their designee prior to the issuance of a Land Development Permit or Building Permit. 
 
The architect, landscape architect, engineer, surveyor of record, horticulture professional, or landscape contractor shall certify that the landscape plan submitted meets the minimum landscape and bufferyard requirements of this article. 
  
505.02.   Format and materials. The landscaping plan and details shall be drawn to the same standard scale as the development plan or a scale which shows all landscaping accurately. Landscape plans shall be included as part of an application for a Land Development and/or Site Plan approval. All landscape plans must be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission and/or their designee.    
 
505.03.  General information. 
 
Complete landscape plans submitted for review and approval shall include the following: 
 
A. Title block, showing the title of the development, name and address of 


the owner/developer, name and address of the person or firm preparing the plan, date of preparation, scale, north arrow, and the date of all revisions. 
 
B. A location map, showing the relative location of the site to the nearest 


existing public street intersection. 
 
C. The boundaries of the subject property including the location and description  


 of all adjoining property, the location and names of all adjoining streets and easements.  If property is a part, or phase, of a larger development, the location/relationship to the overall development shall be indicated. 
 
D. The required number of parking spaces and the proposed number of parking spaces of subject property/development. 


 
E. Location and dimensions of all entrances and exits of the parking lot, the manner in which vehicles will be parked, all traffic circulation patterns, and the location and names of all utility lines, easements or right-of-ways on, or adjacent to, the site. 


 
F. All details needed to communicate appearance, and methods of construction and/or installation. 


 
G. A planting schedule, keyed to the plant materials shown on the landscape plan, listing all proposed plant materials by botanical name, common name, cultivar or variety if any, quantity of materials, size of materials at planting, plant spacing, and existing trees approved for use. 


 
H. Location of all existing and proposed buildings, accessory structures and paved areas. 


 
 
506.  General Requirements.     
 
506.01.  Site protection and general planting requirements. 
 
A. Topsoil.  To the extent needed and practical, topsoil moved during the course of construction shall be preserved and stockpiled for re-use on the site. 


 
B. Existing trees.  Preservation of each existing healthy tree of an approved species (See Table 5-1), within required landscape areas, may count toward fulfillment of these requirements. 


 
1. The existing tree to be preserved must be approved by the Planning Commission and/or their designee to receive credit. 
 
2. Existing trees that are credited towards meeting the requirements of this section shall be subject to the same maintenance and replacement requirements as newly planted trees. 
 
3. Upon approval of the Planning Commission and/or their designee an existing area of native vegetation meeting the definition of woodland, may be deemed to satisfy planting of a specific area or bufferyard required by this Ordinance regardless of the mix of plant materials otherwise required. 
 
C. Slope plantings. Landscaping of all cuts and fills and/or terraces 


shall be matted or protected until plant cover is adequate to control erosion. 
 
D. Utility Easements.  Plantings within Utility Company Easements must comply with the following: 


 
1. Minimum distances measured horizontally from mature trees to overhead utility lines shall be: 
 
Canopy Trees:  30 feet 
Understory Trees: 15 feet 
 
2. The location and species of trees proposed for location in utility easements shall be approved by the Power Company or other appropriate utility provider before installation. 
 
3. Any part of a tree growing within 15 feet of an overhead utility line will require maintenance by a certified line trimmer approved by any affected utility companies. 
 
4. This article shall not be construed to impair:  
 
a.  the right of eminent domain granted by State laws to utilities, whether public or private, or  
 
b.  a utilities’ right to design, locate, erect, construct, re-construct, alter, protect or maintain utility poles, towers, lines, conduits, pipes or mains reasonably required in the public service or  
 
c. a utilities’ right to exercise authority conferred by statute, franchise, certificate of convenience and necessity, license or easement.  Maintenance, repair, and extension of any public and private utility lines or related infrastructure are expressly allowed. The preceding will apply to work done by the utility’s employees, agents and contractors doing work for the utility. 
 
5. Avoid planting trees and shrubs on underground utility easements; root systems may damage or restrict the installed systems. 


 
E. Plant Material Standards: 


 
Canopy Trees: Shall have an average mature crown spread of at least 25 feet, be a minimum of eight feet in height and have a caliper of at least two inches at planting.  
 
Understory Trees:  Shall have an average mature crown spread of at least 15 feet, be a minimum of five (5) feet in height and have a caliper of at least one and one-half inches at planting. 
Note:  No more than 30% of understory plant material may consist of crepe myrtle. 
 
Shrubs:  Shall be a minimum size of three gallon containers and of such species to obtain a height of 24 inches within two years. 
 
F. Planting strips, buffers and planted islands are to be sodded, seeded, mulched or planted with shrubs or ground cover so as to leave no bare ground after landscape materials have been installed and permitted to grow for two years.   Where mulch is used the area must be kept free of weeds. 


 
G. Stormwater inlets shall be located within a perimeter planting strip and incorporate rain gardens, bioswales or other staff approved stormwater mitigation techniques to promote infiltration and reduce stormwater runoff and non-point source pollution.  Rain Gardens shall include at least one (1) tree.  Alternative designs that accomplish the intent of this ordinance may also be permitted subject to approval of the Planning Commission and/or their designee. 


 
H. Wherever a required bufferyard overlaps or coincides with a parking area as defined in this Section, the bufferyard shall take precedence; the required parking area planting shall be placed in another location.   


 
I. The integration of Low Impact Development techniques as part of the landscape plan may be used to meet these requirements. 


 
506.02.  Trash Receptacles. 
 
A. All commercial trash receptacles shall be placed on a pad approved by the City Engineer that allows for pick-up and maintenance as needed. 


 
B. All commercial trash receptacles shall be enclosed with a fence or wall that is impervious to sight, at a minimum of six (6) feet tall, and is consistent with the architectural materials of the primary structure.  


 
C. All screens will be completely enclosed with a latching gate. 


 
D. Trash receptacle sites shall not be located within landscaped areas that are required by this article. 


 
 
507.  Redevelopment. 
 
Redevelopment of an existing built site which involves the complete removal of existing structures to allow for complete redevelopment shall be required to meet all requirements of this Section.  In the event that the site itself is nonconforming by size or has other 
topographic constraints the Planning Commission and/or their designee may authorize the utilization of the standards of Section 512 Alternative Compliance. 
 
When redevelopment involves the expansion of a site’s physical development the following increases in building size will trigger compliance with this Article: 
  
Total Original Square Footage 
 Proposed Expansion 
 
Less than 2,000 s.f. 
 25% or greater 
 
2,000 – 5,000 s.f. 
 20% or greater 
 
5,001 – 10,000 s.f. 
 15% or greater 
 
Over 10,000 s.f. 
 10% or greater 
 

 
 
508.  Landscaping Standards. 
 
It shall be the responsibility of the developer and/or property owner to select species from Table 5-1 which are appropriate to the locations in which they will be planted, and to maintain them so as to meet the intent of this Ordinance.   
 
All plant materials shall meet minimum standards of caliper, fullness of form, height, root ball and vigor as described by the American Association of Nurserymen standards published in the current edition of American Standards for Nursery Stock.   
 
 
508.01.  Frontage Landscape Standards. 
 
Except as required in Section 509, “Special Corridors”, street frontage buffers shall be, at a minimum, ten (10) feet in depth along all adjacent public rights-of-way.  Frontage landscaping shall include a minimum of one (1) canopy tree, two (2) understory trees and six (6) shrubs per fifty (50) linear feet of the frontage, or faction thereof.  Shrubs are optional in areas where a berm at least four (4) feet in height is used.  Trees and shrubs shall be well distributed, though not necessarily evenly spaced.   
 
The following additional frontage landscaping standards shall apply: 
(See Figure 9) 
 
A. lots with less than one hundred fifty (150) feet of frontage shall have a street frontage buffer depth of ten (10) feet; 


 
B. lots with one hundred fifty (150) to two hundred fifty (250) feet of frontage shall have a street frontage buffer depth of twenty (20) feet;  


 
C. lots with over two hundred fifty (250) feet of frontage shall have a street frontage buffer depth of thirty (30) feet. 


 
For developments of two (2) or more acres with frontage of two hundred fifty (250) feet or more, the street frontage buffer shall be bermed in order to minimize the visual impact of the off-street parking area, unless the Planning Commission and/or their designee determines that the natural topography does not require the site to be bermed.  The berm shall not have a slope of greater than one (1) foot of rise per three (3) feet of run, and shall not be less than four (4) feet in height at its apex.  Landscape material for bermed street frontage buffers shall be in accordance with the requirements outlined above. 
 
Frontage landscaping within the site distance triangle at driveways and street intersections, shall have an area of visibility between the heights of two and one-half (2.5) feet and six (6) feet above the street grade to afford a clear line of sight in the interest of vehicular traffic safety.  (See Figure 8 for sight distance triangle detail) 
 
 
508.02.  Perimeter Landscape Standards.  
 
Perimeter landscaping must be provided within the property lines between the off-street parking area and adjoining properties.  Planting areas existing in the public rights-of-way or on adjoining property shall not count toward the required perimeter landscaping area.  Perimeter landscaping areas adjacent to adjoining properties shall be at least ten (10) feet in depth, excluding walkways, measured perpendicularly from the adjacent property to the back of curb, and shall contain the following plant material: 
 
. One (1) canopy tree; three (3) understory trees; and four (4) shrubs per 100 linear feet of property, or fraction thereof. 


 
Should a commercial/industrial development abut a residential district, a higher perimeter landscaping criteria shall apply.  The perimeter landscaping areas along the common property line shall have a twenty (20) foot landscaped buffer area consisting of the following: 
 
. an eight foot (8’) fence with landscaping consisting of 4 canopy trees; six understory trees and 10 shrubs per 100 linear feet of property line 


Or 
. a planted hedge creating a solid unbroken visual screen reaching eight (8) feet in height within two (2) years of planting 


 
It is intended that this bufferyard be of sufficient density to afford protection to the residential district from the glare of lights, blowing paper, dust and debris, visual encroachment and effectively reduce the transmission of noise.  (See Figure 10) 
 
The perimeter buffer area shall be maintained in clean and neat condition.   
 
Where topography provides a more effective buffer than the above described buffer, or where topography renders the above described buffer ineffective, the Landscape Administrator may: 
 
A. Reduce the width of the required buffer by no more than fifty (50) percent, 

B. Reduce the width or waive the required undisturbed buffer, 

C. Allow reforestation with native vegetation in lieu of all or a portion of the required planted buffer, 

D. Any combination of the above stated measures. 


 
508.03.  Interior/Parking Landscape Standards. 
 
Planted islands and/or peninsulas shall be provided for any off-street parking area of twenty (20) or more parking spaces (not including the areas of perimeter and foundation landscaping) with dimensions and arrangements as follow: 
(See Figure 11) 
 
A. Each island or peninsula, to count toward the total interior landscape requirements, shall be at least two hundred and fifty (250) square feet in area; however, the maximum contribution of any individual island or peninsula to the total interior landscaping requirement shall be five hundred (500) square feet. 


 
B. Island and peninsulas, must be at least eight (8) feet in their least dimension, measured from back of curb to back of curb. 


 
C. Islands and peninsulas in off-street parking areas shall be as uniformly distributed as practicable, to subdivide large expanses of parking areas, to regulate traffic flow, to protect pedestrians, and to permit access by emergency vehicles.  When practical, islands and/or peninsulas shall be placed at the end of rows of parking spaces or between the circulation drives and parking rows, to channel traffic safely around the parking areas and to demarcate parking rows. 


 
D. The interior landscaped area shall contain at least an average of one (1) tree and four (4) shrubs per one hundred (100) square feet of landscaped area.  Each island or peninsula shall contain at least one (1) tree. 


 
E. There shall be no more than 10 contiguous parking spaces without a landscape island, or peninsula.  


 
 F. Excavation of parking lot islands.   
 
1.   All parking lot islands, peninsulas, and planting areas shall be excavated to remove all crusher run or parking lot base material and back filled with quality top soil, except those areas where existing vegetation is to be preserved.  The top soil shall be high in organic matter and will allow water to percolate.  The excavation of these 
planting areas shall be to a minimum of 24” and will freely allow penetration of hand-held probe to a minimum of 24”. 
 
2. Inspection of these planting areas shall be conducted by the Landscape Administrator or City Engineer during the construction process.  Failure to comply with these requirements can result in a stop work order issued by the inspectors. 


 
508.04.  Foundation Planting Standards. 
 
Building foundations shall be required to have a landscaped bed with a minimum depth of seven (7) feet along the front of the primary structure.  Beds shall contain both understory trees and shrubs and may also contain other greenery and seasonal color.  There shall be a minimum of one (1) shrub for every four (4) feet of façade length with a minimum height at planting of twenty-three (23) inches.  Understory trees shall be used as accents to shrubbery and may be placed in groups at corners and near building entrances.  Landscaping shall be planted within a bed of mulch or ground cover other than turf grass, and be protected by some barrier, such as curbing or tire stops, from damage by vehicles and maintenance equipment.  Plant material shall be well distributed throughout the bed, though not necessarily evenly space. 
 
Summary: Shrubs = 1 per 4’ of front façade and 23” in height at planting 
  Understory = grouped at corners and entrances of building 
 
 
509.  Special Corridor Landscape & Design Standards.    
 
Recognizing the special nature of certain thoroughfares and the direct and indirect impacts of the appearance of these roadways and their importance to the local economy, this Section sets forth regulations that will help insure that development in these critical areas is visually pleasing and economically viable.  This Section applies to all land in the corridor, regardless of the underlying zoning district designation, and supersedes base zoning district regulations in the corridor unless the zoning district requirements are more stringent.  In those cases, the base district regulations apply.  Henceforth, as parcels are developed or redeveloped along designated corridors, the following bufferyard and landscape requirements shall apply.  
 
509.01.  Areas of Applicability.  These regulations shall apply to all lots, parcels and tracts that have any frontage upon the following rights-of-way:   
 
. Stemley Road 

. U.S. Highway 77   

. U. S. Highway 78 

. Speedway Blvd. 

.  Magnolia Street (ending at downtown) 


 
509.02.  Submission Requirements.  All design elements required by this Section shall be illustrated or described within the application materials prepared for the review of staff and the Planning Commission.  Any submission made without such requirements shall be deemed incomplete.  Incomplete submissions shall not be considered for inclusion on Planning Commission agendas.   
 
509.03.  Building Materials and Design Review. The Planning Commission shall review submissions for their general compatibility with existing conditions and public improvements according to the process for conditional uses outlined in Article IX.   
 
A.  Exterior Building Materials.  All building cladding materials shall be described in the application or upon the site plan.  Building facades and accessory buildings visible to pedestrian and vehicular traffic shall consist of natural materials such as wood, stone, and manufactured products such as brick, stucco, and architecturally decorative concrete block; other such materials may be approved after review by the Planning Commission.   
 
B.   Sign Design.  The location of freestanding signs shall be illustrated on the site plan.  Sign materials shall be coordinated with the exterior cladding of the structures.  Size and height of sign shall conform to the standards set out in Article VII “Sign Regulations”. 
 
509.04.  Bufferyards, Setbacks & Landscaping.  On all developments, the owner or developer must provide the required setback and the required buffer or minimum buffers described below, whichever is greater 
 
A.  Thoroughfare Frontage Bufferyard.  A 15-foot bufferyard shall be installed along the entirety of thoroughfares listed in Section 509.01.  This bufferyard shall contain three (3) canopy trees, ten (10) understory trees, and 15 shrubs per 100 feet of corridor frontage.   
 
B.  General Right-of-Way Setback. All structures shall be at least 20 feet from the right-of-way line of those thoroughfares listed in Section 509.01.   
 
509.05.  Fences and Screening.   
 
A.  Lot areas within which repair of vehicles of any type occur shall be screened from public view.  Storage areas of vehicles that are visibly damaged or under repair shall be similarly screened.   
 
B.  Utility meters, air conditioners and other mechanical units shall not be located on any plane of the primary structure that faces a designated corridor and shall be screened from public view.   
 
C.  No type of wire fabric fencing material shall be used forward of the front plane of the primary structure.  Fences in the front yards shall not exceed four (4) feet in height.  
 
509.06.  Awnings and Canopies. Rigid or fixed awnings and canopies must be maintained and kept free from dirt, mildew and tears.  Worn, faded or torn awnings and canopies shall be replaced.  Awnings shall not be a continuous line across a building façade, but rather shall be broken or grouped to create visual interest.  (See Figure 7) 
 
509.07. Residential Development backing up to corridor roadways. 



 
To provide protection and privacy to residential developments backing up to Highway Corridors as defined above the following Corridor Screening shall be provided: 
 
. An earth berm or bank at least four (4) feet high with a required base width of at least ten (10) feet and covered with an acceptable grass or landscape cover suitable to the slope used. 

. Berms shall meet the following standards: 

o The slope of all berms shall not exceed a three-to-one ratio (horizontal to vertical), shall have a top width at least one-half the berm height, and a maximum height of eight feet above the toe of the berm. 

o Berms exceeding four feet in height shall maintain a four-to-one ratio (horizontal to vertical). 

o Berms, regardless of size, shall be stabilized with a ground cover or other suitable vegetation. 

o Berms along street right-of-ways shall not be permitted within sight distances at intersections. 

o Berms shall in no case damage the roots or trunks of existing healthy vegetation designated to be preserved. 



AND 
 
. A planting screen consisting of a minimum of two (2) staggered rows of evergreen shrubs such as, but not limited to, Ligustrum, Burford Holly, Elaegnus, Boxwood, or Juniper with a minimum height of three (3) feet installed and a maximum spacing suitable to the particular plant used but yet forming an effective visual screen.  This planted screen shall, at driveway and roadway intersections, met adequate sight distance requirements. 


 
Alternative forms of screening may be considered by the Planning Commission subject to detailed drawings supporting said alternative being provided at the time of submission. 
(See Figure 12) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Example:  Berm separating residential development from major roadway 
 
 
510.  Conditional Uses. 
 
The Planning Commission and/or City Council, as part of Conditional Use Approval, may place additional requirements on a Site Development Plan, including but not limited to landscape requirements, above and beyond those specified in this article.   
 
 
511.  Compliance. 
 
For any criteria for which this article applies, the architect, landscape architect, engineer, surveyor of record, horticulture professional, or landscape contractor must certify, to the Planning Commission and/or their designee, that the landscaping has been installed to meet the minimum requirements of this article. The site will be inspected before a final certificate of occupancy will be issued. 
 
In the event that inclement weather delays the installation of landscape materials by less than thirty (30) days, the developer may make a written request to the Planning and Development Services Department for an extension to the time of completion for the planting schedule in the approved landscape plan.. The request must specifically state the reason for the delay as well as an estimated date for completion. Failure to complete the installation within 15 days of specified date will constitute non-compliance.  
 
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any new development that has not met the requirements of this article or an approved landscaping plan.  Additions or renovations to existing parking areas shall also receive a certificate of occupancy prior to usage.  When circumstances preclude immediate planting, the Planning Commission may release the development for a certificate of occupancy after: 
 
A. The owner or developer has completed all curbing, irrigation systems and other non-planting components of the landscaping plan; and 


 
B. Posted a completion bond or certified check in an amount equal to one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the total cost, including labor, of the remaining landscaping installation. 


 
Required surety shall be made payable to the City of Lincoln and submitted to the the Planning and Development Services Department or City Engineer.  The Planning Commission or Engineer shall set the time limit for completion and approval of any guaranteed landscaping, but in no case shall the time period exceed six (6) months after the date the certificate of occupancy is issued. 
 
 
512.  Alternative Compliance. 
 
The Landscape Requirements are intended to encourage development practices which are conscious of the character of the City and its ecological processes.   Conditions associated with individual sites may under certain circumstances warrant approval of alternative methods of compliance. Conditions may arise where normal compliance is impractical or impossible, or where maximum achievement of the Purpose and Intent of this Article can only be obtained through alternative compliance. It is not the intent of this section to allow alternative compliance on the basis of economic hardship. In the event that such conditions are present, the Planning Commission and/or their designee shall have authority to adjust the requirements of this article as provided below in accordance with the following: 
 
A.  Request for Alternative Compliance Review.  Requests for alternative compliance must be made in writing at the time of application and may be granted for any permit application to which the Landscape Requirements apply, when one or more of the following conditions are met: 


 
1. Improved environmental quality would result from alternative compliance. 


 
2.  Topography, soil, vegetation, drainage or other site conditions are such that full compliance is impractical. 


 
3. Spatial Limitations, unusual shaped pieces of land, or unusual servitude requirements may justify alternative compliance. 


 
4. Public safety considerations make alternative compliance appropriate. 


 
5. Public Improvement (i.e. streets, water, sewer, etc.) projects make alternative compliance appropriate. 


 
6. The site is part of a development for which a master plan has been submitted which makes adequate provision for landscaping. 


 
The above conditions must be substantiated as part of the written request for Alternative Compliance. 
 
B. Methods of Alternative Compliance. 


 
1. Reduction in the amount, or variation in types, of required landscaping. 


 
2. Reduction of buffer widths. 


 
3. Modification of required structures (i.e. fences, walls, berms, etc.) 


 
4. Modification in configuration or amount of required parking to accommodate landscaped islands 


 
In all instances, such requests for alternative compliance may be referred to the Planning Commission for review and approval. 
 
 
513.  Landscaping Requirements for Downtown Historic District. 
 
Unless otherwise specified elsewhere, streetscapes shall be developed in the commercial areas of Historic Downtown along McClain Avenue, James Avenue and Crawford Street to mimic those already present along Crawford Street adjacent to the railroad tracks in these districts. 
 
 
 514.  Ownership & Maintenance. 
 
The owner of property developed in accordance with an approved landscape plan shall be responsible for maintaining all landscaping in good condition.  The maintenance required under this section shall include the prompt replacement of all dead or damaged landscaping materials, whether from natural or unnatural causes, so as to insure continued compliance with the requirements of this ordinance. 
 
All landscape and bufferyard materials shall be maintained by the owner of such materials so that the purpose and effect of the landscaping and bufferyards is not diminished.  The following minimum maintenance activities are required:    
 
A.  Replacement of plant materials destroyed by any cause.   
 
In the case of any canopy tree removed or otherwise destroyed by the willful act of the property owner, tenant or contractor, a tree of the same or larger caliper must be used as a replacement.  Where replacement at the same or larger caliper is not feasible, the Planning Commission or their designee may provide alternative replacement criteria. 
 
B.  Repair and/or replacement of fences and walls that deteriorate or are damaged by any cause.   
 
C. Restoration of berms that are altered by erosion, construction, or other causes.   


 
D.  Irrigation of landscape materials is strongly recommended, particularly for larger development sites.  Landscaping lost due to lack of rainfall or irrigation shall be required to be replaced by the property owner. 
 
Bufferyards constitute an integral part of a development site, and may not be subdivided, sold, dedicated, or otherwise conveyed separately from the development site of which they are a part.  The City shall not approve any development plan in which a required bufferyard or any portion of a required bufferyard lies on land, which is not part of the development site. 
 
 
515.  Legal aspects, other Regulations. 
 
All local, state and federal laws and regulations shall be considered when interpreting provisions of, or technical specifications published pursuant to, this article.  In each instance, the more restrictive requirement shall govern unless sound engineering judgment can determine and prove that the more restrictive requirement would be otherwise unnecessary.  In most instances, laws and regulations that are phrased more explicitly shall apply over those items that are not phrased as precisely. 
 
Nothing herein contained shall authorize a person to engage in development or earth changes in a manner inconsistent with current zoning or subdivision regulations or other applicable codes or ordinances.   
 
A landscape plan does not authorize any person or developer to engage in any activity that would violate any other applicable code, ordinance, regulation or state or federal laws nor substitute for obtaining any licenses or permits otherwise required. 
  
 
516.  Penalty for Violation. 
 
Any violation of any provision of this Ordinance, shall constitute a Class C misdemeanor.  Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be fined in an amount not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and may also be sentenced to imprisonment for a period of not exceeding six (6) months, in the discretion of the court trying the case, and violations on separate days shall each constitute a separate offense. 
 
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
 


ARTICLE VI.   DETAILED USE REGULATIONS 
 
 
Section 600.  Purpose.   
 
The purpose of this Article is to specify the detailed regulations, including bulk, layout, setbacks and lot area, which apply to specific land uses.  Standards over and above those imposed by other sections of this Ordinance are necessary for certain land uses which, although permitted as of right in certain districts, have characteristics that might have negative impacts on nearby uses without these additional regulations.   This Article also specifies the regulations applicable to temporary and accessory uses, and it details the off-street parking and loading requirements of permitted land uses. 
 
  
Section 601.  Standards Applicable to Certain Uses.   
 
In addition to compliance with other regulations imposed by this Ordinance, the following standards are required of the specific uses enumerated below. 
 
601.01.  Renovation, Adaptive Reuse, and Preservation of Structures.   
 
Because there may be value to the community in the renovation, reuse and preservation of certain structures, and because these actions serve the public interest, renovation, reuse, and preservation of certain structures are encouraged in all zoning districts.   
 
A. In addition to a site plan required pursuant to Section 902, each proposed renovation, 
reuse or preservation of an existing structure shall include a floor plan showing the internal use of the structure.   
 
B.  It is anticipated that the renovation, reuse, and preservation of existing structures will 
involve difficulties with maximum densities in some zoning districts, bufferyard requirements and off-street parking.  Where these conditions occur, the Planning Commission may impose such standards as fencing, screening, and planting as they deem appropriate to buffer existing adjacent properties.  The Planning Administrator shall, in the case of higher densities and off-street parking, make such recommendations to the Planning Commission as they deem reasonable in supporting the concepts of renovation, reuse, and preservation of structures in the City of Lincoln.   
 
601.02.  Exceptions to Minimum Yard Requirements.  The following structures shall be allowed to project into or be constructed in any minimum required yard as follows:  
 
. awnings and canopies, roof overhangs and balconies not to exceed three (3) feet;  

. bay windows, not to exceed two (2) feet;  

. clotheslines; driveways and their curbs, fences, walls, and hedges may be constructed in minimum yard areas, provided that their installation does not violate any other provision of this Ordinance.   


. Uncovered decks of no more than 30 inches in height may extend to within five (5) feet of the property line.   


 
Nothing contained in this Section shall be construed to allow encroachment of any feature into a required bufferyard.   
 
601.03.  Voluntary Dedication of Property for a Public Purpose.  No existing lot shall be reduced in area or dimension below the minimum requirements applicable to such lot under the provisions of this Ordinance, except that when an existing lot or record is reduced in dimension or total area by 20 percent or less by the voluntary dedication by the owner and acceptance of a portion of such lot by the City for a public use, the lot shall be considered to contain the dimensions and area it contained prior to such dedication.  However, for purposes of measuring compliance with setback requirements of this Code, the dimensions and area of such lot as it exists after the voluntary dedication shall apply.   
 
601.04.  Limitations on Animals.  – See the City of Lincoln, Animal Control Ordinance #2010-16. 
 
601.05.  Moving of Structures.  No structure shall be moved from one development site to another unless such structure shall, at the new location, comply with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance and any other codes or regulations that may be applicable.   
 
 
602.  Broadcast/TV/Radio and Telecommunication Tower Use Regulations.   
 
Except where otherwise stated herein, the following standards shall apply to all types of broadcast and communication towers within the City of Lincoln. 
 
A.  General Regulations and Requirements.  All requirements for site plan approval, as set out in Article IX, shall be met at the time of application for site of new towers.   
 
B.  Safety/Structural Design of Towers.  All broadcast towers must comply with requirements as set out in the latest edition of the EIA-222 code “Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting Structures,” as amended, published by the Electronic Industries Association and all other applicable structural safety standards, building and technical codes having jurisdiction, so as not to endanger the health and safety of residents, employees or travelers in the event of structural failure of the tower due to extreme weather conditions or other acts of God.   
 
C.  Security.  A chain link fence shall be installed around the perimeter of the compound, having a minimum height of eight (8) feet as measured to the top of the fence (or barbed wire, if applicable).  Such fence is to be located on the perimeter of the compound unless otherwise approved as part of the site plan submitted with the application for site plan approval.  Guy anchors may be fenced separately from the main compound.  Climbing pegs shall be removed from the lower 20 feet of all broadcast towers.   
 
D.  Lighting Restrictions.  There shall be no lighting on any tower except when required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or Federal Communications Commission (FCC).  In cases where the FAA or FCC does require a tower to be lighted, any such lighting shall be the minimum necessary to comply with federal regulations.  Written documentation of any FAA or FCC directives to light a tower differently than provided herein must be submitted with the site plan application.   
 
Any security lighting used at the facility shall be of low intensity, shall not be directed or reflected away from the site, and must not illuminate any portion of the site higher than ten (10) feet.   
 
E.  Maintenance.  The owner of a broadcast tower shall be responsible for maintaining the structural integrity, safety, appearance, screening, buffers, security and other installations required by this Section, and by any other applicable codes, ordinances, regulations, statutes or conditions of approval imposed by the City of Lincoln or its authorized representatives, in perpetuity for as long as said tower remains on a site.   
 
F.  Landscaping. Broadcast towers constructed in conjunction with a principal structure (i.e. radio/TV station) shall comply with all bufferyard and landscape requirements as set out in Article V.   
 
G.  Abandoned Facilities.  Any broadcast facility that ceases to be used for its original communications purpose shall be removed at the owner’s expense.  The owner of the facility shall provide Planning and Development Services with a copy of the notice to the FCC of the intent to cease operations, and shall have 120 days from the date of such cessation to remove the obsolete tower and all accessory structures and to restore the site to its natural condition.   
 
In the case of multiple providers sharing use of a single tower, notice will still be required from each provider as to their cessation of operations, and such provider will be required to remove its facilities within the one hundred and twenty (120) day period prescribed above.  At such time as all providers sharing use of a tower cease operation of their facilities located thereon, the owner of the tower shall complete the removal and restoration process as set forth herein.   
 
H.  Area and Dimensional Requirements.  The following area and dimensional regulations shall apply to all facilities covered by this Section:   
 
             1.  Minimum Lot Area:  Determined by setback requirement.   
 
2.  Minimum Setbacks:  Each tower shall be set back from all property lines a distance equal to 50 percent of its height (when site is a leased portion of a larger parcel, setbacks shall be measured from the property lines, not the leased site). Maintenance/equipment buildings must meet the setback requirements as specified for the zoning district in which they are to be constructed.   
 
3.  All buildings, structures, facilities and accessories associated with the proposed tower are to be wholly contained within the required security fence. Guy anchors may be fenced separately from the main compound.   
 
4.  Bufferyard Requirements:  See Article V 
 
I.  Height and Location Restrictions.  In regard to the height and siting of all broadcast facilities and their associated structures the following regulations shall be observed:   
 
1.  No broadcast tower site boundary shall be located closer than 200 feet to any residence.   
 
2.  No tower shall be located less than a distance equal to its height, as measured from the base of the tower, from any Residential (RS) District zoning boundary.  Any new towers so located shall further be restricted to a monopole or self-supporting design.   
 
3.  No tower shall exceed a height of 300 feet.   
 
4.  Where such facility is constructed in conjunction with a principal structure it shall be sited behind the front plane of said structure.  Structures located in the Residential Estate District (RE) for agricultural purposes shall be exempt from this provision. 
 
  602.01.  Telecommunications Towers.   
 
In addition to the standards set out in Section 602 above; the following standards shall apply specifically to telecommunication towers. 
 
A.  Application and Justification.  All requirements for site plan approval, as set out in Article IX, “Development Approval Process”, shall be met at the time of application for siting of new telecommunications towers.  In addition to meeting the general requirements for site plan approval, the following information shall be provided when applying for approval of a communication tower:   
 
1.  A current U.S.G.S. quadrangle map (1:24,000), or equivalent, showing the proposed site location and at least a two (2)-mile radius around the site;   
 
2.  A scaled elevation diagram of the facility, showing the type, height, finish, lighting, site improvements and other such details as necessary to convey an image of the facility at the proposed location;   
 
3.  A study prepared by a radio frequency specialist that includes mapped coverage analysis of the proposed facility and its relationship to the next nearest adjacent cell(s) and an inventory and evaluation of existing towers, alternative sites and available structural facilities (e.g. buildings, billboards, water towers, or 
other structures that could be used for support in lieu of a new tower) considered within a two (2)-mile radius of the proposed location.   
 
4.  A complete inventory of the provider’s existing telecommunications towers and communications antenna sites in Talladega County (including those located in municipalities within Talladega County).  This inventory must include:  
 
a)  The location, parcel identification number, and ownership of the telecommunications tower. 
 
b)  Name of co-locators. 
 
c)  Height of tower. 
 
d)  Type of tower or nature of other structure where antenna is located. 
 
e)  Name of Wireless Communication Service Provider co-location coordinator. 
 
f)  Copy of Wireless Communication Service Provider’s FCC license.   
 
In the event such inventory has already been provided, each successive application must include an update such that said inventory will be completely current and accurate.   
 
5.  Written documentation justifying the need for a new telecommunications tower site to be located on the proposed site.  This documentation must address, at a minimum, how the proposed tower is justified in relation to the following points:   
 
a)  a list, description and map of the potential co-location, nonresidential uses or alternative location sites that are located within the geographic service area of the proposed site;   
 
b)  documentation that requests for co-location have been made at least 30 days prior to the filing of application for site plan approval 
 
c)  a detailed explanation of why each such site was not technologically, legally or economically feasible, or why such efforts were otherwise unsuccessful;   
 
d)  an analysis of how and why the proposed site is essential to meet service demands for the geographic service area and the countywide network;   
 
6.  Certification that the proposed telecommunications tower is structurally and technically designed and capable, and will be so constructed, to meet the co-location requirements set forth in this Section.  Immediately upon completion of construction, as-built certifications of same shall be submitted as well. 
 
B.  Co-location Requirements.  All towers constructed subsequent to the adoption of this Section, and their associated compounds, shall be designed and built to accommodate additional wireless communication service providers based on the height of the tower as follows:   
 
1.  Towers 80 to 159 feet in height shall accommodate a minimum of two (2) providers. 
 
2.  Towers 160 to 209 feet in height shall accommodate a minimum of three (3) providers. 
 
3.  Towers of 210 to 300 feet in height shall accommodate a minimum of four (4) providers.   
 
Carriers wishing to co-locate on an existing tower may receive administrative approval of their request from Planning and Development Services. 
 
C.  Maximum Utilization of Existing Sites.  No new telecommunications tower shall be constructed if space is structurally, technically, and economically available for the proposed telecommunications antenna(s) and related facilities on an existing tower; or on an alternative site (e.g. building or other structure), where such alternative location would cover the required service area without creating undue signal interference.   
 
D.  Pre-Existing Towers.  Any telecommunications tower or telecommunications antenna for which a permit has been properly issued shall hereafter be considered a non-conforming use subject to the provisions of Article VIII of this Ordinance.  The purpose and intent of this Section is to minimize the proliferation of new towers and promote the co-location of new antennas onto existing towers.  Any communications antenna locating on a pre-existing properly permitted telecommunications tower subsequent to adoption of this Section shall be exempt from the restrictions of Article V of this Ordinance when the provisions below are met:   
 
1.  If structural strengthening is necessary to accommodate co-location, the tower type shall remain the same as previously permitted.   
 
2.  There will be no increase in the total height or type of lighting of the facility, including the tower, antennas and all other associated facilities.   
 
3.  All setback and buffer requirements applicable to the existing tower, at the time its permit was issued will continue to be applicable to such tower.   
 
The Planning Commission shall permit such facilities through administrative review and approval. 
   
602.02. Exemptions.  The following wireless communications facilities shall be exempt from the requirements of this Section:   
 
1.  Amateur radio antennas and receive-only antennas not more than 60 feet in height, and satellite earth station antennas two (2) meters or less in diameter, shall be exempt as provided for in the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 when no supportive tower is to be constructed.   
 
2.  Accessory facilities used exclusively for dispatch communications by public emergency agencies or government agencies.   
 
3.  Accessory facilities used exclusively for dispatch communications by private entities, or for internal communications by public utilities, provided such facilities do not exceed a total of 60 feet in height whether mounted to a structure or ground mounted.   
 
The Planning Commission shall make determination of exemption of any such facilities exceeding the foregoing dimensions. 
 
   
603.  Residential Use Regulations.   
 
This Section specifies the minimum lot dimensions and other requirements for each type of residential unit permitted by this Ordinance, except in areas designated as Special District (SD).   
 
When a lot size exceeds the minimum permitted area, all other standards applicable to the minimum lot area shall nevertheless apply.  The figures specified in the tables of this Section are expressed in terms of square feet, feet, or a ratio, whichever applies. 
 
 Lot sizes and other requirements for residential lots within Special Districts (SD) shall be established through the review and approval of the required Master Development Plan, (See Section 605).   
 
603.01.  Conventional subdivisions.  A conventional subdivision consists of single-family dwellings on individual lots and, unless otherwise required by Article V, requires no public or community open space, including resource protection and recreation land.   
 
A conventional subdivision is characterized by division of the entire subject parcel into lots.  Table 6-1 provides development standards for conventional subdivisions in the Residential (RS) District. 
 
 
Table 6-1:  Lot Area, Setback, Bulk Regulations and Parking Requirements:  Conventional Residential Subdivisions. 
 
  
  
 Setbacks (feet) 
  
  
  
 
 
 
Zone 
 Min.  
Lot Area1 
 Min. Lot Width2 
(Ft.) 
  
 
Front 
  
 
Rear 
  
Total Side 
  
Min. Side 
  
Side yard on Street 
  
 
ISR3 
  
Height 
(Ft.) 
  
Off-Street Parking 
 
RE-1 
 1 acre 
 120 
 40 
 45 
 35 
 16 
 25 
 .12 
 35 
 2 
 
RE-2 
 2 acre 
 175 
 45 
 50 
 40 
 18 
 25 
 .10 
 35 
 2 
 
RS-1 
 20,000 sf 
 100 
 35 
 40 
 30 
 12 
 20 
 .28 
 35 
 2 
 
RS-2 
 15,000 sf 
 85 
 30 
 35 
 25 
 12 
 20 
 .32 
 35 
 2 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 

 
1Unless a Special District zoning is requested and a Master Plan submitted, lots must be sized and developed according to the zoning requested. 
 
2In cases where side lot line are not parallel because the lot fronts on a curved right-of-way, minimum width at road frontage shall be as follows: 
 1.  Curved right-of-way:  75 percent of normal width requirement. 
 2.  Subdivision cul-de-sac: 50 percent of normal width requirement 
Width at road frontage shall be measured along a straight line connecting the foremost points of the side lot line. 
 
3Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio. 
 
4Developments containing lots of less than 15,000 square feet in size must be part of a master plan development and are required to have a minimum of 20% Open Space.  
603.02.  Alternative Residential Development Styles.  The purpose of this section is to provide innovative development types that make efficient use of land and public facilities, and/or to protect natural features. 
  
Alternative residential developments may contain one or more of the housing types that are specified in this subsection subject to the overall density standards established through approval of a Master Development Plan.  For purposes of calculating density, the development site shall include all platted lots, together with road, drainage facilities, utility sites and any other common property within the perimeter of the subdivision plat, regardless of whether or not such facilities will ultimately be dedicated to the City.  Such developments shall contain the minimum amount of open space specified in the Master Development Plan.  Prior to approval of the final plat, Planning and Development Services shall verify that all parcels or tracts not intended for use as residential lots are clearly delineated on the plat as to size and dimension.  The purpose, ownership, and responsibility for maintenance for each parcel or tract shall be noted on the plat.   
 
Unless specifically accepted by the City Council, the City of Lincoln shall not be responsible for maintenance and/or repair of any common facility or properties.   
 
Alternative residential developments shall be self-contained in terms of meeting the requirements of this Ordinance.  In addition to other relevant requirements, site plans and subdivision plats shall designate and establish maintenance responsibility for all required recreation, resource protection, and other open space and common properties within the development site.  Where an alternative residential development is to be built, Special District Zoning, along with the associated Master Development Plan shall be required.   
 
The following subsections specify the standards and requirements for each dwelling type in detail.   
 
A.  Zero Lot Line.  Under this development concept, each residential lot contains a dwelling unit placed along one side lot line in order to maximize usable open area within the lot.  All zero lot line subdivision plats shall show driveways, walkways, patio slabs, and building envelopes for all structures.  No windows, doors, air conditioning units or other openings or projections of any kind shall be permitted where the structure meets the side lot line.  However, a window may face the zero side yard if it is recessed at least five (5) feet from the property line.  (See Figure 13) 
 
For each unit constructed along a side lot line, an easement of five (5) feet in width shall be created on the adjoining property.  The purpose of this easement is to permit maintenance and repair of the portion of the structure bordering the zero side yard.  All maintenance easements shall be shown on the final plat, along with an indication of the lot to which each easement is assigned.  No fence, patio, deck, or structure of any kind shall be placed within a maintenance easement.   
 
Zero lot-line units shall not take access from an arterial road.   
 
In addition to the bufferyard requirements of Article V, zero lot-line subdivisions shall also meet the following development criteria:   
 
 
Minimum Lot Area 
 4,500 s.f. 
 
Maximum I.S.R. on individual lots 
 .55 
 
Maximum F.A.R. 
 .35 
 
Minimum Yards: 
  
 
          Front/Side on Street 
 20 ft. 
 
          Side Opposite zero       setback line 
 5 ft.* 
 
          Rear 
 20 ft. 
 
Minimum Lot Width 
 45 ft. 
 
Off-Street Parking Spaces 
 2 
 

*or width of any easement along side lot line, whichever is greater.   
 
 
B.  Town House.  This development type consists of a subdivision, platted according to the requirements of the Subdivision Regulations, which is designed for town house dwelling units as defined in Article II.  Each town house unit shares a common wall with another such unit on one or both sides, has individual entrances (not used by other units) in the front and rear, and may be place on its own lot within the subdivision or on common lots managed through a condominium association.  Town house structures shall contain at least three (3) and not more than ten (10) dwelling units.  Such units may have multiple stories or combinations of one- and two-story sections; however, in no case shall one unit be above or behind another.  Front, side and/or rear yards may be enclosed by a masonry wall not exceeding six (6) feet in height provided that such walls do not prevent a clear view of intersecting streets. (See Section 417).    (See Figure 14) 
 
In addition to meeting all other requirements of the Subdivision Regulations, plats for town house development shall show driveways, walkways, patio slabs, and building envelopes for all structures.  No more than ten (10) town house units shall be permitted in any structure. 
 
Town house lots may be accessed via ally ways to the rear of the lots or from dedicated parking areas.  In no case shall town house lots take direct access from any public road.   
 
 
Minimum Lot Area 
 2,000 s.f. 
 
Maximum I.S.R. on individual lots 
 .60 
 
Maximum F.A.R. 
 .60 
 
Minimum Yards: 
  
 
          Front 
 15 ft. 
 
          Side (end units) 
 10 ft.* 
 
          Side on Street 
 20 ft. 
 
          Rear 
 15 ft. 
 
Minimum Lot Width 
 18 ft. 
 
Off-Street Parking Spaces 
 1 per bedroom 
 

 *or width of any easement along side lot line, whichever is greater.   
 
C.  Twin House.  This development type consists of a subdivision, platted according to the requirements of the Subdivision Regulations, which is designed for twin house dwelling units as defined in Article II.  Each twin house unit shares a common wall with another such unit on one side, has individual entrances (not used by other units) in the front and rear, and shall be place on its own lot within the subdivision.  Twin house structures shall consist of two (2) dwelling units; such units may have multiple stories or combinations of one-and two-story sections; however, in no case shall one unit be above or behind another.  Front, side and/or rear yards may be enclosed by a masonry wall not exceeding six (6) feet in height provided that such walls do not prevent a clear view of intersecting streets (see Section 417).    (See Figure 15) 
 
In addition to meeting all other requirements of the Subdivision Regulations, plats for twin house development shall show driveways, walkways, patio slabs, and building envelopes for all structures.    
 
Twin house lots may be accessed via ally ways to the rear of the lots or from dedicated parking areas.  In no case shall twin house lots take direct access from any public road.   
 
Minimum Lot Area 
 3,500 s.f. per unit 
 
Maximum I.S.R. on individual lots 
 .45 
 
Maximum F.A.R. 
 .30 
 
Minimum Yards: 
  
 
          Front/Side on Street 
 25 ft. 
 
          Side  
 10 ft. 
 
          Rear 
 20 ft. 
 
Minimum Lot Width 
 25 ft. 
 
Off-Street Parking Spaces 
 1 per bedroom 
 

  
  
 
D.  Duplex Subdivision.  This development type consists of two-unit structures in which dwelling units may be constructed side-by-side, one above another, or one behind another.  The development site shall be platted as a subdivision containing one (1) duplex structure per lot.  In no case shall any duplex lot or development site be subdivided so as to create separate lots for dwelling units within a duplex structure.  While ownership of the dwelling units may be separated on a condominium basis, the land on which the structure is built shall remain undivided common property. 
 
 Duplex lots shall not take access from an arterial road.  Duplex lots may be accessed via ally ways to the rear of the lots or from dedicated parking areas.   
 
Duplex developments shall be designed according to the following standards: 
   
Minimum Lot Area 
 7,000 s.f. 
 
Maximum I.S.R. on individual lots 
 .45 
 
Maximum F.A.R. 
 .30 
 
Minimum Yards: 
  
 
          Front/Side on Street 
 25 ft. 
 
          Side  
 10 ft. 
 
          Rear 
 20 ft. 
 
Minimum Lot Width 
 75 ft. 
 
Off-Street Parking Spaces 
 1 per bedroom 
 

 
 
E.  Multiple Unit Development.  This development type consists of two (2) unattached or any arrangement of three (3) or more dwelling units on an undivided lot. 
 
All multiple unit developments shall be subject to site plan approval pursuant to Section 902.  Separate ownership of the units is permitted on a condominium basis; however, in no case shall the development site be platted or otherwise divided for the purpose of assigning specific lots or parcels to particular dwelling units. 
 
No existing single-family house or lot in a conventional residential subdivision shall be used for multi-unit development unless expressly approved under Section 902. 
 
 Minimum Lot Area 
 10,000 s.f. 
 
Maximum I.S.R. on individual lots 
  
.75 
 
Maximum F.A.R. 
 .85 
 
Minimum spacing between buildings 
 15 ft. 
 
Minimum Lot Width 
 70 ft. 
 
Off-Street Parking Spaces 
 1 per bedroom 
 

 
604.  Manufactured Housing 
 
The purpose of this section is to provide standards and procedures specifically relevant to the location and development of manufactured housing, manufactured home parks, and manufactured home subdivisions within the City of Lincoln.   
 
604.01.  Definitions. 
 
Manufactured home.  A home transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode is eight body feet or more in width or forty body feet or more in length, or when erected on site is three hundred twenty or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis, and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems.  The home is built to the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act.  Travel trailers, campers, recreational vehicles (including park models), and motor homes are not manufactured homes, mobile homes or house trailers. 
  
Manufactured home lot/site.  A parcel of land for the placement of a single manufactured home unit and for the exclusive use of its occupants. 
 
Manufactured Home Park:  A parcel of land, under single ownership, which has been planned for the placement of three (3) or more manufactured homes for residential occupancy.  The lots in said park may be leased to residents for placement of manufactured homes or the home and lot may be leased together by the park owner. 
 
Manufactured Home Subdivision.  A development that has been planned, improved and used for the placement of four (4) or more manufactured homes for residential occupancy.  The lots in said subdivision shall be for fee simple sale to individuals wishing to place a manufactured home on said lot. Such developments must meet all dimensional and other requirements set out in this ordinance for single-family residential development. 
 
Mobile Home or House Trailer.  Any detached residential dwelling, built prior to June 15, 1976, prior to the National Manufactured Housing Construction Safety Standards Act.  Designed and fabricated to be transported on its own wheels and axles arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling, completed and ready for occupancy, including the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems.  Travel Trailers, campers, recreational vehicles and motor homes are not to be considered as Manufactured Homes, Mobile Homes, or House Trailers.  Mobile Homes and House Trailers do not carry a HUD Seal. 
 
Modular Home.  A factory fabricated transportable home consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a foundation and used for residential purposes.  A modular home must have a seal of compliance according to the regulations of the Alabama Manufactured Housing Commission.  Modular Homes are treated as Site Built Homes under this Ordinance. 
 
Site Built Home.  Homes constructed by a builder or contractor on-site that must meet standards set by the local building code.   
604.02.  Compatibility Standards for All Manufactured Homes.   
 
Manufactured homes qualifying as dwelling, single-family, shall be compatible to site-built and other housing in the immediate general area within the same zone or residential district.  Approval may be granted when the manufactured home is substantially similar in size, siding material, roof material, foundation and general aesthetic appearance to:  (1) site-built or other forms of housing which may be permitted in the same general area under this Ordinance, (2) existing development or (3) proposed development in the same zoning district.  Items subject to compatibility comparison will include the following: 
 
A. All manufactured homes or trailers that are nonconforming prior to the effective date of this Ordinance shall be treated as nonconforming uses. 


 
B. All manufactured homes placed inside the City of Lincoln after the effective date of this Ordinance must comply with all requirements of this Zoning Ordinance and be less than  eight (8) years old. 


 
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to initially place, replace or relocate a manufactured home or mobile home within the City of Lincoln without first being granted a permit approved by Planning & Development Services. 


 
D. HUD Seal required.  Prior to installation, each manufactured home shall bear a seal certifying compliance with the Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act published by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.  Any existing mobile home or trailer not bearing such a seal shall be deemed a nonconforming structure and shall be treated as a nonconforming structure and use in accordance with the regulations established in Article VIII of this Ordinance. 


 
E. Exterior Finish.  Any material may be used for exterior finish that is generally used in areas near the location where the manufactured home is sited. 


 
F. Installation Requirements.  Manufactured homes shall be set up, installed and anchored in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions and the regulations published by the Alabama Manufactured Housing Commission. 


 
G. Size & Appearance.  The general appearance and square footage of the manufactured home shall conform to housing in adjacent or nearby locations to insure compatibility of site-built homes and manufactured housing. 


 
H. Site-orientation.  Manufactured homes shall be placed on lots in a manner compatible with and reasonably similar in orientation to other structures in the area. 


 
I. Towing devices.  All towing devices, wheels, axles and hitches must be removed. 


 
J. Utilities.  The home must be connected to water and sewage systems (including well and septic tank, if applicable) approved by the Alabama Department of Public Health or the Alabama Department of Environmental Management.   Where City of Lincoln water and sewer are available to the site, the home must be connected. 


 
K. Tie-downs.  Each manufactured home shall have tie-downs or other devices securing the manufactured home based on the requirements of the manufacturer or the installation standards of the Alabama Manufactured Housing Commission. 


 
L. Underpinning.  All manufactured homes shall be underpinned with weather-resistant material, which shall be in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions.  Acceptable materials may include masonry, stone, metal, vinyl or other materials manufactured for the purpose of underpinning.  Underpinning shall be adequately vented and in place at or before the time of occupancy.  For homes on fee simple lots or in manufactured home subdivisions, the type of material and method used for underpinning shall be consistent with and compatible to site-built homes in adjacent locations. 


 
M. Foundations.  Foundations shall be installed in accordance with standards set forth in the manufacturer’s set-up requirements, or the installation standards of the Alabama Manufactured Housing Commission. 


 
N. Access to exterior entrances.  Immediately after installation and prior to occupation, a landing/porch/deck shall be installed on all front and back entrances.  At least one of said landings shall be no narrower than five (5) feet in depth (as measured outward from the exterior of the structure) nor shorter than eight (8) feet in length and contain a railing along all exterior edges of the landing.  Stairways leading to decks shall be no less than three (3) feet in width with exterior railing.  All required stairways and landings/porches/decks shall be constructed of wood or brick materials or some combination of both.  Required railing may be constructed of wood or metal material.  Exception:  Manufactured homes located in manufactured home parks will be required to have a 3x3 foot landing at only one (1) entrance. 


 
O. Additions.   Additions to manufactured housing must be compatible with the home and surrounding area.  New additions will require all necessary permits from the City of Lincoln, and review and approval subject to compliance with the Lincoln Building Code.  Caution:  Interior alternation may render HUD seal invalid and the structure nonconforming with regard to this ordinance.  Such alterations should be done by an authorized dealer certified by the Alabama Manufactured Housing Commission. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
604.03.  Manufactured Homes on Individual “Fee Simple” Lots. 
 
A.  Location Restrictions.  Manufactured Homes may be permitted on a vacant lot within the RE and RS zoning districts, subject to full compliance with the following conditions: 
 
1. The proposed manufactured home shall not be located on a vacant lot that is within a designated local, state or federal historic district, or a vacant lot that is between two or more structures that have been listed on or are eligible for addition to the National Register of Historic Places. 


 
2. The combined value of the proposed manufactured home and the property upon which it will be sited shall not be less than ninety (90) percent of the average appraised value of all adjoining properties that have been improved for single family residential use. 


 
3. Manufactured Homes replacing older manufactured homes or locating on a site vacated by a manufactured home will be subject to 604.03.A.2 above.   


 
4. All manufactured homes located on individually owned “fee simple” lots, or within a manufactured home subdivision shall comply with the standards set out in Section 604.02. 


 
B.  Destruction by Fire or Natural Disaster.  It is not the intent of this Ordinance to deprive a property owner of their homestead and thereby their right to restore or replace a non-conforming manufactured home should their home be destroyed by fire or natural disaster.  In the event that a nonconforming manufactured home is destroyed by fire or natural disaster in excess of fifty (50%) of the appraised value as set out in Article VIII, restoration or replacement may be permitted provided that: 
 
1. The manufactured home was, and will continue to be, occupied by the owner of said property;  


 
2. The restoration or replacement does not result in a structure which appraises at a lesser value than that of the original structure. 


 
3. The restoration or replacement shall be approved by the City Council prior to any zoning certificates being issued. 


 
4. The restoration or replacement shall take place within twelve (12) months of being damaged. 


 
5. Noncompliance with Health Department or other governmental agency regulations shall prohibit the nonconforming use of the site, and 


 
6. Expansion of the site for additional nonconforming uses shall not be permitted. 


 
604.04.  Standards for Manufactured Home Park. 
 
This housing type consists of manufactured home units installed on an undivided development site through site plan approval under Section 902.  In no case shall a manufactured home park be separated into lots for fee simple ownership.  All manufactured home sites shall be shown on a site plan.  Recreational vehicles shall be permitted within designated storage areas only and shall not be used for residential purposes.   
 
All manufactured home parks shall be developed according to the following standards:   
 
Minimum size for development site 
 10 acres 
 
Minimum number of manufactured home sites 
 25 
 
Minimum size for manufactured home site 
 5,400 s.f.   
 
Minimum size of manufactured home site 
 55’ wide and 70’ deep 
 
Maximum I.S.R. for entire park 
 .35 
 
Maximum I.S.R. on a manufactured home site1 
 .60 
 
Off-Street Parking Spaces: 
     Manufactured Homes 
     Permanent Habitable Structure 
       (on-site manager) 
  
2 per manufactured home  
1 per 200 s.f. of gross floor area  
 
 
Maximum building height (conventional structures) 
 35 feet 
 

1For purposes of site plan review, it shall be assumed that impervious surfaces cover 60 percent of each designated manufactured home site unless the site plan specifies a lesser amount. 
 
 
A.  Landscaping and Yards:   
  
1. All proposed Manufactured home communities shall submit, along with a request for site plan approval, a landscape plan showing a minimum 5% planted area which must include a combination of grass and ornamental plant material and may be included as part of the open space requirement of the zoning district.  Said landscape plan shall be subject to review and approval of the Planning Commission along with the proposed site plan.  The architect, landscape architect, engineer or surveyor of record for each project must certify that the landscaping has been installed to meet the minimum requirements of this Ordinance before a Certificate of Occupancy or release of power will be issued. 


 
2. All manufactured home parks shall be separated from all other land uses by a bufferyard. 


 
3. Manufactured homes and structures shall be placed at least 20 feet from the pavement edge of private park roads. 


4.  Manufactured homes and freestanding structures serving as common facilities shall be at least 30 feet apart.  No carport or other attached structure may be installed on a manufactured home less than 20 feet from another manufactured home or attached structure.  This distance shall be measured between the closest points of the units or structures. 
 
5.  Storage sheds or other freestanding accessory structures shall be prohibited in required bufferyards and open space areas.  Any such structure shall be at least ten (10) feet from any other structure.                
 
B.  Allowable accessory uses:   
 
1.  Clubhouse, laundry, swimming pool, and other shared facilities for the common use of the residents of a development. 
 
2.   No more than one (1) dwelling unit of conventional construction, at least 800 s.f. in size, for the use of a resident manager. 
 
3.  One accessory storage building is allowed on a lot.  The storage building shall be located in the rear of the lot and shall not encroach on any required bufferyard or setback established elsewhere in this section.  The maximum size of the storage building shall not exceed 120 square feet.  
4.   Storage area for boats, recreational vehicles, or vehicles that exceed 30 feet in length.  The storage area shall be for the use of park residents only, and shall be fenced and landscaped.  Storage of these units shall be prohibited on individual manufactured home sites or on park roads. 
 
C.  Other regulations:   
 
1  Ownership.  Manufactured home parks may not be platted or otherwise divided by fee simple ownership 
 
2.  Access and Internal Circulation.  Internal park roads and driveways shall be paved, and shall be owned and maintained by the developer or property owner of the park.  For each manufactured home site, two (2) paved off-street parking spaces of ten (10) feet by 20 feet each shall be provided.  No individual manufactured home site shall have direct access to a public right-of-way. 
 
3.  Review and Approval.  Before a permit is issued for construction of a manufactured home park, a site plan for the community must be submitted to the Planning Commission for review and approval in accordance with Section 902 of the City’s Zoning Ordinance.   
 
4.  Site Plan.  No structures or facilities shall be installed or constructed  


until a site plan meeting the requirements of Section 902 of this Ordinance has been submitted to and approved by the City of Lincoln.  All improvements, regardless of timing or project phasing, shall be substantially consistent with the approved site plan.  Where an existing manufactured home park has no site plan, such a plan shall be prepared and submitted to the City prior to the addition, improvement, rearrangement or replacement of park facilities. 
 
5. Public Safety.  Each lot within a manufactured home park shall be 


visibly numbered in a uniform location so as to provide immediate identification by emergency services. 
 
6.  Occupancy.  No manufactured home shall be installed, stored, or otherwise located within a manufactured home park development site, nor shall residential utility service be authorized, until the park has received a Certificate of Occupancy from Planning & Development Services. 
 
7.  Storm Shelter.  All new or redeveloped manufactured home parks shall contain an appropriately sized storm shelter(s) for the use of park residents.  Said shelter(s) shall be constructed in conformance with State of Alabama Emergency Management Agency standards.  Appropriate sizing shall be determined by the developer/owner. 
 
8.  Recreational Area.  Recreation areas designed for the common use of residents shall comply with the following:  
 
a) In all parks accommodating or designed to accommodate 25 or more manufactured homes, there shall be one or more designated recreation areas. This shall include any expansions.   


 
b) The size of such recreation areas shall be based upon a minimum of 100 square feet for each park lot. 


 
c) Recreation areas shall be so located as to be free of traffic hazards. The minimum dimension of recreation areas shall be 20 feet in any direction. 


 
d) The location, design, and equipment for recreation areas shall be part of a site plan submitted and approved by the Lincoln Planning Commission.  


 
e) All recreation improvements shall be in place before any occupancy permits shall be granted.   


 
9. Storage, collection and disposal of refuse and garbage.  Each Park shall be provided with safe and adequate facilities for the collection and removal of waste and garbage.  Storage, collection, and handling shall be conducted so as 


to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, or fire hazards.  Trash dumpsters shall be screened on three (3) sides. 


 
D.  Manufactured Home Park Street System & Parking. 
 
1. The entrance and exit street or streets shall be designed to provide safe and convenient access between the public streets and the internal community street system. 


 
2. Park Street Systems shall meet the following standards: 


 
 
a) Minimum pavement widths shall be 20 feet for two-way traffic, 14 feet for one-way traffic and at least 7 feet shall be added for each parking lane if provided. 


 
b) Each site shall be accessible from abutting streets for all essential and emergency uses by vehicular equipment, including equipment used by public safety agencies (fire, police and ambulance services). 


 
c) The street layout shall be designed to provide for the continuous flow of traffic, with cul-de-sacs (minimum radius of 80 feet) being permissible. 


 
d) Traffic control signs (stop, yield, and speed limit) shall be placed throughout the park where necessary. 


 
e) Each street shall have a permanent sign installed with a designated name identifying each street. 


 
f) Streets and parking areas shall be maintained by the owner/operator of the manufactured home park. 


 
g) Street lighting shall be provided throughout the park. 


 
3. Car Parking:  Off-street parking areas or on-street parking lanes shall be provide for the use of park occupants and guests as follows: 


 
a) Minimum of two, ten (10) feet by 20 feet, paved parking spaces shall be provided for each lot/site. 


 
b) Driveways shall have a minimum width of 12 feet. 


 
c) All off-street parking areas or spaces shall have direct access to an interior street; no direct driveway access shall be permitted between manufactured home lots to any exterior public street. 


E.  Procedures for Approval for Placement of Manufactured Homes on Individual Lots. 
 
1. Applications for approval of placement of manufactured homes shall be made on a form developed for this purpose.  The form shall be submitted to Planning & Development Services for review and approval in accordance with this ordinance. 





 
2. Such application shall include all information necessary to make determinations as to conformity with the provisions of this ordinance.  Photographs or renderings of the manufactured home may be necessary to make determinations required by the ordinance. 





 
3. Planning & Development Services shall approve or deny the application within three (3) business days after receipt of the application and any required supporting materials. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the approval or denial of the application.  





 
4. CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH A MANUFACTURED HOME SHALL NOT BE LOCATED IN THE CITY OF LINCOLN: 





 
a) If it has been altered structurally from the manufacturer’s original design. 


 
b) If it has been damaged by flood, wind, fire or other cause. 


 
c) If it has been denied set-up in another municipality or community for reasons other than the federal zone requirements for wind, thermal and/or roof load protection. 


 
 
604.05.  Standards for Manufactured Home Subdivisions. 
 
Manufactured home subdivisions proposed for location within the corporate limits of the City of Lincoln must comply with all requirements of the Subdivision Regulations, including but not limited to, road construction standards, access requirements, drainage requirements, etc. 
 
Additionally, unless otherwise approved as part of a special district master plan development, manufactured home subdivisions located in the City of Lincoln must meet all lot size and setback requirements for the zoning district in which it is to be located, as set out in Table 6-1. 
 
Table 6-2: General requirements for the various alternative development types  
  
Housing Type 
  
S/D Plat 
Required 
 Bldg. Envelope 
On Plat 
  
Site Plan 
Required 
  
Units per 
Lot 
  
Units per 
Structure 
 Platted 
Open Space1 
 
SF Detached 
 X 
  
  
 1 
 1 
 X 
 
Zero Lot-Line 
 X 
 X 
  
 1 
 1 
 X 
 
Town House 
 X 
 X 
  
 1 
 3-10 
 X 
 
Twin House 
 X 
 X 
  
 1 
 2 
 X 
 
Duplex 
 X 
  
  
 2 
 2 
 X 
 
Multiple Unit Development 
  
  
 X 
 3+ 
 2 
  
 
Manufactured Home Park 
  
  
 X 
 25+ 
 1 
  
 
Manufactured Home Subdivision2 
 X 
 X 
  
 1 
 1 
 X 
 

1See Table 6-1, note 4 
2See Section 604 
 
 
Section 605.  Master Development Plan.   
 
Where any development site is to be developed in stages or phases, no plat or phase plan for any fraction of the site shall be accepted for review, unless a Master Development Plan is submitted.  A Master Development Plan shall be required in connection with any request for Alternative Residential Development or Special District (SD) zoning.  A Master Development Plan shall also be required for any development containing a mixture of residential and non-residential land uses, and/or more than one of the dwelling unit types described in Section 603.02. 
  
The Master Development Plan shall be a conceptual plan showing the entire development site and all component stages or phases, and shall express the overall development concept for the site at build-out.  The plan shall show all proposed streets and shall demonstrate compatibility between adjacent land uses.  The plan has two additional purposes:  to ensure that required amenities keep a reasonable pace with residential construction in a phased development; and to establish an outer perimeter for the purpose of calculating density and required open space. 
 
The Master Development Plan shall include the following information: 
 
A.  outer boundary or perimeter of the overall development site, including a valid legal description; 
 
B.  approximate locations of all proposed streets; 
 
C.  type, number and approximate locations of all dwelling units; 
 
D.  overall gross density for the development site, as well as density for each individual stage or phase; 
 
E.  location and approximate acreage of all resource protection, recreation, and open space lands and other common properties; 
 
F.  location of all streets and drainage facilities; 
 
G.  required bufferyards; and 
 
H.  any other information which  Planning and Development Services determines to be relevant.   
 
Where a Master Development Plan is submitted in conjunction with a Special District (SD) zoning this plan shall include a written statement addressing design standards within the development, including minimum residential lot sizes and widths, building setbacks, building heights, signage, impervious surface and floor area ratios, and any other information Planning and Development Services determines to be relevant.  Upon approval, this written statement shall become a component of the Master Development Plan and shall be binding upon all future development on the site.   
 
When a Master Development Plan is required, such plan shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission prior to or simultaneously with any regular site plan or subdivision plat submitted.  Upon approval of the Master Development Plan, the developer may submit and, the Planning Commission may approve, subdivision plats or site plans for individual phases or stages. 
 
The Master Development Plan shall include a schedule showing density and open space on a cumulative basis upon completion of each phase.  All stage or phase plans shall be consistent with the approved Master Development Plan. 
 
 Once approved, the Master Development Plan shall become a binding condition of development on the site, and subsequent stages or phases of the development shall be substantially consistent with it.  If Planning and Development Services finds that any stage or phase plan substantially deviates from the approved Master Development Plan, a revised master plan shall be required for Planning Commission review prior to approval of further site plans or subdivision plats within the development. 
 
 Any of the following changes shall constitute a “substantial deviation:”   
 
A.  An increase or reduction in land area of the development. 
 
B.  An increase in the total number of dwelling units. 
 
C.  Provision of less than the required percentage of recreation, resource protection, or open space land. 
 
D.  Proposal of single family attached, duplex, multi-family or zero lot-line development in place of approved single family detached housing. 
 
E.  Any significant addition, removal or rearrangement of land uses and streets.   
 
Master Development Plan approval shall expire 24 months after granted unless significant progress has been made toward implementation of the development.  Such progress shall be commensurate with the scale of the project. 
  
 
Section 606.  SPECIAL DISTRICT  (SD) 
 
Special districts are hereby authorized for the purpose of providing optional methods of land development, which encourages imaginative solutions to environmental design problems. Areas so established shall be characterized by a unified building and site development program providing for coordinated open space and architectural treatment. The special districts authorized by this Article are also intended to provide means for the establishment of uses, which are generally considered to be incompatible with most other land usage.  
 
606.01.  Procedure.   The procedure to be followed in the creation of special districts shall conform to the regulations for any other zone change with the following exceptions.  
 
A.   Any petition for the establishment of a Special District shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for its review and action. Approval of the request shall be based on the Commission's consideration of the following:  
 
1.  That the proposed development is consistent with the intent and purpose of this ordinance to promote public health, safety, and welfare.  
 
2.  That the final plan for the proposed development meets the requirements of this ordinance as well as the requirements of all other regulating bodies.  
 
3.  That an approved method of sewage disposal is available to the tract under consideration.  
 
B.  The establishment of a Special District will be for the express purpose of improving the tract of land in accordance with the approved plan of development for the particular tract of land and for the uses set forth in the development plan.  
 
C.  If, within two (2) years from the effective date of the zone amendment, construction has not commenced, the Planning Commission may, by appropriate action, repeal the amendment establishing the Special District. Once construction is started the improvements set forth in the plan of development must be completed within two years from date of issuance. Otherwise, the Planning Commission may repeal the amendment establishing the Special District. Extension of time may be granted as long as satisfactory progress is being made.  
 
D.  Unless specific variations are noted on the development plan and approved by the Planning Commission, the most restrictive requirements for parking, loading, yards, and dimensional regulations for the proposed use shall be applicable to the Special District.  
 
606.02.  Shopping Center – Special District (SC-SD) 
 
A.  A special district created for the purpose of establishing a planned shopping center may be allowed in any district except the RE, RS and RG districts.  
 
B.  The Planned Shopping Center District shall be laid out, developed and used according to a plan prepared in compliance with the provisions of this article in order to provide for modern retail shopping facilities in appropriate locations to serve residential neighborhoods or regional areas. Any owner or owners of a tract of land may request that such tract of land be zoned as a Planned Shopping Center District by proceeding under the provisions of this article, but the failure of such owner or owners to apply under this article shall not prevent them from constructing or causing to be constructed a retail sales complex, customarily called a Shopping Center, upon such tract of land provided the same is zoned so as to permit its use for this purpose.  
 
C.  The use of each building or premises shall be in accordance with the plan referred to in this Article, which use shall be limited to services, offices, clinics, parking, retail sale or merchandise, and similar activities ordinarily accepted as shopping center uses. No building shall be designed, constructed, structurally altered or used for residential purposes, except to provide within the buildings allowed, facilities for a custodian, caretaker, or watchman employed on the premises.  
 
D.  The structures permitted in this article shall observe a maximum height of seventy-five feet.  
 
E.  The owner or owners of a tract of land may submit to the Planning Commission a plan for the development and use of such tract for the purpose of and meeting the requirements set forth in this article. Said plan shall comply with all requirements of this article and shall be accompanied by evidence concerning the feasibility of the project and the effect of the proposed development on surrounding property and other physical conditions, which plan and supporting evidence shall include each of the following:  
 
1.  A site plan defining the areas wherein buildings may be constructed, the areas which will be developed for parking and the proportionate amount thereof, the location of roads, driveways and walks and the points of ingress and egress, including access streets where required, the location and height of walls, the spaces for loading, the location, size, character and number of signs, the location and character of exterior lighting, and the character and extent of landscaping, planting and other treatment for protection of adjoining property.  
 
2.  A drainage plan approved by the Planning Commission.  
 
3.  A copy of any deed restrictions intended to be recorded.  
 
4.  A professional report on the needs and extent of the market to be served, and general economic justification.  
 
5.  A professional traffic analysis indicating the effect of the proposed shopping center on adjacent streets and roadways and also indicating the direction and amount of traffic flow to and from the shopping center.  
 
F.  Before any action thereon, the proposed planned shopping center plan, together with the required supplementary information shall be referred to the Planning Commission for study and report. Reasonable additional requirements may be required by the Planning Commission for the protection of adjoining residential property.  
 
 
606.03.  Residential – Special District (RS-SD) 
 
A.  The regulations established in this section are intended to provide optional methods of land development with provisions for commercial, religious, educational and cultural facilities, which are integrated with the total project by unified architectural and open space treatment.  
 
B.  A planned residential development shall be permitted in any district except the GB, HC, LC, and M districts.  
 
C.  The following uses are permitted:  
 
1.  Single family attached and detached dwellings.  
 
2.  Any alternative dwelling type shown in Section 603.02. 
  
3.  Multiple family dwelling including condominiums and town houses.  
 
4.  Commercial uses. For each one hundred (100) dwelling units to be established, four (4) acres may be set aside for commercial use provided that adequate protection of adjacent properties is afforded by the plan.  
 
5.  Recreation uses. Recreation uses may include a community center, golf course, swimming pool, or parks, playground or other recreational uses. Any structure involved in such use shall have a thirty-five (35) foot setback from all property lines.  
 
6. The amount of land set aside for permanent open space shall be fifteen (15) percent of the gross development area.  
 
7.  Educational uses.  
 
8.  Community facilities such as churches and other religious institutions and non-profit clubs such as country clubs, swim and/or tennis area.  
 
D.  The following requirements are minimums and are intended to serve as a guide in plan formulation. The Planning Commission retains the authority to waive the provisions of this section or to impose greater requirements than herein stated. All buildings shall be set back from street right-of-way lines and from the periphery of the project to comply with the following requirements:  
 
1.  There shall be a front yard for all detached single-family dwellings of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. The front yard setback for all other structures shall be as determined by the Planning Commission.  
 
2.  Unless indicated elsewhere, all buildings shall have a setback of not less than twenty-five (25) feet.  
 
3.  In no case shall a lot, for a single family detached structure, be created with an area of less than 4,000 square feet or a frontage of less than sixty (60) feet at the building line.  
 
E.  In addition to other applicable regulations the following rules shall be observed.  
 
1.  The application must be accompanied by a site development plan showing the use or uses, dimensions and locations of proposed streets, parks, play-grounds, other open spaces, residential buildings, commercial buildings and such other pertinent information as may be necessary to adequately determine that the proposed development meets the purpose of this ordinance.  
 
2.  The Planning Commission shall review the conformity of the proposed development by employing recognized principles of design and land use planning. The minimum yard and maximum height requirements of the zoning district shall not apply except as set forth herein. The Planning Commission may impose conditions regarding layout, circulation, and other physical improvements.  
 
3.  Where the planned residential development provides for single family attached (row houses) or single family detached housing to be held under individual ownership by the occupant, a plat of development shall be recorded and shall show building lines, common land, streets, easements and other applicable features.  
 
4.  The proposed development must be designed to produce an environment of stable and desirable character not out of harmony with its surrounding neighborhood. It shall include provisions for recreation areas to meet the needs of the anticipated population.  
 
Section 607.  Mixed-Use Developments.   
 
Developments, other than those within a Special District (SD) which include more than one use on the same site, and in which the uses fall into two or more different use categories, shall be treated as mixed-use developments; and are required to meet the standards of this Section in addition to any other regulations imposed by this Ordinance.  
 
All uses proposed within a mixed-use development must be permitted under Table 4-1 in the district in which the development is to be located, or be approved as part of a Special District zoning and Master Development Plan.  Uses shown in Table 4-1 as conditional must be approved under the provisions of Section 903.  
 
For review purposes, a separate development site for each land use category shall be delineated within a mixed-use development wherever possible.  For shopping centers and any other case in which the different land uses occupy a single structure, the most restrictive requirements relating to any of the individual uses will be applied to the entire site.  
 
 
Section 608.  Accessory Uses and Structures. 
 
608.01.  Authorization.  Except as otherwise expressly provided or limited by this Ordinance, accessory structures and uses are permitted in any zoning district in connection with any principal use lawfully existing or permitted within such district.  Any question of whether a particular use is permitted as an accessory use by the provision of this Section shall be determined by Planning and Development Services pursuant to his or her authority to interpret the provisions of this Ordinance.   
 
608.02.  Zoning certificate required.  No accessory use or structure shall be established or constructed unless a zoning certificate evidencing the compliance of such use or structure with the provisions of this Section, and other applicable provision of this Ordinance and all other City regulations, shall have first been issued in accordance with Section 904.   
 
608.03.  Use limitations. In addition to complying with all other regulations, no accessory use or structure shall be permitted unless it strictly complies with the following restrictions:   
 
A.  The principal use or structure, together with any accessory use or structure, shall not jointly exceed the FAR and ISR in any given use class.   
 
B.  No accessory structure or use shall be constructed or established on any lot prior to the time of the substantial completion of the principal structure.    This shall not apply to agriculture-related structures in the Residential Estate District (RE).   
 
C.  No accessory structure or use on any lot shall cause any impervious surface ratio or exterior storage area to exceed the maximum permitted on the site by this Ordinance.   
 
D.  In the case of all nonresidential uses:  accessory structures shall maintain the same minimum front, side, and rear yard as is required for the principal structure.   
 
E.  No accessory structure shall be closer than ten (10) feet to a principal structure or closer than five (5) feet to any other accessory structure, unless it is attached to such principal or other structure by means of fully enclosed living area.   
 
F.  Accessory structures and uses shall comply with all applicable area, bulk, and yard regulations.   
 
G.  Accessory structures relating to residential uses shall be placed no less than ten (10) feet to the rear of the front building line or front plane of the structure, whichever is greater.  Accessory structures on lots of three (3) acres or more in the Residential Estate (RE) District shall be setback a minimum of 100 feet from the front property line.  
 
H.  No accessory structure shall be placed within a required bufferyard or located closer than five (5) feet to a property line where no bufferyard is required.  
 
I.  On corner lots, no accessory structure shall be located within the required setback for a side yard adjacent to a street.  
 
J.  On any one (1) residential lot, the total floor area of all accessory structures shall be limited to 50 percent of the floor area of the principal structure.  This shall include open carports, gazebos and greenhouses, but not swimming pools.  Lots of three (3) acres or larger in the Residential Estate (RE) district shall be exempt from this limitation.  
 
K.  Accessory structures shall be constructed of materials compatible with those of the principle structure; with the exception that one (1) metal or prefabricated residential accessory structure not exceeding 200 sq. ft. in size may be allowed in the rear yard. 
 
 
609.  Detailed Accessory Use Regulations 
 
The accessory uses and structures specifically mentioned below are subject to the following additional requirements:  
 
609.01.  Home Occupations.   
 
It is the purpose of this Section to provide residents of the City of Lincoln a wide range of opportunities in the use of their residences in profitable activities.  However, the character of the City’s residential areas must also be preserved.  Therefore, these regulations shall ensure that such activities remain limited in scope so as not to interfere with the principal use of any residential neighborhood or development.   
 
A. General Regulations.  All home occupations shall meet the following criteria:   
 
1.  The home occupation must be clearly secondary and incidental to the use of the dwelling unit as a residence.  No more than 25 percent of the total floor area of the dwelling shall be used for the home occupation, to a maximum of 500 square feet.  For the purposes of this Section, “total floor area” shall include all heated and ventilated areas within the dwelling.  Garages, carports, outside storage rooms, and porches shall be excluded.   
 
At Planning and Development Services’ option, a floor plan of the residence may be required, indicating the specific location(s) and extent of the business activity.  
 
2.  The exterior appearance of the dwelling unit and/or premises shall not be altered, nor the occupation within the dwelling unit conducted, in any manner that would cause the premises to differ from its residential character or from the character of the neighborhood.   
 
3.  The home occupation shall be operated in the existing dwelling unit, which shall not be enlarged to accommodate the business activity.   
 
4.  No new accessory structure shall be built, nor shall any existing accessory structure be used, for the purpose of operating the home occupation.   
 
5.  There shall be no visible evidence that the dwelling is being used to operate a home occupation.  Signs shall not be permitted.   
 
6.   No more than two (2) company or commercial vehicles shall be parked at the premises at any time – including but not limited to cars, vans, trucks, and utility trailers.  Off-street parking shall be provided on the premises, as required by Section 611.  No parking of commercial or residential vehicles shall be permitted on the street or in the required front yard. 
 
7.  A maximum of one (1) person not residing in the dwelling may engage in the operation of the home occupation.   
 
8.  No merchandise shall be distributed to customers on the premises.   
 
9.  All advertising material indicating the business hours, address and/or physical location of the business shall also state “By Appointment Only” and/or “No On-Site Service”. 
 
10.  There shall be no outside display or storage of materials, goods, supplies, or equipment used in the home occupation on the premises.   
 
11.  The operation of a home occupation shall not create any nuisance such as excessive traffic, on-street parking, noise, vibration, glare, odors, fumes, smoke, dust, heat, fire hazards, electrical interference or fluctuation inline voltage, or hazards to any greater extent than that normally experienced in the residential 
neighborhood, or be present or noticeable beyond the property boundaries of the home occupation premises.   
 
12.  The operation of a home occupation shall not involve the sale of any dangerous or deadly weapons such as knives, firearms, or air guns; or the storage of hazardous, flammable or explosive chemicals.   
 
13.  The on-site repair of vehicles shall be prohibited as a home occupation.   
 
B.  Application Procedures.  Any applicant for a home occupation zoning certificate shall pay a fee as established in Section 907, and submit an application form, together with any required attachments, to Planning and Development Services.  Planning and Development Services shall have five (5) business days to approve or deny the application, or inform the applicant that more information is needed to reach a decision.   
 
Each applicant for home occupation approval shall submit a deed to the property on which the proposed business will be conducted.  If the applicant does not own the property, he/she shall obtain from the owner a signed and notarized letter of authorization to apply for home occupation approval.   
 
No more than one (1) home occupation shall be approved in any residential dwelling unit.  A fraternity, sorority, or boarding house shall constitute a single dwelling unit.   
 
If an applicant fails to provide required documentation, or provides insufficient information, to determine compliance with this Section, the application shall be denied.   
 
C.   Other Provisions.   
 
1.  Home-based businesses offering child or adult day- or nighttime-care services to more than two (2) persons shall not be considered home occupations under this Section, but shall be regulated under Section 609.02.  These businesses, if previously approved as home occupations, may continue operating as such until the expiration of the current business license.  
 
2.  Yard or garage sales shall be exempt from these regulations under the following conditions: 
a)  sales shall last no longer than two (2) consecutive days;  
 
b)  sales are held no more than four (4) times per year, with an intervening time period of at least 30 days;  
 
c)  the property on which the sale is conducted shall be owned by one of the participants;  
 
d)  no goods purchased for resale may be offered for sale;  
 
e)  no consignment goods may be offered for sale;  
 
f)  all directional or advertising signs shall be removed immediately upon completion of the sale.   
 
3.  Planning and Development Services, their designee, shall be permitted upon reasonable request to enter and inspect the premises of an approved home occupation at any time to verify compliance with these regulations.   
 
4.  Any existing home occupation not in compliance with these regulations may continue operating as a nonconforming home occupation under the following conditions:   
 
a)  the home occupation was approved prior to the effective date of these regulations;  
 
b)  the home occupation is in compliance with all regulations in effect at the time of its approval;  
 
c)  the business activity has continued since the effective date of these regulations without ceasing for a period in excess of 30 days;  
 
d)  the home occupation holds a valid business license issued by the City of Lincoln Business License Office;  
 
e)  the home occupation has operated in a lawful manner at all times prior to adoption of these regulations;  
 
f)  all signs shall be removed immediately;  
 
g)  Limitation on company vehicles and outside display/storage of materials shall become effective immediately upon adoption of this Ordinance. 
 
h) Home Occupations are not transferrable from one property owner to another.  Upon sale of property the existing nonconforming home occupation shall cease operation.  New owners wishing to conduct the same or a different home occupation must petition the City for a new home occupation license and must come into compliance with all home occupation regulations in place at that time. 
 
  609.02.  Family Child Care Home.   
 
It is the intent of this Subsection to regulate the operation of family child care homes so that the average neighbor, under normal circumstances, will not be aware of their existence.   
 
Any resident of a dwelling unit in the City of Lincoln providing family child care shall apply for and receive a zoning certificate from Planning and Development Services subject to the following regulations:   
 
A.  The childcare activity shall be licensed to and operated by a resident of the dwelling unit in which it is located.   
 
B.  The childcare activity must be clearly incidental to the use of the structure as a residence.   
 
C.  Child care services shall be provided to a maximum of six (6) non-resident children at any one time.   
 
D.  The appearance of the dwelling unit, structure, and/or premises shall not be altered, nor the child care activity within the structure conducted, in any manner which would cause the premises to differ from its residential character or from the character of the neighborhood.   
 
E.  The family child care home shall be operated in the existing dwelling unit.  No new or existing accessory structure shall be built or used for the purpose of the child care activity.   
 
F.  No sign shall be permitted in connections with the family child care home.   
 
G.  The total number of persons engaged in the operation of the family child care home shall not exceed four (4).  Up to two (2) persons other than those residing in the dwelling may engage in the operation of the business, provided that there is sufficient off-street parking space to accommodate the vehicles of such non-resident employees.   
 
H.  Off-street parking spaces shall be provided on the premises, as required by Section 611, or as otherwise necessary.   
 
I.  The operation of a family child care home shall not create any nuisance such as excessive traffic, on-street parking, or noise to any greater extent than that normally experienced in the residential neighborhood, or be present or noticeable beyond the property boundaries of the child care premises.   
 
J.  The family child care home shall at all times possess an appropriate license issued by the State of Alabama.  A copy of such license shall be furnished to Planning and Development Services upon request.  Revocation or expiration of the state license shall automatically void any zoning certificate issued by the City. 
 
609.03.  Private Swimming Pools and Tennis Courts Accessory to a Residential Use.   
 
A.  Swimming pools and tennis courts shall be subject to the same side and rear setback requirements applicable to other accessory structures, and shall not be located within 
public utility or drainage easements along side and rear lot lines.  For purposes of setback measurement, swimming pools and tennis courts shall include all surrounding decking or paving, and vertical supports for screen enclosures.   
 
B.  Pools shall be enclosed by a fence a minimum of four (4) feet in height, which must be in place prior to the filling of the pool.  In addition, pools shall meet all other requirements of the City’s most currently adopted edition of the International Property Maintenance Code. 
 
C.  No swimming pool or tennis court permitted under this Section shall be operated as a business or a private club.   
 
D.  Lighting for pools and tennis courts shall be located and installed so that no direct light is visible from adjoining properties. 
 
  609.04.  Antennas.   
 
A.  Antennas shall be an accessory use only, and shall not be the principal use of any property.   
 
B.  Residential TV antennae shall not exceed 30 feet in height; all other antennae shall not extend above 60 feet in height, unless otherwise specified by this Ordinance.   
 
C.  Antennae shall not be located forward of the front building line or within a required side street setback area.   
 
D.    Antennae not mounted on or affixed to a principal structure shall be set back from all property lines a distance equal to its height.   
 
E.  No more than two (2) antennas shall be permitted for each lot or development site.  


 
F. See Also Section 602. 


 
609.05. Subdivision Amenities.   
 
It is the intent of this Section to allow the provision of recreational amenities within a subdivision as uses, which are secondary and incidental to the principal residential use.  Such features are intended to be low in intensity, have minimal impacts on neighboring properties, and serve only residents of the subdivision in which it is located or other developments that are directly adjacent.  Amenities approved under this Section may not be subject to the parking requirements, nor shall they generally require conditional use approval by the Planning Commission.   
 
Upon submission of a scaled drawing showing all proposed improvements, Planning and Development Services may approve subdivision amenities if they meet the requirements listed 
below.  Those not meeting the provisions of this Section shall be evaluated as principal uses and shall be subject to all applicable regulations. 
  
A.  Amenities that may be approved under this Section include swimming pools, playgrounds, parks, and courts or fields for particular sports such as tennis, shuffleboard, softball, basketball, and volleyball.  Specifically excluded are golf courses, golf driving ranges, and miniature golf.   
 
B.  All amenities shall be located on lots or parcels whose recreational purpose is clearly identified on the recorded subdivision plat.  Where an amenity is proposed on an existing lot, which is not designated for recreational purposes, it shall be processed by the Planning Commission as a conditional use under Section 903.     
 
C.  Structures shall be limited to one (1) per parcel, shall be set back 25 feet from all lot lines and shall not exceed 1000 square feet in size inclusive of restroom facilities.  Any recreational parcel containing a structure shall have frontage on a public road within the development.   
 
D.  Amenities shall be appropriately landscaped and buffered in keeping with the standards set out in Article V.  
 
E.  A minimum of five (5) off street parking spaces shall be provide, or 5% of the number of lot in the subdivision, whichever is greatest.  Vehicles and/or equipment used by employees shall be stored in an enclosed structure.   
 
F.  Amenities that occupy required open space within a Master Planned and/or a Special District Development shall be limited to those uses that are allowed under Section 415.  
 
 
610.  Temporary Uses.  
 
Temporary uses are permitted only as expressly provided in this Section.  No temporary use shall be established unless a zoning certificate, evidencing the compliance of such use with the provisions of this Section and other applicable provisions of this Ordinance, shall have first been issued, as provided in Section 904.   
 
610.01.  General Regulations.   
 
Temporary uses as detailed below shall be subject to the following, unless otherwise provided for in this Section:   
 
A.  Notarized, written authorization from property owner with deed to property attached.   
 
B.  Documentation from the Talladega County Health Department must be provided that adequate arrangements for temporary sanitary facilities have been made.   
 
C.  No permanent or temporary lighting shall be installed without an electrical permit and inspection.   
 
D.  All uses shall be confined to the dates specified in the permit.   
 
E.  Hours of operation shall be confined to those specified in the permit.   
 
F.  The site shall be cleared of all debris at the end of the special event and cleared of all temporary structures within seven (7) days after the closing event.   
 
G.  Public parking for the exclusive use of the facility shall be provided, and a stabilized drive to the parking area shall be maintained.  It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to guide traffic to these areas and to prevent patrons from unlawful parking.   
 
H.  Traffic control arrangements required by the Lincoln Police Department, in the vicinity at major intersections, shall be the responsibility of the applicant.   
 
I.  Property owners shall be responsible for restitution and/or repair of any damage resulting to any public right-of-way or property as a result of the event.   
 
J.  Serving of alcoholic beverages shall not be permitted without a permit from the Lincoln City Council.  
 
610.02.  Use Limitations.   
 
A.  The principal use or structure, together with any temporary uses or structures, shall not jointly exceed the ISR or any standard contained in Article IV.   
 
B.  No signs in connection with a temporary use shall be permitted except as specified in Section 610.03.  
 
610.03.  Particular Temporary Uses Permitted.  The following are temporary uses, which are subject to the specified regulations and standards, in addition to the other requirements specified in this Ordinance. 
 
A.  Carnival or circus.   
 
  1.  Permitted only in Commercial Districts (GB and HC).   
 
2.  Maximum length of permit shall be 15 days.   
 
3.  No structure or equipment shall be permitted within 500 feet of any residential property line.   
 
4.  Permitted sign shall have a maximum size of 32 sq. ft.  
 
B.  Christmas tree sales.   
 
  1.  Permitted only in Commercial (GB and HC) and Residential Estate (RE).   
 
  2.  Maximum length of permit for display and open-lot sales shall be 45 days.   
 
  3.  Permitted sign shall have a maximum size of 32 sq. ft.   
 
 C.  On-Site Contractor’s office and construction equipment sheds. 
 
1.  Permitted in any district where use is incidental to a construction project.  Office or shed shall not contain sleeping or cooking accommodations.   
 
2.  Maximum length of permit shall be one (1) year.  The Planning Commission may grant a one-time extension as deemed appropriate. 
 
3.  Office or shed shall be removed upon completion of construction project.   
 
4.  Signs shall be permitted only in accordance with Article VIII.   
 
 D.  Events of public interest. 
 
1.  Permitted only Commercial (GB and HC), and Residential Estate (RE); and Downtown Historic District (DH).    
 
2.  Events may include but are not limited to outdoor concerts, auctions and athletic events and associated concessions and activities.  
 
3.  Permitted sign shall have a maximum size of 32 sq. ft.   
 
E.  Fireworks Stand.   
 
  1.  Permitted only in GB, HC, M-1 and M-2 zoning districts. 
 
  2.  Front setback requirements shall be waived. 
 
3.  Side and rear yard setbacks shall conform to the minimum required for the zoning district. 
 
4.  A minimum of five (5) off-street parking spaces per fireworks stand.  Improved parking areas shall not be required. 
 
5.  Advertising signs on the site shall conform to the requirements of Article VIII, Sign Regulations. 
 
6.  Maximum length of permit shall be 30 days.  All evidence of use must be removed within seven (7) days of the end of the permit period. 
 
 F.  Modular Buildings as Temporary Uses. 
 
1. Business Establishments: 

a) Permitted only while a permanent structure is actively being constructed. 

b) Must be a modular building (not manufactured). 

c) Permitted only in Commercial (GB & HC) Districts. 

d) Maximum length of permit shall be six (6) months.  Subsequent 90 day extensions may be granted by request to the Planning Commission.  No more than two (2) extension may be granted. 

e) Any proposed sign for the temporary location shall be approved by Planning and Development Services and have a maximum size of 32 sq. ft. 




 
2. Classrooms: 

a) Temporary location shall be treated as a conditional uses and shown on a site drawing filed with the Planning Commission. 

b) Must be underpinned and kept free from weeds and debris. 

c) Maximum length of permit shall be one (1) year.  One extension may be granted by request to the Planning Commission.  Further extensions will require recommendation of the Commission and approval by the City Council. 

d) May be a manufactured building if placement is for one year or less; must be modular if planned placement is for more than one year. 




 
G.  Real estate sales office.   
 
1.  Permitted in any district for any new subdivision approved in accordance with Lincoln Subdivision Regulations.  The office must be of modular construction and may not contain sleeping or cooking accommodations.  A model home may be used as a temporary sales office for the duration of the temporary use zoning certificate.   
 
2.  Maximum length of permit shall be one (1) year.  The Planning Commission may grant a one-time extension as deemed appropriate. 
 
3. Office shall be removed upon completion of the development of the subdivision.   
 
H.  Religious tent meeting.  
 
1.  Permitted only in Office & Institutional (O-I), Commercial (GB & HC), and Residential Estate (RE) Districts.   
 
2.  Maximum length of permit shall be 15 days.   
 
3.  Permitted sign shall have a maximum size of 32 sq. ft.                 
 
I.  Sale of farm produce.  
 
1.  Permitted in Commercial (GB &HC), Residential Estate (RE), and Downtown Historic (DH) Districts.  Prohibited in Manufacturing (M), and Residential (R) Districts.   
 
2.  Maximum length of permit shall be one (1) year.   
 
3.  Sales areas, including the produce stands, shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the nearest right-of-way of any street or highway.   
 
4.  No permanent structures shall be permitted without an approved site plan meeting all the requirements Section 902. 
 
4.  Permitted sign shall have a maximum size of 32 sq. ft.   
 
J.  Temporary shelter. 
 
1.  When fire or natural disaster has rendered a single-family residence unfit for human habitation, the temporary use of a manufactured home located on the single-family lot during rehabilitation of the original residence or construction of a new residence is permitted subject to the following additional regulations: 
 
1.  Appropriate building permits must be issued prior to location of temporary shelter on the site.   
 
2.  Required water and sanitary facilities must be provided.   
 
3.  Maximum length of permit shall be six (6) months, however, Planning and Development Services may extend the permit for a period or periods not to exceed 60 days in the event of circumstances beyond the control of the owner.  Requests for the extension shall be made in writing at least 15 days prior to expiration of the original permit.  In no case shall the length of the original permit plus all extensions exceed one (1) year.   
 
4.  The manufactured home shall be removed from the property within 14 days of   issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy for the new or rehabilitated residence.   
 
 
 
 
K.  Tent sale/outdoor sales activity.   
 
1.  The outdoor storage or display of merchandise shall be exempted from these requirements under either of the following conditions:  
 
a)  merchandise occupies an outdoor display area, which is permanent in nature and designated as such on an approved site plan;  
 
b)  merchandise is located in a temporary display area which does not occupy required parking spaces, driveway aisles, or required bufferyards, and customers must enter the building to make a purchase.   
 
2.  Tent sales and similar activities are permitted only in Commercial (GB &HC) Districts, on property developed with a principal commercial use, with proper pedestrian and vehicular access.  They shall be prohibited on vacant property.   
 
3.  Where the temporary sales activity constitutes a conditional use on the site, it shall not be permitted unless conditional use approval has been recommended by the Planning Commission and granted by the City Council.   
 
4.  The applicant shall submit a site plan specifying the location of all tents, temporary structures, equipment, and merchandise on display.  
 
5.  Permitted sign shall have a maximum size of 32 sq. ft.   
 
6.  All electrical connections shall be inspected and approved by the Building Inspections Department. 
  
7.  Planning and Development Services and/or City Engineer may establish additional requirements as necessary to minimize hazards and promote efficient traffic circulation on the site.   
 
8.  The maximum duration of the Zoning Certificate shall be 15 days.  A maximum of four (4) permits per calendar year may be authorized, and at least 30 days shall elapse between the expiration of one permit and the approval of another. 
 
Section 611.  Off-street Parking, General Requirements.   
 
A.  The requirements listed in this Section specify the minimum number of off-street parking spaces.   
 
B.  For all required off-street parking, the minimum size of each standard parking stall shall be ten (10) feet by eighteen (18) feet, exclusive of aisle width, which shall be delineated by striping or other similar means.  Parking other than perpendicular parking shall comply with the standards set out in the International Building Code.   
 
C.  Unless otherwise noted, all parking spaces required herein, including adequate driveways and maneuvering areas shall be improved with a suitable, hard surface, permanent type of pavement.   
 
D.  If the required number of spaces is not a whole number, the number of required spaces shall be rounded up to the next higher whole number.   
 
E.  Except as provided in elsewhere in this section, all required parking spaces shall be provided on the same development site for which they are required; location of required spaces on adjoining property or across a public right-of-way shall be prohibited. 
 
F.  All parking spaces shall be delineated by appropriate fixed curbing, painted lines (a minimum of four inches (4”) wide), or other fixed markers.   
 
G. Alternate forms of parking (i.e. compact spaces) other than that defined as “standard” above shall be considered by the staff on a case by case basis.  Under no circumstances shall such parking comprise more than fifteen (15) percent of the overall required parking. 


 
H. Truck loading spaces shall be an accessible rectangle having a width of twelve (12) feet and a length of seventy (70) feet.  Any overhead obstructions shall have a vertical clearance of fifteen (15) feet. 


 
I.  In all applicable districts, the following off street loading requirements shall apply: 
 
Residential Uses 
 None Required 
 
Commercial Uses:  
  
 
    0 – 30,000 sf  
 1 berth 
 
    30,001 – 50,000 sf 
 2 berths 
 
    50,001 – 70,000 sf  
 3 berths 
 
    Greater than 70,000 sf 
 1 berth for each additional 100,000 sf or fraction thereof 
 
 
  
 

 
 J.  Queuing Spaces shall be ten feet (10’) by twenty-four feet (24’) 
  
611.01.  Residential Parking. 
 
A.  See Section 603 for the off-street parking requirements for residential uses.   
 
B.  Reduction in number of off-street parking spaces.  When a development is specifically designed to be used for senior citizens, all such units shall be required to provide a minimum of one (1) parking space for each such unit.   
 
C.  Required parking for any residential dwelling unit within a subdivision shall be provided within the boundaries of the lot on which it is located.   
 
D.  Parking for single-family detached dwellings on fee simple lots is exempt from the striping requirements set forth in Section 611. 
 
611.02.  Non-residential Parking. 
 
On-site parking will not be required for nonresidential uses in the Downtown Historic district.  For all other district, the following minimum number of parking spaces shall be required of the nonresidential uses specified below.   
 
Reference herein to “employee(s) on the largest work shift” means the maximum number of employees employed at the facility regardless of the time period during which this occurs and regardless of whether any such person is a full-time employee.  The largest work shift may be a particular day of the week or a lunch or dinner period in the case of a restaurant.   
 
The term “capacity” as used herein means the maximum number of persons that may be accommodated by the use as determined by its design or by fire code regulations, whichever is greater.   
 
A.  Parking Requirements by Land Use Category.   The following criteria shall be used when no Specified Use Standard has been provided in Section 611.02 B. below. 
 
1.  Agricultural uses:  one (1) space per employee on the largest shift.  The Planning Commission may, based upon the type and intensity of the agricultural use, waive the requirement for parking to be of hard surface pavement. 
  
2.  Agricultural support uses:  one (1) space per 750 square feet of gross floor area.   
 
3.  Commercial and entertainment uses:  one (1) space per 250 square feet of gross floor area; for uses exceeding 100,000 square feet, one (1) space per 300 square feet of gross floor area.   
 
4.  Commercial/recreational uses:  one (1) space per four (4) patrons to the maximum design capacity of the facility.   
 
5.  Commercial support uses:  one (1) space per 750 square feet of gross floor area.   
 
6.  Extraction uses:  one (1) space per employee on the largest shift.   
 
7.  Industrial uses:  one (1) space per 1000 square feet of adjusted gross floor area, plus one (1) space per company vehicle normally stored on premises.   
 
8.  Institutional, indoor recreational, and special residential uses:  one (1) space per four (4) patrons to the maximum capacity.   
 
9.  Nursery uses:  one (1) space per 300 square feet of gross floor area.  Plus one (1) space per 2000-sq. ft. of outdoor display area.   
 
10.  Office uses:  one (1) space per 250 square feet of gross floor area.   
 
11.  Outdoor recreational uses:  one (1) space per four (4) patrons at design capacity.   
 
12.  Public services uses:  one (1) space per employee on the largest work shift, plus one (1) space per company vehicle normally stored on the premises.   
 
13.  Recreational rental uses:  one and one-half (1.5) spaces per rental site; plus one space per 250 square feet of office area.   
 
14.  Road service uses:  one (1) space per 150 square feet of gross floor area.  Road Service uses utilizing a drive-in window shall provide queuing space for at least six (6) vehicles from the start of the stacking lane to the service window; and at least one and one half (1.5) vehicles from the service window to the exit to a public right-of-way.  
   
 
B.  Parking Requirements for Specified Uses.  
 
1.  Airport:  one (1) space for each four (4) aircraft that can be parked or stored at the facility, whether indoors or outdoors; plus one (1) space for each four (4) seats in waiting areas and restaurants; plus one (1) space for each 250 square feet of office and other administrative or support uses.   
 
2.  Amusement center:  one (1) space for each 100 square feet of gross floor area.   
 
3.  Assembly, Places of:  one (1) space per four (4) seats of maximum capacity.  
 
4.  Assisted living facilities:  one (1) space per dwelling unit.   
 
5.  Athletic field:  20 spaces for every diamond or athletic field, or one (1) space for every four (4) seats of design capacity, whichever is greater.  
 
6.  Auction house:  one (1) space for each four (4) seats of design capacity, whether indoors or outdoors.   
 
7.  Auto parts store:  one (1) space per 300 square feet of gross floor area.   
 
8.  Auto rental:  one (1) space per 400 square feet of gross floor area.   
 
9.  Automated, freestanding walk-up facility:  one (1) space per facility.  If accessory to another use, no additional spaces are required.   
 
10.  Banks:  one (1) space per 300 square feet of gross floor area, plus four (4) stacking spaces per drive-through lane.   
 
11.  Beauty and barber shops:  two (2) spaces per chair or one (1) space per 150 square feet of gross floor area, whichever is larger.   
 
12.  Bicycle sales and repair shop:  one (1) space per 300 square feet of gross floor area.   
 
13.  Boarding house:  one (1) space per room.   
 
14.  Bowling alley:  four (4) spaces per lane, plus any additional space required for restaurant facilities, game rooms and other accessory uses on the site.   
 
15.  Car wash (full service):  five (5) employee spaces; plus four (4) stacking spaces for each wash stall.  
 
16.  Car wash (self-serve):  two (2) stacking spaces per stall (including stall); plus one drying space per stall.   
 
17.  Carpet store:  See Furniture Store.   
 
18.  Church:  See Assembly, Places of 
 
19.  Community, civic or recreation center:  one (1) space per 250 square feet of gross floor area.   
 
20.  Contractor’s office/storage yard:  one (1) space per 250 square feet of office area; plus one (1) space per 1,500 square feet of indoor storage area; plus one (1) space per 4,000 square feet of outdoor storage area.   
 
21.  Convenience store and/or self-service gas station (no vehicle repairs):  one (1) space per 150 square feet of gross floor area.  Service areas at pumps may 
be counted toward required parking spaces.  In no instance shall a required parking space conflict with vehicles being fueled or awaiting fuel.  Convenience stores with on-site or attached eating establishments shall also meet requirements for restaurant parking.  (See Section 611.03 “Shared Parking”) 
 
22.  Day care center or nursery school:  one (1) space per 250 square feet of gross floor area; plus one (1) off-street parking or loading space per ten (10) children.  Maximum enrollment and number of employees shall be noted on the site plan.  Parking or loading spaces designated for children shall be located such that there is direct pedestrian access into the facility without crossing streets or driveways.   
 
23.  Drive-in theater:  one (1) space per automobile station, plus one (1) space per employee.  Parking may be of a non-paved surface, but must provide a stabilized surface such as gravel, dirt surfaces will not be permitted. 
 
24.  Drug and alcohol treatment center:  one (1) space per two (2) beds and one (1) space per staff member, based on state licensing requirements and maximum design capacity.   
 
25.  Dry cleaning facility:  one (1) space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, but in no case less than three (3).  
 
26.  Employment agency:  one (1) space per 250 square feet of gross floor area.   
 
27.  Exterminator:  one (1) space per 800 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space per company vehicle.   
 
28.  Funeral home:  one (1) space per four (4) patron seats in each chapel or viewing area, plus one (1) space per 300 square feet of office space. 
 
29.   Furniture store:  one (1) space for each 750 square feet of gross floor area.   
 
30. Gas station, full-service:  one (1) space per 150 square feet of retail area, plus one (1) space per service bay, plus one (1) space per 250 square feet of office space.  In no instance shall a required parking space conflict with vehicles being fueled or awaiting fuel.  Service areas at pumps may be count toward parking spaces.   
 
31.  Golf courses (nine and eighteen hole):  35 spaces per nine (9) holes.  Parking shall be provided for other uses accessory to a golf course (e.g., restaurants, pro shops, driving ranges, etc.) at the rate of 50 percent of normal requirements.   
 
32.  Golf driving range:  one and one-half (1.5) spaces per tee.   
 
33.  Golf, par three:  25 spaces per nine (9) holes.   
 
34.  Grocery or supermarket (stand-alone):  one (1) space per 250 square feet of gross floor area.   
 
35.  Health club/spa/gymnasium:  one (1) space per 275 square feet of gross floor area.   
 
36.  Hospital:  two (2) spaces per patient bed, plus two (2) spaces per emergency room examination table or bed  
 
37.  Hotel or motel:  one and one quarter (1.25) spaces per room.  Parking shall be provided for other uses accessory to a hotel or motel (e.g., restaurants, bars, meeting rooms, etc.) at the rate of 65 percent of normal requirements.  
 
38.  Junkyards:  two (2) space per acre of land area.   
 
39.  Kennel:  one (1) space per 500 square feet of floor area, but not less than three (3) spaces. 
  
40.  Laundromat:  one (1) space per 250 square feet of gross floor area.   
 
41.  Lumberyard or Home Improvement Center:  one (1) space per 500 square feet of gross floor area, plus one (1) space per 1,500 square feet of outdoor storage/display area.   
 
42.  Machinery sales (includes cars, boats, RVs, Heavy Equipment, tractors, etc.):  one (1) space per 400 square feet of gross floor area, plus two (2) spaces per service bay, plus one (1) space per 2,500 square feet of outdoor display/storage area.  (See Also Vehicle Sales & Service) 
 
43.  Medical offices:  one (1) space per 250 square feet of gross floor area.  
 
44.  Miniature golf:  one and one half (1.5) space per hole.   
 
45.  Mini-warehouse:  a minimum of three (3) and maximum of five (5) spaces shall be provided in the vicinity of the office and a 27 foot minimum drive aisle to all storage unit doors.   
 
46.  Movie theatre:  See Assembly, Places of 
 
47.  Nursing homes:  one (1) space per three (3) beds.   
 
48.  Office Warehouse:  one (1) space per 250 square feet of office area, plus one (1) space per 1,500 square feet of gross warehouse floor area. 
 
49. Outdoor theater/amphitheater:  one (1) space per four (4) patrons to the maximum capacity of the facility inclusive of both indoor and outdoor capability.   
 
50. Parcel delivery service:  one (1) space per 750 square feet of gross floor area.   
 
51.  Plumbing and heating supply:  one (1) space per 750 square feet of gross floor area.  See Also Contractors office.   
 
52.  Printing and publishing plant:  one (1) space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.   
 
53.  Private clubs:  one (1) space per four (4) persons to the maximum capacity of the facility.   
 
54.  Public assembly hall:  See Assembly, Places of 
 
55. Radio/television station:  one (1) space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.   
 
56.  Recreational vehicle park:  one (1) space per recreational vehicle site, plus one (1) space per 250 square feet of gross floor area of permanent habitable structures on the development site.   
 
57.  Restaurant, fast food:  one (1) space per 100 square feet of gross floor area.  Sufficient space on-site shall be provided to accommodate queuing vehicles.  Such space shall at a minimum provide capacity for four (4) vehicles from the start of the stacking lane to the order board; two (2) vehicles from the order board to the service window; and one and one-half (1.5) vehicles from the service window to the exit to a public right-of-way.  In no instance shall stacked vehicles block primary ingress/egress to the site. 
 
58.  Restaurant, standard:  one (1) space per four (4) patron seats or one (1) space per 150 square feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater. (Including Outdoor Seating) 
 
59.  Schools:    
 
a)  Elementary:  five (5) spaces, plus one (1) space per classroom or one (1) space per six (6) seats of largest assembly room, whichever is greater.  
 
b)  Junior high:  five (5) spaces, plus one (1) space per classroom or one (1) space per six (6) seats of largest assembly room, whichever is greater.  
 
c)  Senior high:  ten (10) spaces, plus one (1) space per classroom, plus one (1) space for each five (5) students or one (1) space per ten (10) seats of largest assembly room, whichever is greater.  
d)  College:  one (1) space for each five (5) students (based on the maximum design capacity) plus two (2) spaces per three (3) employees. 
 
60.  School, commercial or trade:  one (1) space for each five (5) students (based on the maximum design capacity) plus two (2) spaces per three (3) employees. 
    
61.  Shopping center:  one (1) space per 250 square feet of gross floor area.  In a shopping mall, common pedestrian areas, except food courts, may be excluded from the calculation.  Shopping centers over 650,000 square feet shall have one (1) space per 300 square feet of gross floor area.   
 
62.  Skating rink, ice or roller:  one (1) space per four (4) patrons to maximum capacity.   
 
63.  Swimming facility:  one (1) space per 200 square feet of gross water area.   
 
64.  Taverns, dance halls, nightclubs, and lounges:  one (1) space per 75 square feet of gross floor area.   
 
65.  Telecommunications tower:  one (1) off-street parking space to accommodate a maintenance vehicle for unoccupied structure.  Occupied structures must comply with parking requirements as set out under Public Service uses.   
 
66.  Tennis, racquetball, and handball courts:  two (2) spaces per court.   
 
67.  Theaters and auditoriums:  See Assembly, Places of 
 
68.  Truck terminal:  one (1) space per truck normally parked on the premises, plus one (1) space per 500 square feet of office floor area.   
 
69.  Vehicle sales and service accessory to vehicle sales:  One (1) space per 2,000 square feet of interior or exterior sales, display, or storage area up to a total of 20 spaces. 
 
70.  Vehicle repair and maintenance services:  one (1) space per 400 square feet of office and indoor display area, plus one (1) space per service bay (excluding bay).   
 
71.  Veterinary office:  one (1) space per 500 square feet of gross floor area.  
 
72.  Warehouse:  one (1) space per 2,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus one (1) space per company vehicle normally stored on the premises.   
 
 
611.03.  Shared Parking.   
 
In order to reduce impervious surface and resulting stormwater runoff, establishments may be allowed to share up to 20 percent of the required parking spaces.  In all cases where parking is to be shared by uses on different lots, the subject parcels or lots shall be adjacent to one another, have adequate vehicular cross access, and in no case shall properties bound under a shared parking agreement, or plan, be separated by a public right-of-way.  (See Figure 16) 
 
The intention to share parking facilities must be represented to the Planning Commission prior to site plan approval by means of a written agreement between the various property owners, or in the case of a single owner, an overall shared parking plan for the properties or development sites.  Said agreement or plan shall be binding upon all subsequent purchasers, inheritors, subjects and assigns.  Should there be a change in the use within any individual structure or location which is bound by a shared parking agreement or plan, the transfer of the shared parking agreement shall be subject to the review and approval of the Planning Commission and City Attorney.   
 
611.04.  Reduction in the Number of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces for Large Uses (over 500,000 square feet of gross floor area).    In order to prevent the establishment of a greater number of parking spaces than are actually needed to meet the particular needs of a development site containing over 500,000 square feet of gross floor area, a reduction in the number of required off-street parking spaces may be permitted.  This reduction shall be permitted subject to the following conditions:   
 
A.  A maximum reduction of one (1) parking space per every 1,000 square feet of gross floor area or 20 percent of the total spaces required can be permitted.  The site plan shall indicate the location and dimensions of the parking area provided, and shall include calculations showing the number of parking spaces eliminated pursuant to this Section which otherwise would have been required.   
 
B.  Sufficient area must be reserved to provide for the total number of off-street parking spaces required by Section 611.  The purpose of this reservation is to insure adequate area to meet any future need for additional parking spaces.  Prior to site plan approval, the applicant shall sign a written statement agreeing to provide additional spaces up to the full amount required by Section 611 upon notification by Planning and Development Services and/or the Planning Commission that such spaces are needed.  This statement 
shall be provided to the Planning Commission and City Attorney in letter form and shall be reproduced on the site plan.   
 
C.  The reserved parking area shall be shown on the site plan and shall be grassed, landscaped or otherwise covered in vegetation.  It shall not include signs or other structures, drainage or percolation fields for sewage disposal, areas exceeding 12 percent slope, required bufferyards, areas of general or off-street parking landscaping required under Article V, setbacks, or areas which would otherwise be unsuitable for parking spaces due to the physical characteristics of the land or other requirements of this Ordinance.  
 
 
 612.  Lighting.   
 
All lighting must be directed and/or shielded so as to focus lighting onto the use as established and away from adjacent property and areas of pedestrian and vehicular traffic including, but not limited to, sidewalks and streets.  
 
All lighting fixtures incorporated into non-enclosed structures (i.e. gas pump canopies, car washes, etc.) must be fully recessed into the underside of such structures. 
 
Light or glare from any operation and all lighting for parking areas or for the external illumination of buildings or grounds shall be directed or located in such a manner as to focus lighting onto the use and away from adjacent property and areas of pedestrian and vehicular traffic including, but not limited to, sidewalks and streets.  (See Figure 17) 
 
A lighting plan must be provided with all development plans (i.e. site plans and subdivision plats) showing, at a minimum, placement of all lighting structures, height of structures, and illumination levels taking into account landscaping and other possible obstructions. 
 
 
Section 613.  Flag Lots.   
 
A flag lot is a lot that has minimal frontage on a publicly owned and maintained street, whose width some distance back from the street boundary line meets all Ordinance requirements.  (See Figure 5)  The purpose of flag lots is to reduce the number of direct access points to arterial and collector roads.  Flag lots may be permitted, even though they do not meet the minimum lot width requirements at the street boundary line, subject to the following conditions:   
 
A.  Flag lots shall be limited to single family residential use only.  No more than one (1) dwelling unit shall be authorized for any one (1) flag lot access strip.   
 
B.  A flag lot may be used within a subdivision to provide a lot fronting on an arterial or collector road with access to an internal subdivision street.  In such cases, vehicular access to the lot from the arterial or collector shall be prohibited.  In any event, no more than 10 percent of the lots in any subdivision may be approved as flag lots.   
 
C.  Flag lots providing access to arterial or collector roads shall be prohibited.   
 
D.  Flag lot “stems” or access strips shall be at least 25 feet in width as measured at the road frontage.  The land area within the access strip shall not count toward the required minimum lot size. 
 
E.  Where otherwise consistent with the provisions of this section, flag lots may be created in groups not exceeding two (2); in such cases, access strips shall be adjacent to each other and form a total width of 50 feet.  A distance of 500 feet shall separate non-adjacent flag lot access strips on the same side of the road.  All access strips shall be at least 25 feet from an intersection.  
 
F. Planning and Development Services shall identify the front, side and rear lot lines of a flag lot for determining yard requirements, allowable locations of accessory structures, and other purposes.  


 


ARTICLE VII.     SIGN REGULATIONS 
   
Section 700. Purpose and Scope   
 
The City of Lincoln recognizes that signs perform an important function in identifying properties, businesses, services, residences, events, and other matters of public interest.  It is the intent of this Article to: 
 
A.  Set standards and provide controls that permit reasonable use of signs and enhance the character of the City. 
 
B. Support and promote the use of signs to aid the public in the identification of businesses and other activities, to assist the public in its orientation within the City, to express the history and character of the City, to promote the community’s ability to attract sources of economic development and growth, and to serve other informational purposes.  


 
C. Avoid excessive competition for large or multiple signs, so that permitted signs provide identification and direction while minimizing clutter, unsightliness, confusion, and hazardous distractions to motorists. 


 
D. Protect the public from the danger of unsafe signs, and from the degradation of the aesthetic qualities of the City.   


 
E. Encourage sign design that builds on the traditional town image and visual environment the City of Lincoln seeks to promote. 


 
This Article is not intended to inhibit an individual’s right to express non-commercial messages protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution.  
 
These regulations shall apply to all signs erected, constructed, displayed, painted, maintained, altered, and/or installed in every zoning district in the City, which are designed or intended to be seen by or attract the attention of the public.  No sign shall be erected or installed unless it is in compliance with the regulations of this Article. 
 
 
Section 701. Definitions   
 
Words and phrases used in this Article shall have the meanings defined in this Section.  Words and phrases not defined in this Article but defined elsewhere in the Zoning Ordinance shall be given the meaning set forth in Article II Definitions. 
 
Banner: Any sign made of cloth, canvas, plastic sheeting or any other flexible material, which is not rigidly and permanently attached to a building or the ground through a permanent support structure.    
 
  

 

 
Billboard:  A sign that directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a location other than the premises on which the sign is located. 
 
Building Frontage:  See “Main or Entry Façade” definition.   
 
Building Sign:  A sign displayed upon or attached to any part of the exterior of a building, including walls, doors, parapets, and marquees. Canopy signs, awning signs, projecting signs, and signs suspended from buildings are considered types of building signs.   (See Figure 18) 
 
Commercial Message:  Any sign wording, logo, or other representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial activity.   
 
Commercial Sign:  When describing the content of a sign, a sign advertising, identifying, directing attention to, or otherwise relating to commerce and to property, goods or services for sale, lease, exchange or any other transaction where value is given or received by any party to the transaction.   
 
Development Sign:  Any sign, of a temporary nature, used at the entrance to a subdivision, office park, or similar development that indicates lots being sold, the name of the developer, financial institution or other development parties. 
 
  

 

 
Display Area: The area of a sign or advertising device that can be enclosed or measured by the smallest square, rectangle, triangle, circle or combination thereof, which will encompass the entire sign or advertising device; excluding trim, frame, apron, posts, uprights, braces or other structural members which support it, (See Section 705.04 - Calculation of Display Area).   
 
Entry Façade:  See “Main or Entry Façade” definition.   
 
Erect:  To construct, reconstruct, build, relocate, raise, assemble, place, affix, attach, create, paint, draw, or in any other way bring into being or establish a sign.  It shall not include any of the foregoing activities when performed as an incident to change a message on a reader board, or maintain the sign.   
 
Freestanding Sign:  Any sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on, or anchored in the ground and that are independent from any building or other structure.  The posts or other supporting structures shall be considered as part of the sign, except that they shall not be included in computing the sign display area.  (See Figure 18) 
 
General Business Sign:  Freestanding sign on any individual development site.    
 
Grade Level:  The finished elevation of the lot or development site upon which the sign is located.    
 
Main or Entry Façade:  Generally the façade or side of the building that faces the public street, road or highway.  In cases where the building is oriented in a manner not parallel to the street, the primary entrance façade is used as the main façade.   
 
Marquee:  A permanent roof like structure extending from part of the wall of a building but not supported by the ground; designed to have changeable copy, either manually or electronically which may overhang the public way.   
 
  

 

 
  
   
Menu Board:  A permanent sign, which is not designed or located so as to be legible from any public right-of-way, depicting products that can be purchased on site, and is part of a drive-through service, (i.e. fast food restaurants). 
 
  

 

 
Noncommercial Sign:  A sign which is not an on-premise or off-premise commercial sign and which carries no message, statement, or expression related to the commercial interests of the sign owner, lessee, author or other person responsible for the sign message.  Noncommercial signs include but are not limited to:  signs expressing political views, religious views or signs of non-profit organizations related to their tax-exempt purposes.   
 
Off-Premise Sign:  A sign containing a message unrelated to a business, profession, or activity conducted, or to a commodity or service sold or offered, upon the premises where such sign is located.   
 
On-Premise Sign:  A sign containing a message related to a business, profession, or activity conducted, or to a commodity or service sold or offered, upon the premises where such sign is located.   
 
Open Letter Sign:  A sign consisting of a logo or symbol, individual letters or connected lettering mounted on a building in a raceway or similar mounting or on the surface of an integral architectural element, which is a part of the building. Individual letters may be illuminated. The display area of an open letter sign shall not exceed the maximum permitted area for building signs on the property, (See Section 705.04 “Calculation of Display Area”).   
 
  

 

 
Parapet:  That portion of a wall which extends above the roof line.   
 
Painted Graphics:  Any mosaic, mural, painting, graphic art technique, or combination thereof placed on a wall and containing no copy, advertising symbols, lettering, trademarks, or other references to the premises or products and/or services offered for sale on the premises. 
 
Pole Sign:  A freestanding sign that is affixed, attached, or erected on a pole that is not itself an integral part of or attached to a building or structure. 
 
Political Signs:  Any temporary sign promoting the campaign of an individual for public office or an advertisement for an amendment or referendum on a public issue.   
 
Portable Sign:  Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported.  Portable signs include, but are not limited to, signs on wheels, A-frame or T-frame signs, signs attached to vehicles that are not part of the normal day-to-day operation of a business, and temporary metal/cardboard/plastic/wood signs inserted in the ground other than real estate signs.   
  

 

 
Reader Board:  Permanent sign containing messages in the form of removable letters or changeable copy. A reader board may be a building sign or an integral part of a freestanding sign.   
 
Real Estate Sign:  A sign indicating that a property or any portion thereof is available for inspection, sale, lease, rent, or directing people to a property, but not including temporary subdivision signs. 
   
 
  

 

 
Subdivision Identification Marker:  A sign marking an entrance to a residential subdivision, office park, or industrial park.   
 
Temporary Sign: A sign designed and displayed for a seasonal or brief activity such as, but not limited to, sales, specials, promotions, holidays, auctions, business grand openings, and signs advertising the lease or vacancy of rental units in multiunit residential developments. Symbols, figures, balloons, and other similar items shall be considered temporary signs. 
 
Vehicle Sign:  Any sign affixed to a vehicle.   
 
 
  

 

 
Wall Sign:  See Building Sign (See Figure 18) 
 
Wind Sign:  Any signs, pennants, flags (other than official flags), ribbons, spinners, streamers,  captive balloons or inflatable figures, or other objects or materials fastened in such a manner as to move upon being subjected to pressure by wind and drawing attention to a business, product, service or activity whether it contains a message or not.   
 
Window Sign:  Any sign, picture, symbol, or combination thereof designed to communicate information about a business, commodity, event, sale, or service for the location on which it is located that is placed inside or upon a window and is visible from the exterior of the window. 
 
  

 

 
 
Section 702. Exempt Signs   
 
Exempt signs are allowed without a sign permit and are not to be included in determinations of the allowable numbers, type and area of signs that require a sign permit. (Nothing in this Section shall exempt an individual, who desires to erect a sign from the necessity of obtaining a building permit, should such be required by the adopted building code.)  Signs exempted in this Section must conform to the standards enumerated herein and shall not be placed in the public right-of-way, or constructed so as to create a hazard of any kind.   
 
702.01.  Address Numbers.  Address numbers used for the purposes of identifying the E-911 address of a residential or non-residential property are exempt providing they are not part of a building or freestanding sign with other commercial or non-commercial messages or images. An address shown as part of a building or wall sign on a non-residential property shall be counted toward the maximum allowable display area. Incidental signs on residential property identifying the house number, street name and resident’s name are also exempt.   
 
702.02.  Community Event Banners.    Banners may be utilized for special community events open to the general public and sponsored for civic, charitable, community, or similar non-profit purposes provided that: 
 
A.  At least five business days before signs are to be posted, the designated representative of the sponsoring group shall provide a sign installation and removal plan for review by the Planning Commission or their designee, who shall grant written permission for signs to be posted if the following standards are met: 
 
1. Signs or banners shall be located outside of the public right-of-way of any public street and outside of the sight distance triangle of any intersection. 


 
2.  Signs or banners may be posted up to fourteen (14) days before the event and must be removed within three (3) days following the event. 


 
3. No more than one banner shall be permitted per lot or premises, and in no case shall any banner or sign be located closer than 200 feet from another such sign on the same side of the street. 


 
 B.  Nothing in this provision shall be construed to authorize the posting of such signs or banners upon trees, utility poles, traffic control signs, lights or devices in any place or manner prohibited by the provisions herein, nor on private property without written consent of the owner. 
 
702.03.  Community Event Displays.  Temporary decorations, and/or non-commercial signs associated with school activities, school elections, celebrations or commemorations that have significance to the entire community.  All displays shall be removed within seven (7) days of the event’s completion.   
 
702.04.  Construction Signs.  Signs used to identify contractors, financial institutions or developers on a site under construction or undergoing modification.  Signs are limited to two (2) signs per site and thirty-two square feet in size each.  All construction signs shall be removed within 14 days after the Certificate of Occupancy has been issued.  In the case of minor modifications not requiring a certificate of occupancy, i.e. tree removal, painting, landscaping, signs are limited to a display period of 30 days.  Routine lawn/landscape maintenance is not considered construction activity.   
 
702.05.  Development Signs.  Signs used at the entrance to subdivisions, office parks, or similar developments that indicates lots for sale, the name of the developer, financial institution or other development parties.  Signs are limited to 32 square feet in size and no more than one sign per development entrance.  Signs are to be removed when the original developer sells all lots in the development or phase.   
 
    
702.06.  Directional Signs. A sign that is designed and erected solely for the purpose of traffic or pedestrian direction and placed on the property for which its use is intended.  No such sign shall display the name of a product, establishment, service or any other advertising other than a logo. Signs identifying public telephones, trash receptacles, first aid facilities, and shopping cart corrals are considered directional signs.  No directional sign shall exceed five (5) square feet. 
  

 

 
702.07.  Directory Signs.  A wall-mounted sign, which is not designed or located so as to be legible from any street or adjoining property, listing the businesses, tenants, or activities conducted within a building or group of buildings.  Directory signs are limited to one per building and shall not exceed 20 square feet in size.   
 
702.08.  Hazard/Prohibition/Warning Signs. Signs warning of construction, excavation, or similar hazards. Signs such as “No Trespassing” and “No Parking” as long as they do not contain logos or text advertising a commercial product or activity.   
 
702.09.  Help Wanted Signs.  Signs advertising job vacancies for employment opportunities with the business or activity on the property on which the sign is located.  Signs are limited to six (6) square feet in size and only one (1) sign shall be allowed per business.   
 
702.10.  Historic District Celebration Signs.  Signs mounted to light poles or similar upright structures in historic Lincoln, depicting historic district events or activities and containing no commercial message.  Said signs shall be mounted in such a manner that a minimum of eight (8) feet of vertical clearance is provided, and line of sight at intersections and/or driveways entering the roadway is provided. 
 
702.11.  Holiday Decorations.  Temporary holiday decorations used to celebrate a single holiday or season.    
 
702.12.  Internal Signs.  Signs not intended to be viewed from public right-of-way and located not to be visible from public right-of-way or adjacent properties, such as signs interior to a shopping center, commercial buildings and structures, ball parks, stadiums and similar uses of a recreational or entertainment nature. 
 
702.13.  Menu Boards.  A permanent sign, which is not designed or located so as to be legible from any public right-of-way, depicting products that can be purchased on site (i.e. fast food restaurants) such as a drive-through menu service.  (See Section 704.03) 
 
702.14.  Nameplates.  A non-electrical sign identifying only the name and occupation or profession of the occupant of a non-residential property on which the sign is located.  A nameplate shall not exceed two (2) square feet in size.   
 
702.15.  Official Signs.  Official federal, state or local government traffic, directional and informational signs and notices issued by any court, person, or officer in performance of a public duty.  Also, any sign erected by a federal, state, or local government agency for identification purposes at any office, institutional, recreational, historical or other publicly owned or recognized site.     
 
  

 

 
702.16.  Official Flags. Official federal, state, or local government flags.  Also, any flags or insignia of a nonprofit religious, charitable, fraternal, academic, corporate or civic organization shall be allowed as well. Official flags must be flown in a manner that meets U.S. Congressional protocol.  Failure to display flags in this manner will be a violation of this Ordinance. 
  
702.17.  Political Signs.  Political signs are subject to the following requirements: 
 
A.  Political sign must be removed within seven (7) days following the election for which they are posted.  In the event of a run-off election, the signs of the run-off candidates may be maintained until the date of the run-off election and must be removed within seven (7) days following the official election date.  However, signs belonging to successful primary candidates may remain in place for the general election and must be removed within seven (7) days following the official election date.  


 
B.  Political signs are limited in size to no more than thirty-two (32) square feet.  


 
C.  Such signs are confined wholly to placement on private property. 


 
D. Pursuant to Section 23-1-6 of the Code of Alabama, it is unlawful to erect or display political signs on any property owned or controlled by the City of Lincoln or on School Board property.  This shall include public rights-of-way, trees, light poles, sidewalks, streets, benches, fire hydrants, public parks or playgrounds, libraries, fire stations, City Hall, and schools. 


 
E.  The regulations of this section do not prohibit the purchase of advertising space on permitted advertising signs in addition to the signs permitted by this section. 


 
F. It is the candidates’ responsibility to ensure that the volunteers and sign contractors who distribute and erect political signs during an election are doing so in compliance with this regulation.  Candidates will be held responsible for violations. 


 
702.18.  Real Estate Signs.   
 
           A.  For Sale Signs.  Temporary signs indicating the property on which the sign is located is for sale, rent or lease.  Only one (1) sign is permitted to face each street adjacent to the property.     
 
Maximum allowable sign display area for real estate signs: 
 
 
Residential 
 6 Sq. Feet each, or a maximum of 12 Sq. feet 
 
Non-Residential 
 32 Sq. Feet 
 
 
  
 
NOTE:  All real estate signs shall be located only on the property that is for sale, lease or rent.   
 

                     
 
B. Model Homes/Open House.  Temporary signs attracting attention to a model home, and open house viewing provided that the aggregate area of such signage is not to exceed 32 square feet.   


 
C. Off-Premise Real Estate “For Sale”, “For Rent”, etc. or locator signs are allowed on consecutive days from the hours of 4:00 p.m. Friday thru 10:00 a.m. Monday.  No such sign shall be located in any public right-of-way.  Any such sign posted outside of the hours designated above shall be removed and immediately disposed of by the City of Lincoln. 


 
702.19.  Vehicle Sign.  Any sign attached to a vehicle or trailer that is used in the normal day to day operation of the business depicted on the vehicle.  The primary use of any vehicle or trailer, which contains a vehicle sign, must be to serve a useful function in the transportation or conveyance of persons or commodities from one place to another, including transportation to and from work.  These vehicles shall not be parked immediately adjacent to the public right-of-way, whether in a parking space or otherwise located.  A vehicle or trailer, the primary use of which is for advertising, is prohibited.    
 
702.20.  Window Sign.  Any sign located on a window that is visible from the street or adjoining properties. Signs must contain a message related to a business, profession, or activity conducted, or to a commodity or service sold or offered, upon the premises where such sign is located and shall not occupy more than 25% of the total glass area.    
 
 
Section 703.  Prohibited Signs.  
 
It shall be unlawful to erect, cause to be erected, maintain or cause to be maintained, any sign not expressly authorized by, or exempted from, these regulations.  The signs listed below are expressly prohibited in the City of Lincoln.    
 
A.  Signs that are in violation of the building code or electrical code adopted by the City of Lincoln.   
 
B.  Portable signs.    
 
C.  Beacons and searchlights.   
 
D.  Off-Premise signs.   
 
E.  Flags on commercial property other than official flags.   
 
F.  Wind signs consisting of one (1) or more flags, pennants, ribbons, spinners, streamers, captive balloons, inflatable figures or other objects or material fastened in such a manner as to move freely upon being subjected to pressure by wind (whether the sign contains a commercial message or not).  Wind signs exclude holiday or community decorations.   
 
G.  Inflatable signs and tethered balloons.   
 
H.   A sign that, in the opinion of the Planning Commission or their designee, does or may constitute a safety hazard.   
 
I.  Any sign which simulates or imitates in size, color, lettering or design any traffic sign or signal, or which makes use of words, symbols or characters in such a manner to interfere with, mislead or confuse pedestrian or vehicular traffic.   
 
J.  Any signs, other than official traffic control devices, highway identification markers, warning signs, and other official signs, which are erected within the right-of-way of any street or alley.  Any sign that is erected or maintained outside the right-of-way and obstructs the vision of pedestrians, cyclists, or motorists traveling on or entering a street, road, or highway.  The national standards for sight-distance triangles utilized by the City of Lincoln Engineer shall be utilized to determine if a sign is creating an obstruction.   
 
K.  Freestanding signs which project into the public right-of-way.   
 
L.  Signs consisting of any moving, rotating, flashing, or otherwise animated light or component, except for time and temperature displays and traditional barber poles.  
 
M.  Any sign or sign structure identifying a previous use or activity that has not occupied the site for a period greater than sixty (60) days, does not maintain a current business license or pertains to a time, event or purpose which no longer applies, shall be deemed abandoned.  The removal of a frame of an abandoned sign shall not be required, if it conforms to all applicable terms contained in these regulations (including the sign face area for sign replacement yielded by such frame).   
 
Any sign structure, which supported or supports an abandoned sign and which structure conforms to all applicable terms contained in these regulations shall be allowed to remain in place. However, in the event a sign structure which supported or supports an abandoned sign is inconsistent with any term contained in these regulations (including the sign face area for sign replacement yielded by the frame), then the sign structure and frame shall be either altered to comply with the terms contained herein or removed by the owner of such structure or property.  (See Section 707.02) 
 
N.  Strips or strings of lights outlining property lines, sales area, rooflines, doors, windows, wall edges or other architectural features of a building.  This prohibition does not include holiday decorations and community decorations. This prohibition does not include neon lighting on buildings.  If neon is used to depict wording or logos, it will be calculated as part of the overall allowable signage.   
 
O.  Signs on public land, other than those erected at the direction or with the permission of a public authority.   
 
P.  Signs that emit audible sound, odor, visible matter such as smoke or steam, or involve the use of live animals.   
 
Q.  Signs or sign structures that interfere in any way with free use of any fire escape, emergency exit, or standpipes, or that obstruct any window to such an extent that light or ventilation is reduced to a point below that required by any provision of these regulations or any other regulation of the City of Lincoln.   
 
R.  Signs that are of such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or impair the vision of motorists, cyclists, or pedestrians; or that illuminate adjacent residential development.   
 
S.  Signs that contain any lighting or control mechanism that causes unreasonable interference with radio, television, or other communication signals.   
 
T.  Signs placed upon light poles, benches, bus shelters, waste receptacles or shopping cart corrals except those which identify the use of the object on which they are placed, i.e. “Cart Return,” “Bus Stop.”   
 
U.  Signs erected on public utility poles, even if they are located on private property other than signs erected by a public authority for public purposes.    
 
V.  Signs, other than historical markers or those identifying a natural feature, painted on or attached to trees, rocks, or other natural features.   
 
W.  Signs visible from a public right-of-way that use the word “stop” or “danger” or otherwise present or imply the need or requirement of stopping, caution, the existence of danger, or which for any reason are likely to be confused with any sign displayed or authorized by a public authority.     
 
X.  Any sign mounted to the structural roof or applied to the roof including painted signs.    
 
Y.  Signs projecting above the building roof or parapet line.   
 
   Z.  Signs that have become deteriorated or damaged to such an extent that the cost of the reconstruction or restoration of said signs is in excess of 50 percent of its replacement value exclusive of foundations.   
 
AA.  Signs lettered in a crude or amateurish fashion.   
 
BB. Signs on any broadcasting or telecommunications tower or any antenna other than appropriate hazard/warning signs.   


 
CC. Vehicles or trailers (operable or inoperable) which contain advertising and are not used in the daily conduct of business.  (See Section 702.19) 


 
DD. Signs in conjunction with a home occupation. 


 
 
Section 704.  Permitted Signs.   
 
704.01.  Freestanding Signs.  All freestanding signs shall consist of or be covered entirely in masonry, stone, wood, or other decorative surface treatment such that metallic structural elements, including poles, are not visible.  For the purpose of this Section, paint of any kind including textured or rubberized paint shall not qualify as a cladding material.   
 
The height of freestanding signs on property lying below the grade of the street shall be taken from the adjacent curb elevation or in the absence of a curb, the street centerline elevation.  All other sign heights shall be measured from grade. 
 
Any berming or filling solely for the purpose of locating the sign shall be computed as a part of the sign height. 
 
All monument style signs must have a minimum base of one foot (1’) in height, covered as described above. 
 
A.  General Business Signs.  Freestanding General business signs may be of the monument or elevated (pole) style, and one hundred (100) square feet in area.  Elevated signs may be up to twenty (20) feet in height, and monument style signs up to ten (10) feet in height, on any individual development site, unless specifically allowed or further limited by this Section.   
 
Freestanding signs are limited to one (1) per parcel, unless otherwise allowed by this Section.  Such signs shall have a minimum setback of ten (10) feet from any side lot line. (measured from the edge of the sign face) 
 
Reader boards shall be integrated into the structure of the general business sign and count toward the maximum allowable display area.   
 
Corner or double frontage lots shall be allowed two (2) signs, one on each street frontage.  Such signs shall be a minimum distance of fifty (50) linear feet apart and located outside of any applicable site distance triangle.  The combined area of the two signs shall not exceed one hundred-sixty (160) square feet.  The area of the two signs may be distributed in any combination not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet on any individual sign. 
 
A summary of the sign requirements for Freestanding General Business signs is shown below:   
 
 
Permitted Sign Area 
(One Sign) 
 Sign Area  
on Corner Lots  
(Two Signs) 
  
Permitted Sign 
Height 
  
Side Lot Line  
Setback 
 
Elevated: 
  
  
  
 
100 sq. ft.  
 160 sq. ft.  
 20’ 
 10’ 
 
Monument: 
  
  
  
 
100 sq. ft. 
 160 sq. ft. 
 10’ 
 10’ 
 

 
 
B.  Shopping Center Signs.  For the purposes of this Section, the term "Shopping Center" shall be inclusive of "Shopping Centers" and "Neighborhood Shopping Centers".  Additionally, for the purposes of this Section, a development site must consist of at least three (3) individual businesses and a minimum of 10,000 square feet of gross building area to be considered a shopping center.   
 
Shopping Centers consisting of between 10,000 and 20,000 square feet of gross building area shall be allowed one (1) sign. The total area of said sign shall not exceed one-hundred (100) square feet.  Said Shopping Centers lying on corner or double frontage lots 
shall be allowed two (2) freestanding signs.  The combined area of these signs shall not exceed 160 square feet.   
 
Shopping Centers consisting of at least 20,000 square feet and less than 65,000 square feet of gross building area shall be allowed one (1) sign. The total area of said sign shall not exceed 150 square feet.  Said Shopping Centers lying on corner or double frontage lots shall be allowed two (2) freestanding signs.  The combined area of these signs shall not exceed 200 square feet.   
 
Shopping Centers consisting of greater than 65,000 square feet of gross building area shall be allowed one (1) sign. The total area of said sign shall not exceed 250 square feet.  Said Shopping Centers lying on corner or double frontage lots shall be allowed two (2) freestanding signs.  The combined area of these signs shall not exceed 350 square feet.   
 
The combined height of the base and sign shall not exceed 25 feet in height for Shopping Centers less than 65,000 square feet of gross building area and shall not exceed 35 feet in height for Shopping Centers greater than 65,000 square feet of gross building area.  All Shopping Center signs shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from any lot line.   
 
All shopping center signs shall be supported by a structure constructed of brick, stone or other masonry material, unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission. 
 
A summary of the sign requirements for Shopping Centers is shown below:   
 
 
Shopping Center Gross Building Area (sq. ft.) 
  
Permitted Sign Area 
 (One Sign) 
  
Permitted Sign Area on Corner Lots 
(Two Signs) 
   
Permitted Sign Height 
  
Side lot line 
and ROW 
setback 
 
 
10,000 – 20,000 
  
100 sq. ft. 
  
160 sq. ft. 
  
25 
 
  
10’ 
 
 
20,000 – 65,000 
  
150 sq. ft. 
  
200 sq. ft. 
  
25’ 
  
10’ 
 
 
65,000 – over 
  
250 sq. ft. 
  
350 sq. ft. 
  
35’ 
  
10’ 
 

 
C. Interstate Signs. In addition to the allowable freestanding general business signage for any nonresidential development site, an interstate sign may also be erected provided that;  
1. Any portion of the development site lies within an area of 1,000 feet from the center point of the centerline of the interstate overpass. One (1) interstate sign with a maximum area of 250 square feet and a maximum height of 60 feet may be erected; or  
 
2. Any portion of the development site lies within an area of one (1) mile, (5,280 feet) from the center point of the centerline of the interstate overpass and 
whose development site abuts the right-of-way of the interstate. One (1) sign with a maximum area of 130 square feet and a maximum height of 30 feet may be erected. Such signs must be located only along the property edge abutting the interstate right-of-way and must be positioned as to be read from the interstate. The maximum setback from the interstate right-of-way shall not exceed 20 feet.  
 
The height measurement of interstate signs shall be measured from the elevation of the interstate highway grade at the center point of the overpass.  
. The elevation of the interstate highway grade at the center point of the overpass located at Stemley Road, Exit 165, is 479 feet.  

. The elevation of the interstate highway grade at the center point of the overpass located at Highway 77, Exit 168, is 555 feet.  

. The elevation of the interstate highway grade at the center point of the overpass located at Speedway Blvd., Exit 174, is 540 feet. 


 
D.  Billboards.  Off-premise signs with a maximum display area of 672 square feet.  All Billboards erected after the adoption of this ordinance shall be of the digital style and have no more than seven (7) messages per minute.     
 
1.  Area and Dimensional Requirements.  The following area and dimensional regulations shall apply to all billboards: 
 
Minimum Lot Area:  Determined by setback requirements 
 
Minimum Setbacks:  Determined by district setback requirements.  All billboards must meet the setback requirements of the zone in which they are to be located.  No part of the sign, including the sign face, shall extend over a building setback line.  In no case shall any billboard sign be less than 10’ from any property line measured from edge of sign face. 
 
Movement:  Except for the change of messages on a digital billboard there shall be no movement (i.e. video copy etc.) involved with the messages displayed. 
 
Lighting:  All lighting of Billboards shall be done in a manner that will not interfere with commuters’ vision.  The light intensity of Digital Billboards shall be adjusted for daylight and dark so as not to impair commuters’ nighttime vision. 
 
2.  Height and Location Restrictions.  In regard to the height and citing of all billboard signs, the following regulations shall be observed: 
 
 No billboard shall be located closer than 600 feet to any residence. 
 No billboard shall be located within a 2000 foot radius from another billboard 
 
No billboard shall exceed 45 feet in height as measured from grade.  
 
No billboards shall be located in the Downtown Historic District, or within a ½ mile radius of the declared center point of said district. (See Figure 19) 
 
No billboard may be mounted or displayed as a roof sign or wall sign or on any structure not intended specifically to use as a billboard. 
 
No billboard shall be located on or project over any public property, right-of-way, utility easement or drainage easement. 
 
Exposed backs of signs, poles and other support structures must be painted black, dark green, or dark brown to blend with natural surroundings and present a more attractive appearance. 
 
Billboards shall only be permitted in areas zoned Highway Commercial (HC), or Manufacturing (M-1 or M-2), and only along the following Roadways: 
  Highway 77 
  Speedway Blvd. 
  Interstate 20 (on private property only and per ALDOT regulations) 
   
E.  Freestanding Signs in the Downtown Historic District.  Freestanding signs are prohibited in the Downtown Historic District, with the exception of a changeable copy freestanding directory that may be provided for the use of all downtown businesses.  Any such directory sign shall be designed to fit with the architectural features of downtown historic businesses and approved by the Planning Commission. 
 
704.02.  Reader Boards.  A reader board is a permanent sign displaying changeable copy in the form of either removable letters or electronic (LED or Digital) format.  A reader board may be a building sign or an integral part of a freestanding sign and will be counted toward the overall allowable sign area for either.  In no case shall a reader board exceed 32 sq. ft. in size, and no more than one such sign shall be permitted per site. 
 
Electronic Reader Boards shall meet the following additional criteria: 
 
A.  The sign must be “accessory” to the primary “freestanding” business sign, it shall not constitute the entire primary sign. 


 
B. The sign may not be more than 32 sq. ft. in size 


 
C. The overall sign area (primary and reader board) must meet the size and height requirements of the Lincoln Sign Regulations. 


 
D. No more than seven (7) message frames per minute may be displayed on the sign. 


 
E. Except for the changing of the message there shall be no movement (i.e. video, flashing backgrounds, etc.) involved with the message display. 


 
F. All lighting shall be done in a manner that will not interfere with commuters’ vision.  The light intensity shall be programmed for daylight and dark so as not to impact commuters’ nighttime vision. 


 
704.03.  Menu Boards.  A permanent sign, which is not designed or located so as to be legible from any public right-of-way, depicting products that can be purchased on site (i.e. fast food restaurants) and is part of a drive-through service.  Menu boards must be shown on the site plan and noted on the sign permit, but the size does not count against the allowable square footage of a freestanding sign.   
 
704.04.  Subdivision Identification Marker.  A sign marking an entrance to a residential subdivision, office park, or industrial park.  A subdivision marker shall contain no advertising other than the name of the residential subdivision, office park, or industrial park and/or the developer.  Subdivision markers must be within the perimeter of the subdivision and shall not be located within the public right of way, except for those located in a landscaped traffic island (see below).  Subdivision Markers shall meet the following standards: 
 
Maximum Number:  1 per street front (entrance); 2 sign faces may be used (on either side of entrance) with a wall, fence or other architectural entrance feature. 
Maximum Area:  36 sq. ft. (sign face) 
Maximum Height:  8 ft. (overall structure) 
Permitted for all-residential, mixed use, and non-residential projects of 10 acres or more. 
Limited to name and/or logo. 
 
For subdivision markers located in traffic islands as mentioned above, the following criteria shall apply: 
 
A. The sign must be placed in a designated curbed median. 
 
B. The sign must be constructed of a durable material such as brick. 
 
C.  The developer must indicate the location of the sign(s) on a site plan and provide construction details for review and approval. 
 
D. Any utilities involved with construction of the sign, shall be permitted through the Lincoln Building Inspections Office. 
 
E. If the sign is ever damaged by natural or human causes the sign will not be repaired or replaced at the expense of the City, nor shall it be allowed to remain in a damaged condition. 
 
G. The developer's engineer must certify that site distance around the sign meets minimum requirement established by the City. 


 
Maintenance.  All such signs shall be maintained perpetually by the developer, the owner of the sign, a pertinent homeowners association or some other person who is legally accountable.  Such 
accountability is required before a permit shall be issued.  If, following the issuance of a permit and subsequent erection of such signs, no accountable person accepts legal responsibility to maintain the signs and no other provision has been made for maintenance, the signs shall be removed by the developer or owner. 
 
704.05. Building (Wall) Signs.  Building signs on any single development site shall not exceed a total of two (2) square feet per linear foot of the main or entry façade except in the Downtown Historic District where building signs shall not exceed a total of one (1) square foot per linear foot of the main or entry façade.  
 
Note:  Individual businesses will be allowed a minimum of 32 square feet, except the Downtown Historic District where a minimum of 24 square feet will be allowed.  No individual business shall be allowed more than 500 square feet of building signage, and no single sign shall exceed 300 square feet.   
 
A.  Projecting Signs - Projecting signs shall not project into the public right-of-way, except in the Downtown Historic District.  Signs in the Downtown Historic District may project into a public pedestrian way (sidewalk) no more than six feet.   Signs projecting over pedestrian ways shall provide a minimum of eight (8) feet vertical clearance.     
 
Signs in the Downtown Historic District may project into an alley no more than six (6) feet.  Projections greater than one (1) foot and up to six (6) feet shall be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer. Signs projecting over public alleyways shall provide a minimum of sixteen (16) feet of vertical clearance.  (See Figure 18) 
  
 

  
 
 
Projecting Sign 
 

 
B.  Shopping Center - When determining the allowable exterior sign area for Shopping Centers and Neighborhood Shopping Centers, where it cannot be determined which facade is the main or entry facade, the longest single exterior elevation of the structure shall be used.   
 
When determining the allowable exterior sign area for an individual business in a Shopping Center or Neighborhood Shopping Center, where it cannot be determined which façade portion of the individual business is the main or entry façade, the longest single exterior entry façade of the individual business shall be used.    
 
When determining the allowable exterior sign area of individual mall shops or other businesses without exterior façades, the interior or entry façade width or the allowable minimum shall be used.   
C.  Historic District.  Permanent wall signs for those businesses having no frontage on primary streets may be mounted to the wall of another business in the historic district subject to the approval of the property/building owner of the host building.  Said wall signs shall be calculated using the parent structures façade frontage as set out in above and count toward the overall allowable signage of the same.  Said wall signs shall not count toward the host building’s overall allowable wall signage.  In no case shall the host building provide more than one hundred (100) square feet of signage for other businesses, or cover more than twenty-five (25) percent of the surface of a building’s façade, whichever is less. 
 
704.06.    Multi-Family Residential Signs.  Permits are required for all signs located on multi-family residential properties.  The following requirements apply to multi-family residential sites:   
 
                  A.  Wall Sign - 32 square feet, not including building identification number. 
 
                  B.  Freestanding Sign - 32 square feet. 
 
                  C.  Allow one sign of either type at each entrance from a public street.   
 
704.07.  Commercial Banners.  Banners may be utilized by commercial establishments provided: 
 
At least five business days before signs are to be posted, the designated representative of the business or commercial establishment shall provide a sign installation and removal plan for review by the Planning Commission or their designee, who shall issue a permit for signs to be posted if the following standards are met: 
 
A.  Signs or banners shall be located outside of the public right-of-way of any public street and outside of the sight distance triangle of any intersection. 


 
B. Signs or banners may be posted up to thirty (30) days. 


 
C. Each banner shall require a separate permit, and no more than four (4) permits per calendar year shall be issues for any one commercial establishment. 


 
D. In no case shall any banner be located closer than 100 feet from another such banner on the same site.    


 
E. Banners shall be limited in size to 4’ x 8’ or 32 square feet. 


 
F. Exemptions: 


 
a. Each new business shall be allowed one exempt “Grand Opening” banner for up to 30 days from the date of opening, in the place of or in addition to their permanent business sign. 



 
b. Banners for special sales and events related to Talladega Race Week, posted during Race weekends shall be exempt. 



 
G. Nothing in this provision shall be construed to authorize the posting of such banners in the right-of-way, upon trees, utility poles, traffic control signs, lights or devices in any place or manner prohibited by the provisions herein, nor on private property without written consent of the owner. 


 
 
Section 705.  Design, Construction, and Maintenance of Signs   
 
705.01.  Compliance with Building and Electrical Code Requirements.  All permanent signs and the illumination thereof, shall be designed, constructed and maintained in conformity with the applicable provisions of the adopted building code and electrical code of the City of Lincoln.  Wherever there is inconsistency between this Ordinance and the building or electrical code, the more restrictive requirement shall apply.   
 
705.02.  Illumination Standards.    
 
A. Sign lighting shall not be designed or located to cause confusion with traffic signals.   


 
B.  Devices that illuminate a sign or signs shall be placed and shielded so that direct light shall not be cast into the eyes of pedestrians, cyclists or motorists entering or using a street, road or highway.  
 
705.03.  Placement and Clearance Standards.   
 
A.  Signs shall be located such that there is at every intersection and driveway clear sight distance for pedestrians, cyclists, and motorists traveling on or entering any street, road, or highway.  The national standards for sight-distance triangles utilized by the City of Lincoln Engineers shall be applied to determine if a sign is creating an obstruction.   
 
B.  No sign structure shall be erected that impedes use of any fire escape, emergency exit, or ventilation opening.   
 
C.  No freestanding sign shall project into a public right-of-way.   
 
D.  No building sign shall project into a public right-of-way except in the Downtown Historic District.  Signs in the Downtown Historic District may project over a public pedestrian-way no more than six (6) feet.   Signs projecting over pedestrian-ways shall provide a minimum of eight (8) feet of vertical clearance.     
 
Signs in the Downtown Historic District may project into an alley no more than six (6) feet.  Projections greater than one (1) foot and up to six (6) feet shall be reviewed 
and approved by the City Engineer. Signs projecting over public alleyways shall provide a minimum of 16 feet of vertical clearance.   
 
705.04.  Calculation of Display Area.  The display area of a sign or advertising device is measured by the smallest square, rectangle, triangle, circle or combination thereof, which will encompass the entire sign or advertising device; excluding trim, frame, apron, posts, uprights, braces or other structural members which support it.   
 
Where a sign is double facing and only one face can be viewed from a single location on a roadway, the display area shall be the area of one sign face.  Where a sign has two (2) or more faces that can be viewed from a single location, the display area of all such faces shall be included in determining the total display area of the sign.   
 
Open Letter sign display area shall be measured by the number of square feet in the smallest rectangle, within which all letters, logos, symbols or other elements of the sign can be enclosed, multiplied by a factor of 0.8.   
 
When a sign is in the form of a three-dimensional object, the area shall be determined by drawing a square, rectangle, triangle, circle or combination thereof, which will encompass the projected image of the sign and multiplying that area by two (2).  The “projected image” is that image created by tracing the largest possible two-dimensional outline of the sign.   
 
705.05.    Maintenance.  All signs, including their supports, braces, guys and anchors, electrical parts and lighting fixtures, and all painted and display areas, shall be maintained in accordance with the building and electrical codes adopted by the City of Lincoln.  All signs and their components shall be maintained in good repair, free of rust, peeling, fading, broken or cracked panels, and broken or missing letters.  Vegetation must be properly maintained and no condition shall be allowed that would constitute a fire or health hazard.  The general area in the vicinity of any sign shall be kept free and clear of any unnecessary or discarded sign materials.  
 
No sign shall be allowed to deteriorate to a condition in which it is unsightly in appearance or to a condition in which it requires repairs or renovations in an amount which exceeds 50 percent of its current replacement cost. Signs which deteriorate to such a condition are deemed to be in violation of this ordinance, and as such must either be removed or improved (if permitted) by the person responsible for maintaining the sign.   
 
   
Section 706.  Permitting and Administration   
 
706.01   Applicability.  No person shall erect, alter, relocate, repair, replace the face of, or change a sign without first obtaining a permit, except for the following actions which shall not require a permit:   
 
A.  Changing the copy, announcement or message on a reader board sign;   
 
B.  Cleaning, painting, or comparable maintenance of a sign that does not alter the size, image or message of the sign;   
 
C.  Erecting a sign for which a permit is not required in accordance with Section 702 “Exempt Signs” of this Ordinance.   
 
706.02.  Procedure.  All sign permits shall be procured in accordance with the following procedure:   
 
A. A written application shall be submitted to the Planning Commission or their designee for review and processing.  The Planning Commission or their designee, only upon determination that all requisite documentation and fees accompany the application form, will accept the application.  The application shall include supplementary information as may be specifically requested by the Planning Commission or their designee to determine compliance with these regulations.  


 
B. The Planning Commission or their designee shall review the application, plans, and specifications to determine whether the proposed sign conforms to all applicable requirements of these regulations.   


 
C. Following review and determination as to conformance with these regulations, the Planning Commission or their designee shall either approve or deny the application for the sign permit.  In case of denial, the Planning Commission or their designee shall specify the section or sections of these regulations with which the proposed sign is not in conformance.   


 
D. An application may be amended within thirty (30) days of the application date to include additional signs up to the allowable maximum.  Additional fees shall be charged if the additional signs exceed the size limitations for fee category.  After thirty (30) days, a new sign permit shall be required for any sign constructed and all fees shall be required. 


 
706.03.  Submission Requirements.  No request for a sign permit shall be considered complete until all the following has been submitted to the Planning Commission or their designee.   
 
A.  The application form shall be submitted with all required information completed by the applicant.  The application form is available from the City of Lincoln.   
 
B.  Plans and specifications for the proposed sign shall be submitted, drawn to scale, and include the following:   
 
1.  Site plan of development site showing location of any freestanding sign(s) including any easements, public rights-of-way, property lines, buildings, sight distance triangles and other signs on the property;  
 
2.  Main or entrance façade including linear dimension;  
3.  Dimensions and elevations (including message) of all signs;  
 
4.  Dimensions of any supporting structures;  
 
5. Maximum and minimum height of sign, as measured from finished grade;  
 
6. For illuminated signs, indicate type and placement of illumination;  
 
7. Inventory of number, type, location, and display area of all existing signs on the same property and/or building on which the sign is to be located.   
 
C. The applicant shall be required to pay an application fee according to the current schedule of fees established by the Lincoln City Council for the particular category of application.  This fee is nonrefundable irrespective of the final disposition of the application.   
 
D. A sign permit shall be valid for a period of 180 days after issuance.  Failure to place the sign within the allotted time period shall void the permit and necessitate reapplication. 


 
 
Section 707.  Nonconforming, Illegal and Abandoned Signs. 
 
707.01.  Nonconforming Signs.   
 
A nonconforming sign is any sign within the jurisdiction of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Lincoln on the effective date of this article or any sign existing within any area added to such jurisdiction after the effective date of this article, which is prohibited by, or does not conform to the requirements of, these regulations.  (See Also:  Section 703. M. “Prohibited Signs) 
 
A nonconforming sign may be continued and shall be maintained in good condition as required by these regulations, however, it shall not be: 
 
A.  Structurally changed to another nonconforming sign, but its pictorial content may be changed. 
 
B.  Structurally altered to prolong the life of the sign, except to meet safety requirements. 
 
C.  Expanded or altered in any manner that increases the degree of nonconformity. 
 
D.  Re-established after damage or destruction if the estimated cost of reconstruction exceeds fifty (50) percent of the appraised replacement cost as determined by the Planning & Development Service Department. 
 
E.  Continued in use when a conforming sign or sign structure shall be erected on the same parcel or unit. 
 
F.  Continued in use when the structure housing the occupancy is demolished or requires renovations the cost of which exceeds fifty (50) percent of the assessed value of the structure. 
 
707.02.  Abandoned Signs. 
 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, any sign that is located on property which becomes vacant and unoccupied, pertains to a business which does not maintain a current business license, or pertains to a time, event or purpose which no longer applies, shall be deemed to have been abandoned.  Any abandoned sign shall be prohibited and shall be removed by the owner of the sign or the owner of the property.  The frame of an abandoned sign shall not be required to be removed if it conforms to all applicable terms contained in these regulations (including the sign face area for sign replacement yielded by such frame).   
 
Sign faces (whether freestanding or building signs) deemed to be abandoned as a result of the closing, relocation or other form of removal of the business for which it was intended, shall be replaced with a blank sign face panel or with the approval of the Planning Commission and/or their designee, otherwise neatly removed or covered.  Exposed lighting or wiring shall not be allowed. 
 
Any sign structure which supported an abandoned sign and which structure conforms to all applicable terms contained in these regulations shall be allowed to remain in place.  However, in the event a sign structure which supported or supports an abandoned sign is inconsistent with any term contained in these regulations (including the sign face area for sign replacement yielded by the frame), then the sign structure and frame shall be either altered to comply with the terms contained herein or removed by the owner of such structure or property. 
 
707.03.  Illegal Signs.   
 
The following signs shall be considered to be illegal and a violation of the terms of this article: 
 
A.  A sign erected or maintained after the effective date of this article inconsistent with the terms contained herein; 
 
B.  A nonconforming sign which was erected inconsistent with the terms governing location, height, surface area or other regulatory measure applicable at the time of its erection; 
 
C.  An abandoned sign. 
 
Upon determination by the Commission or their designee that a certain sign is illegal, the Commission or their designee shall act to remedy the violation, which may include: 
 
A.  Causing the issuance of a notice of violation to the individual who owns, is responsible for or benefits from the display of such sign prescribing the action 
necessary to make the sign legal and conforming to the terms contained herein or ordering the removal of the illegal sign and also prescribing the time which the individual is afforded to accomplish such action; 
 
B.  The removal of any illegal sign located on public property or on private property, including any such sign located within a street right-of-way in which case the City shall have the right to recover from the individual erecting such a sign the full costs of removal and disposal.  
 
Failure to bring any illegal sign into conformance with the terms contained in this article or any other violation of the terms contained in this article shall be considered a violation of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Lincoln and shall be subject to the remedies and penalties provided by such ordinance and by state law. 
 
 
Section 708.  Variances and Waivers 
 
It is the explicit intent that this section be enacted to accomplish the purposes as set forth in Section 700 and any variance granted by the Board of Zoning Adjustment (BZA) would be detrimental to these purposes.  Accordingly, the BZA shall only grant a variance in the case of an extreme hardship.  Acts of God and economic conditions shall not be considered hardships for purposes of this section. 
 
 
Section 709.  Severability Clause 
 
If any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this chapter is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term or word of this chapter. 


ARTICLE VIII. NONCONFORMITIES 
 
 
Section 800. Purpose. 
 
It is the purpose of this Article to provide for the regulation of nonconforming structures,  lots of record and uses, and to specify those circumstances and conditions under which such nonconformities shall be permitted to continue. It is necessary and consistent with the regulations prescribed by this Ordinance that those nonconformities that adversely affect orderly development and the value of nearby property not be permitted to continue without restriction.  
 
Nonconformities are existing uses, lots, buildings and structures that were previously lawful, but that would be prohibited or subject to more stringent regulation under the zoning districts and related requirements established by this Ordinance or subsequent amendments.  
 
A. Legally established buildings, structures and uses in existence at the time of adoption of this Ordinance shall be permitted to continue subject to the provisions of this Article. 
 
B. Uses that were illegally established prior to the adoption of this Ordinance shall remain illegal and be subject to penalties and remedies that are pursued. 
 
It is the intent of this Ordinance that legal nonconformities, as described in “A” above, be allowed to continue, in accordance with the requirements of this Article, but not be enlarged or used as the grounds for additional nonconformities.  This Article provides for the regulation of legally nonconforming lots, uses, buildings and structures; specifies the conditions under which a legal nonconformity can be continued, expanded or modified; and the circumstances under which a legal nonconformity shall be terminated 
 
Section 801. Definitions .  
Nonconformity.  Any land use or physical design of development, structure, or lot of record legally established prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, or subsequent amendment to it, which would not be permitted by, or is not in full compliance with, the regulations of this Ordinance.  
Nonconforming Use.  An activity using land, buildings, and/or structures for purposes which were legally established prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, or subsequent amendment to it, and which would not be permitted to be established as a new use in the zone in which it is located by the regulations of this Ordinance.  
Nonconforming Structure or Development Site. Any structure or development site, established prior to the effective date of this Ordinance or subsequent amendment to it, which does not fully comply with the standards of this Ordinance.  
Nonconforming Lot of Record.  Any validly recorded lot which at the time it was recorded fully complied with all applicable laws and ordinances, but which does not fully comply with the lot requirements of this Ordinance concerning minimum area, minimum lot width, or minimum street frontage. 
 
Section 802. Authority to Continue Legal Nonconformities.  
802.01. Except as otherwise provided in this Article, any nonconforming lot, use, or structure lawfully existing on the effective date of this Ordinance, or subsequent amendment thereto, may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful.  
802.02. No nonconformity shall be enlarged upon, expanded, or extended unless such alteration is in full compliance with all requirements of this Ordinance, except as noted in this Section. Normal maintenance and incidental repair of nonconformity shall be permitted, provided that this does not violate any other section of the Article.  
A. Nothing in this Article shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoration to a safe condition of a structure in accordance with an order of a public official who is charged with protecting the public safety and who declares such structure to be unsafe and orders its restoration to a safe condition; provided that such restoration is not otherwise in violation of the various provisions of this Section prohibiting the repair or restoration of partially damaged or destroyed structures.  
B. An extension, for the exclusive purpose of providing required off-street parking or loading spaces, involving no structural alteration or enlargement of such structure, shall not be deemed an expansion of nonconformity, subject to the restrictions of this Article. 
C. Nothing in this Article shall be interpreted to prohibit routine maintenance, restoration of a structure to a safe condition, and/or internal renovations, provided the total value of such activities does not exceed 50% of the appraised value of the structure as determined by the Talladega County Tax Assessor. 
802.03. No nonconformity shall be moved in whole or in part, for any distance whatsoever, to any other location on the same or any other lot unless the entire structure shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located after being moved.  
802.04. Regardless of any other provision of this Article, no use or structure which is accessory to a principal nonconforming use or structure shall continue after such principal use or structure shall have ceased or terminated, unless it shall thereafter conform to all regulations of this Ordinance.  
802.05. The burden of establishing the nonconforming status of any structure or land use under the terms of this Article, in all cases, shall be upon the owner of such nonconformity and not upon the City of Lincoln.  
 
802.06. Termination of Nonconformities.   
 
A.  Termination of a nonconforming use shall occur if: 
 
1.  the structure or premise occupied by the nonconforming use becomes and remains vacant for a period of six (6) months, or  
 
2.  the structure or premise is occupied by a use that is permitted in the zoning district in which such structure or premises is located. 
 
Thereafter, the use of said structure or premise shall conform to the use regulations of the district in which such structure or premise is located, regardless of the intent of the owner or occupant. 
 
B. Changes and Reversions to Nonconforming Uses Prohibited:  A nonconforming use of land, buildings or structures shall not be changed to another nonconforming use.  A nonconforming use of land, buildings or structures that is changed to a conforming use shall not be permitted to revert to a nonconforming use. 
 
C.  Termination of Use of Nonconforming Buildings and Structures:  Any nonconforming use of buildings and structures that has been discontinued for any reason for a period of six (6) consecutive months shall not be reestablished.  The future use of the building or structure shall comply with all applicable regulations. 
 
D. Termination Required by Modification.  A development site that is nonconforming by physical design (i.e., insufficient parking, landscaping, setbacks, etc.), may be utilized for any land use which is permitted at that location.  However, any permits for additional floor area, or the replacement of any structure on the development site, shall be contingent upon bringing the entire site into conformity with all requirements of this Ordinance.  
 
 
Section 803. Nonconforming Vacant Lots of Record. 
 
When a lot exists that does not consist of sufficient land to comply with the lot, yard and setback requirements at the time of adoption of this Ordinance or any subsequent amendment, it shall be considered a nonconforming vacant lot of record. 
Subject to the provisions of this Section, a nonconforming lot of record may be used for any principal use permitted in the zone in which the lot is located, provided that all other standards (i.e. setbacks, parking, etc.) can be met, or a variance meeting the standards of Section 803.02 can be granted.  For any use which is to be served by an individual well and/or septic system, the nonconforming lot shall be of a size and design to meet the minimum requirements of the Talladega County Health Department regulations for such wells and septic systems.  
 
803.01. Effect of Single Owner.  If two or more contiguous vacant lots of record are in single ownership at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, or any subsequent amendment, and one or more of the lots is a nonconforming lot of record, then the land involved shall be considered an undivided tract of land.  No portion of the tract of land shall be divided, sold or developed in a manner that diminishes the ability of all lots to comply with the requirements of this Ordinance or any subsequent amendment.  
 
803.02.  Appeal to Build on Nonconforming Vacant Lot of Record. A nonconforming vacant lot may be used as a building site for any use permitted in the zoning district in which the lot is located provided: 
 
A.  Other requirements of this Ordinance are complied with; or 
 
B.  Application is made to the Board of Zoning Adjustment for a variance from applicable requirements that can not be met. 
 
C.  A variance for a nonconforming vacant lot of record shall conform, as closely as possible to the lot area, yard and building setback and other requirements and: 
 
1. The front yard setback shall not be less than the average of the setbacks of existing buildings within two hundred (200) feet on each side of the lot. 


  
2.  At least one side yard shall not be reduced to less than ten (10) feet in width and the other side yard not less than five (5) feet in width;  
 
3.  The rear yard setback shall not be less than twenty (20) feet, and 
 
4.  No more than one principal use and building shall be allowed on a nonconforming vacant lot of record. 
 
 
Section 804. Nonconforming Developed Lot of Record.   
 
804.01.  Nonconforming Developed Lot of Record.  When the use complies with the requirements of the district in which the use is located, but the lot has been developed in a manner that does not comply with the lot, yard and setback requirements at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, or any subsequent amendment, it shall be considered a nonconforming developed lot of record. 
 
804.02. Expansion of Conforming Use. Provided a proposed use is permitted in the zoning district in which the lot is located, the use, building or structure may be expanded, in accordance with all other requirements, within the buildable area defined by this Ordinance. 
 
 
 
Section 805. Nonconforming Uses of Buildings and Structures. 
 
When a nonconforming building or structure and related uses exist at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, or any subsequent amendment, that does not comply with these regulations, that building or structure and related use shall be allowed to continue subject to the following conditions. 
 
805.01.  Expansion of Nonconforming Use within an Existing Building or Structure. The expansion of a nonconforming use within an existing building or structure shall be allowed provided the use will be expanded in a space contiguous with the existing use.  The expansion shall be limited to within the existing building or structure.  A nonconforming use shall not be expanded or relocated, in whole or part, to a non-contiguous part of a building or structure.  All required on-site improvements, such as parking, loading and buffer areas shall be provided before the use is expanded within the building. 
 
805.02.  Enlarging Nonconforming Principle Buildings and Structures Prohibited. A nonconforming building or structure and related use shall not be enlarged, intensified, or altered in a manner that increases the nonconformity, but may be altered to decrease the nonconformity. 
 
805.03.  Effect of Relocation. If a use, building or structure is relocated on the existing site or moved to another location, the lot, use, building or structure shall comply with all zoning and applicable development regulations after it is moved. 
 
 
Section 806. Construction Prior to Adoption or Amendment of Zoning Ordinance. 
 
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be interpreted as requiring a change in plans, construction, use or occupancy of land, buildings or structures for which approval has been granted and on which construction was lawfully begun and has been diligently continued prior to the adoption this Ordinance, or any subsequent amendment, that would make a use, building, structure or occupancy nonconforming. 
 
A.  Construction shall mean the erection and fastening of building materials in a permanent manner in accordance with approved plans.   
 
B.  Where demolition and removal of an existing building has begun in preparation for rebuilding, or where excavation has begun for building, construction shall be deemed to have begun provided the work is diligently continued. 
 
C.  The storage of building materials or location of a temporary office on a lot shall not be deemed as having begun construction. 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 807. Repair and Restoration of Nonconforming Buildings and Structures. 
 
807.01. Nothing in this Ordinance shall: 
 
A. Prevent the continuous maintenance, internal renovations, strengthening, or restoration of any building or structure to a safe and sanitary condition; or 
 
B. Prevent repairs ordered by a proper authority charged with the duty of protection of health and safety. 
 
807.02.  A nonconforming building, structure or use shall not be rebuilt or restored, except in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance, after being damaged by natural acts (e.g. fire, wind, flood, etc.) to the extent of fifty (50) percent or more of the appraised value at the time the damage occurred.  If a nonconforming building is damaged less than fifty (50) percent of its appraised value at the time of damage it may be rebuilt or restored and used provided the rebuilding or restoration is started within six (6) months following the date of such damage and that restoration work is diligently continued.  A request for extension of the start of rebuilding or restoration may be requested of the Planning Commission, provided said request is made within the initial six (6) month period. 
 


ARTICLE IX.       DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL PROCESS 
   
 
Section 900.  Purpose.   
 
This Article sets forth the procedures required for obtaining development approval within the City of Lincoln.  Site plans, subdivisions, conditional uses, zoning certificates, and certificates of occupancy are addressed herein.  However, the approval of a development under the provisions of this Article does not imply any variation or waiver of any provisions of the building code, housing code, fire code, or any other applicable code, standard, or regulation adopted by the City of Lincoln, the State of Alabama, or the United States Government. 
 
   
Section 901.  Subdivisions.   
 
Any subdivision or resubdivision of land, or combining of lots within the City of Lincoln, and within unincorporated areas lying within three (3) miles of the Lincoln city limits, shall be carried out in accordance with the Lincoln Subdivision Regulations which are hereby incorporated by reference into this Ordinance.  All development within subdivisions shall be consistent with applicable sections of this Ordinance. 
 
   
Section 902.  Site Plans.   
 
This Section shall apply to all site plans as defined in Article II.  The site plan procedures shall be required in order to ensure that site-specific development projects meet the requirements of this Ordinance prior to the issuance of a zoning certificate authorizing a building permit.  It is the intent of this Section that the site plan and design review process be a part of the building permit application process, and that the site plan shall be the instrument by which improvements to the site will be constructed and inspected prior to occupancy of the development.   
 
902.01.  Development Requiring Site Plan Approval.  Prior to issuance of a zoning certificate, site plan approval and design review shall be required for all proposed non-residential construction and residential development types described in Sections 603.02.  This shall include clubhouses or other ancillary facilities within a residential subdivision.  Site plan approval shall also be required for the subdivision of an existing development site of a type subject to site plan requirements, and/or an expansion, reduction or reconfiguration of any such development type.  For any proposal in which these requirements are unclear, the Planning Commission or their designee shall determine whether site plan approval is necessary.  (See Sections 902.09 C, and 903 for Conditional Uses) 
 
902.02.  Review of Site Plans.  Site plans submitted for review shall be referred to the Planning Commission’s Site Plan Review Committee.  The site plan review committee shall call a site plan review meetings when necessary, at which time both pre-design conferences and formal reviews will take place.  The Committee will review plans in accordance with the standards set out in this Ordinance and the Comprehensive Plan and make recommendations to the Planning 
Commission with regard to conditions to be imposed and action to be taken.  When a site plan is disapproved, the reason(s) for the disapproval shall be provided in writing to the applicant within ten (10) work days of the hearing at which the decision to disapprove was made.   
 
In approving a site plan, any request for waivers from the requirements of this Ordinance shall be taken to the Planning Commission for consideration as provided in Section 902.03.  Variance requests shall be submitted to the Board of Zoning Adjustment as set out in Section 1007. 
 
The following criteria shall be used in determining whether to approve a site plan: 
 
A.  Completeness of application information as required under Section 902.12; 
 
B.  Consistency with adopted policies and standards of the Major Streets and Long Range Utilities Plans; 
 
C.  Uses permitted on the development site under the provisions of this Ordinance; 
 
D.  Whether the site plan meets applicable design standards established by this Ordinance; 
 
E.  Availability and adequate capacity of public facilities to serve the development, such as roads, sewer, water, schools, solid waste disposal, and fire protection (including access to the site for emergency vehicles); and 
 
F.  Compatibility with surrounding land uses (this criterion shall apply only where a site plan proposes a conditional use pursuant to Section 903). 
 
902.03.  Waiver of Selected Development Standards – Approval By Planning Commission.  Specific development standards that may be modified with Planning Commission Approval are limited to the following:   
 
. bufferyards, including width, planting and required structures; and  

. general and off-street parking landscaping requirements 

. minor parking adjustments (in instances of redevelopment) 


 
This may be done only upon a specific finding by the Planning Commission that such requirements are inappropriate as applied to a particular development site due to its size, proposed use, and/or location, and that a waiver would not conflict with the intent of this Ordinance or confer upon any property owner a right or privilege denied to neighboring property owners within the same district.   
 
902.04.  Pre-design Review.  A pre-application conference shall be required for each site plan to be submitted. At that time the Site Plan Committee and staff will provide the applicant or their representative with advice and guidance regarding the requirements of this Ordinance, and any other regulations which apply.  Preliminary sketches shall be reviewed and overall development concepts finalized at this time.   
At the pre-design conference, the applicant shall provide the Site Plan Committee with basic information regarding the proposal.  This information should form the basis upon which they may advise the applicant on the subsequent steps required to gain final site plan approval and the necessary information which will be submitted with the formal application.   
 
It shall be the applicant’s responsibility to allow for plenty of time for the pre-application conference, and any other available guidance, in order to have a complete application package submitted and formal review completed before their desired construction start date. 
  
902.05.  Formal Submission.  Twelve (12) folded copies of the site plan, a completed application form, a landscape plan and all other necessary attachments, as well as the requisite application fees shall be submitted to the Planning Commission or their designee to initiate processing of the site plan.  Additional plans shall be provided for review by appropriate state, regional and county agencies upon staff request.   
 
A.  Site Plan Preparation Requirements.  Proposed development site plans shall be prepared and sealed by an architect, professional engineer or surveyor.  Full engineering drawings must be submitted by an engineer registered in the State of Alabama.  The City’s Engineer may choose to require additional information as necessary.   
 
Sketch plans and drawings submitted with variance or other zoning-related applications shall not be accepted for review as a site plan unless they are prepared in accordance with the guidelines of this Section and contain all required information.  In all cases, engineering plans addressing drainage, road construction and other technical aspects of development design shall be sealed by a civil engineer registered in the State of Alabama.   
 
B.  Completeness of Plans.  Site plans submitted without complete information in accordance with Section 902.12 shall not be reviewed by the Site Plan Committee or placed on the Planning Commission Agenda.   
 
C.  Committee & Staff Review.  The Site Plan Committee and other appropriate city staff members shall review the site plan with specific regard to this Ordinance and other regulations of the City of Lincoln.  This review shall identify matters of development policy concern to which the applicant shall address particular attention.   
 
902.06.  Approval of Site Plans.  The Planning Commission may approve, approve with conditions or disapprove an application as submitted.  For all applications that are disapproved, the reasons for such disapproval shall be provided to the applicant in writing.  For all applications that are approved with conditions, the nature of such conditions shall be provided to the applicant in writing.  No site plan shall be approved which is inconsistent with any term contained in this Ordinance unless a waiver or variance has been granted in accordance with Sections 902.03 or 1007 of this Ordinance.   
 
Upon approval of a site plan, a minimum of five (5) folded copies, and any additional copies as may be required by the City, of the approved site plan shall be submitted to the Planning & Development Services Department prior to issuance of a zoning certificate.  The Site Plan 
Committee/staff shall stamp, sign and date the site plan copies, then forward copies of the site plan to the City’s Engineer and Building Inspections Departments.  A minimum of two (2) copies of the site plan shall be reserved for the use of the Planning Commission.   
 
902.07.  Effect of Site Plan Approval.  Upon final approval of a site plan, no structures, uses, or development of any kind shall be permitted on a development site except in accordance with the site plan and related approved plans for development phasing, building construction, grading drainage, and other site design elements.   
 
Approved site plans shall remain valid for 18 months after final approval, and a zoning certificate/ building permit for the development may be obtained during that time period.  The Planning Commission may grant an extension of site plan approval for a single period up to six (6) months from the date when the site plan would otherwise expire.  An extension may be granted only if the Planning Commission concludes that the applicant or developer has proceeded with due diligence and in good faith, and that conditions have not changed substantially so as to warrant a new application.  All such requests for extensions must be submitted in writing not less than 30 days before the expiration of the approved site plan stating the reason for the time extension request.   
 
Requests for extensions in excess of six (6) months shall not be granted.  Instead, the applicant shall submit a new application for review according to the requirements of this Section.   
 
Upon approval of the site plan, the applicant may proceed to submit detailed construction drawings to the City’s Engineer and Planning & Development Services Department for permitting.  These shall include, but are not limited to: 
. detailed building plans 

. grading plans 

. drainage and stormwater management facilities 

. erosion control plans 

. road and driveway construction specifications 

. landscape and tree removal plans.   


 
Nothing contained herein shall preclude the Planning & Development Services Department from accepting for review and processing building construction plans related to the structural, mechanical, electrical, and plumbing systems prior to final approval of a site plan, subject to such conditions as may be established by that department relative to processing of site plans prior to final approval.   
 
In such instances, no building permit will be issued until Planning & Development Services has issued a zoning certificate and the site plan has been stamped approved and is on file in the Building Inspections Department.  All building and construction permits issued for any project requiring site plan review shall be consistent with the stamped approved site plan.  The approval of a site plan shall not under any circumstances be construed to waive or otherwise diminish the applicable City requirements for construction or installation of structures or materials.  Whenever a conflict between the site plan and such construction details occurs, the more restrictive, or that requiring the higher standard, shall prevail.  
902.08.  Modification or Termination of Site Plans.   
 
A.  Site Plan Amendments.  After final approval, any modification, variation or adjustment of a stamped approved site plan shall require approval of a site plan amendment.   
 
Upon approval of any amendment, the Planning Commission or their designee, shall stamp and date the most recent version of the site plan, showing the approved amendment, and mark all previous copies as “void”.  If appropriate, the City’s Engineer and Building Inspector shall be notified of the amendment.   
 
B.  Site Plan Expiration and Cancellation.  In the event of a change to these regulations the site plan shall be valid under the regulations for which it was approved for 18 months from the date of such approval.  Upon expiration of the site plan and any extension that may have been granted, the staff shall make appropriate records in the Planning & Development Services Department files, stamp all available copies of the site plan as “void”, and notify the City’s Engineer and Building Inspector of the expiration.   
 
The applicant may cancel the site plan at any time between the date of final approval and the date of expiration by submitting a written request to the Planning Commission. Upon receipt of this request by the Commission, the site plan shall be treated as expired.  
 
902.09.  Integration of Other Review Procedures.  Any site plan to be built in stages or requiring variance or conditional use approval shall be coordinated as set forth below:   
 
A.  Development Built in Stages.  As part of the application for site plan approval, the developer shall submit a proposed stage plan, including a schedule for completion of all improvements.  If the site plan proposes any of the residential housing types described in Sections 603 or 604, a Master Development Plan pursuant to Section 605 shall also be required.  Once a stage plan has been approved, no land may be used and no building may be occupied except in accordance with such plan.  At the Planning Commission’s discretion, a new site plan may be required for each successive stage of the development.   
 
Stage configurations shall be logical and consistent with the purposes of this Ordinance.  If appropriate, the Planning Commission may stipulate that any or all portions of the required landscaping and/or bufferyards be provided during the first stage of development, even though some bufferyards or portions thereof lie outside the stage.  Each stage, at a minimum, must include adequate parking, drainage facilities, landscaping, and all other features needed to serve that portion of the total development.   
 
Prior to approval for construction of any one stage, an engineering stage plan shall be submitted to and approved by the City’s Engineer.  This plan shall address site grading, erosion control, stormwater management, internal traffic circulation, and any other design elements required by the City’s Engineer.   
 
In approving a stage plan, the Planning Commission, Site Plan Committee or the staff may specify certain site improvements to be provided at a percentage rate exceeding that of construction of the overall development.  These items may be elements of engineering design, or requirements of this Ordinance.   Such improvements include, but are not limited to parking, drainage facilities, erosion control measures, landscaping and bufferyards.  Where the applicant has agreed to provide off-site improvements, such as traffic signals, turn lanes, and sewer lines, the Planning Commission may require such improvements to be in place upon completion of any stage of the development.   
 
B.  Variance.  Those developments requiring a variance from any regulation of this Ordinance in conjunction with site plan review shall have the appropriate request acted upon by the Board of Zoning Adjustment in accordance with Section 1007 of this Ordinance.  This shall include existing development sites, proposed for expansion or reconfiguration, which are nonconforming to any requirement of this Ordinance.  The site plan may be reviewed by the Site Plan Committee concurrently with review and action by the Board of Zoning Adjustment on the variance request, but the site plan shall not be approved by the Planning Commission until the variance has been approved.   
 
C.  Conditional Uses.  For developments requiring approval of a conditional use, a request for such approval shall be submitted to the Planning Commission; and the Commission shall make a recommendation to City Council on such request.  The Council shall act on the conditional use request prior to final approval of the site plan.  A site plan and a conditional use request may be processed concurrently. 
 
902.10.  Non-Compliance.  Failure to comply with a stamped approved site plan or any of the conditions upon which such approval was contingent, including time limits for performance, shall be cause to deny issuance of a zoning certificate or, where a zoning certificate has been issued pursuant to a stamped approved site plan, to render such zoning certificate invalid.  Any action, construction, development or use of property undertaken in violation of the provisions of this Section for a site plan shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance and may be subject to a stop-work order and appropriate fines.   
 
902.11.  Development Site To Be Unified.   
 
A.  Internal Division of Ownership.  Except as provided in this section, the development site shall remain unified by title under one (1) owner, or by multiple owners holding a percentage interest in the site as a whole.  Where a development site consists of two (2) or more existing lots under the same ownership, all such lots shall be combined in accordance with the Subdivision Regulations prior to final approval of the site plan.   
 
Where spatial division of ownership within a development site is proposed, the owners of all component properties shall accept the following conditions in receiving site plan approval:   
 
1.  No individual property will be used or developed in any way that is not consistent with the approved site plan. 
2. Development rights on each parcel are combined with those of the balance of the development site, and the City will consider no separate development proposals unless the development site can be divided in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.  


 
3. No parcel of land within a development site shall be subdivided, sold or otherwise conveyed for the purpose of new development that is not authorized under the approved site plan.  


 
All owners of property within the development site shall authorize one (1) person, designated as the applicant, to represent them collectively before the Planning Commission and other City officials in all matters related to the site plan and development site.  In the event the designated applicant is not an owner of the subject property then a notarized “Authorization to Act as Applicant” must be completed and signed by the owner(s). 
 
 B.  External Ownership.  When the development site is part of a larger parcel of property, of which a portion is not intended to be included within the site plan, this unused area shall become a separate lot, meeting any relevant size and dimensional requirements of this Ordinance, to be approved in accordance with the Subdivision Regulations.  This subdivision process shall be completed prior to final approval of the site plan.   
 
C.  Development Site To Be Complete.  The development site shall be designed to provide all required amenities and facilities, including bufferyards, open space, and landscaping.  No such required features shall be located off-site or on adjacent properties which are leased, rented, or otherwise proposed for use on an informal basis, except as provided for in Section 611.03 Shared Parking.  The entire site shall have the zoning designation required to accommodate the principal use.   
 
D.  Division After Approval.  No development site, once granted site plan approval, shall be divided except through the site plan amendment process established in Section 902.08. 
 
902.12.  Site Plan Preparation Requirements.  A site plan must accurately show all relevant information about a proposed development to permit it to be reviewed against the requirements of this Ordinance, and to provide a permanent record as to the type and characteristics of development approved on the site.  Site plans shall be drawn, on one of the following overall sheet sizes 22”x 34”, 24”x 36”, or 36”x 48”, and at a scale no smaller than 1:50.  
 
When more than one (1) sheet is needed, a series of drawings showing different elements of the site design, such as landscaping, utilities, or topography may be submitted.  Where such a series is submitted, the top sheet shall include an index of all other sheets in the series.  These shall be bound in a single package, with each sheet labeled as to what it shows and its number in the series (e.g., Landscaping Plan, Sheet 2 of 3).  Information shown on Drawings included in construction plan (i.e. grading plans, utility plans, etc.) will not be considered as meeting the 
requirement for a site plan submission.  Required site plan details must be shown on the “site plan” drawing. 
 
Unless specifically waived by the Planning Commission, the following information shall be shown on all site plans:   
 
A.  Written Information:    
 
1.  Site plan name. 
 
2.  General statement indicating the character of the use(s) proposed for the site.  This shall include information describing the size and/or intensity of the use, such as the number of employees at largest shift, seating capacity, number of students, number of hospital beds or motel rooms, etc.  All other relevant information not otherwise specified in this checklist shall be provided in the General Statement, such as variances on the property, nonconforming status, etc. 
 
3.  Property owner’s name, address and telephone number; and the designated project applicant or representative if other than the property owner. 
 
4.  Name, address, and telephone number of engineer, surveyor, architect, landscape architect and/or any other professional involved in design of the project.  Include current license numbers. 
 
5.  Total size of the tract expressed in square feet and acres (to nearest tenth). 
 
6.  Zoning district assigned to the subject property. 
 
7.  Zoning and current land use of adjacent properties. 
 
8.  Number of units proposed (residential only).  Proposed use(s) of building(s), number of lots and lot numbers if applicable (commercial and/or residential) 
 
9.  Impervious surface area in square feet, impervious surface ratio (ISR), maximum allowed and proposed. 
 
10.  Floor area in square feet, floor area ratio (FAR), maximum allowed and proposed. 
 
11.  Number of parking spaces required and proposed (must show calculations based on the requirements of Section 611). 
 
12.  Building height and front, rear and side yard setbacks. 
 
13.  Corridor Overlay Information where applicable (i.e. building materials, sign, lighting, etc.) 
 
  B.  Graphic Information: 
 
1.  Vicinity map showing the site in relation to adjoining properties, streets and other landmarks such that its location within the City can easily be determined. 
 
2.  North arrow, scale and date prepared or amended. 
 
3.  Certified boundary survey of the tract prepared by a surveyor registered with the State of Alabama, indicating an existing lot of record. 
 
4.  Location, number of floors or stories, height and dimensions of all structures. 
 
5.  Location of all impervious surfaces. 
 
6.  All flood-prone areas as delineated by the Flood Insurance Rate Maps published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), including a notation of the 100-year flood elevation. 
 
7.  All wetlands and watercourses, including lakes, streams, etc. 
 
8.  Steep slopes greater than 30 percent. 
 
9.  USGS – MSL – Contours at five foot intervals. 
 
10.  Plan showing all proposed and required Landscaping (general & parking) and bufferyards signed and sealed by a registered landscape architect or landscape designer. 
 
          11.  Location height and type of all on premise lighting and freestanding signage. 
 
12.  Lot frontage on public streets and all proposed accesses and cross accesses. 
 
13. Location and dimensions of all parking spaces (including handicap spaces), loading berths, and driveway aisles.  One-way aisles must be labeled as such. 
 
14. Location of all curb cuts and their distances from nearest adjacent curb cuts or street intersections. 
 
15. Phase lines, if the development is to be constructed in phases. 
 
16. Existing and proposed utility easements. 
 
17. All existing and proposed street right-of-way reservations, cross access locations, sidewalks and easements. 
 
18. Finished floor elevations of all structures. 
 
19. All existing and proposed utility lines, including sewer, water, gas, and electricity including size of such lines where applicable. 
 
20. Location and screening of solid waste receptacles. 
 
21.  Elevations of all building facades at a scale of 1/8” – 1’ indicating: 

a. Design character of buildings and structures; 

b. Materials, existing and proposed, to be used on all structures to include color schemes.  

c. Structure heights. 

d. Roof configuration and overhangs. 

e. Special design features including compliance with ADA requirements. 

f. Proposed location, size and configuration of all wall mounted signs.  



   
C. Engineering:   


 
1.  Engineering Plan Submittal Requirements 
a.  Submit two (2) complete sets of documents 
b.  Each set is neatly bound; no loose sheets will be accepted 
c.  All submitted plan sheets shall be 22”x 34”, 24”x 36”, or 36”x 48” in size 
d.  In addition to site specific civil sheets, the following sheets are required in all plan sets: 
. Cover Sheet 

. Boundary/Existing Conditions Survey 

. Plat (recorded or proposed version) (Residential Subdivisions), Overall Development Plan (Commercial) 

. Current Site Plan (Commercial projects only, must have been submitted to Planning Commission) 


 
**Plans not meeting above requirements may be returned without a review and marked “Incomplete”. 
 
2.  Requirements for all Civil Plan Sheets 
a.  Title block with engineering firm information, registration number, engineer’s seal, sheet title, and page numbers clearly shown 
b. Benchmarks are required on all pertinent sheets 
c. North Arrow and Scale clearly shown on each plan sheet 
d. Legend (relevant to each sheet) showing all special symbols, line types and hatch used 
e. Street names labeled on all existing, proposed, and future streets 
f. Lot and Block numbers and/or ownership information shown for all lots 
g. Caution notes shown when working next to any existing utilities (public and franchise) 
 
3.  Recommended Order of Sheets (Sheets may be combined where feasible to reduce unnecessary sheets). 
      a.  Cover Sheet 
b.  Plat/Overall Development Plan 
c.  Survey 
d.  Approved Site Plan (non-residential projects) 
e.  Dimensional Control Plan (non-residential projects) 
f.  Demolition Plan (if required) 
g.  Erosion Control Plan 
h.  Paving and Layout Plan 
i.  Grading 
j.  Drainage Area Map and Drainage Plans 
k. Water and Sewer Plans (including Plan and Profile)l. 
l.  Street Light Plan 
m. Construction Details 
 
Note:  Based on the size and type of development, all of the following plan requirements may not be applicable. 
 
4.  Dimensional Control Plan (Non-Residential Projects) 
a.  Dimensions for all buildings, pavement and hardscape areas (i.e. parking areas, driveways, fire lanes, turn lanes, sidewalks, radii, throat depths, etc.) measured to the nearest 0.0’ 
b. Control points to structures (i.e. inlets, etc.) based on dimension from property corner or known feature (not from an arbitrary point parallel to property line) 
c.  Verification of public right-of-way widths.  Dimension each property corner adjacent to public right-of-way to perpendicular point on opposite side right-of-way line (do not label “variable width” only) 
d.  Dimension along right-of-way to nearest cross-street and/or driveway measured from throat to throat. 
 
5. Erosion Control Plan 
a.  Existing and/or proposed contours clearly shown/labeled 
b.  Existing and proposed storm lines and inlets shown 
c.  List the total disturbed acreage, and delineate limits of construction 
d.  FEMA 100-year flood plain 
e.  Appropriate BMP’s used and identified 
f.  Phasing of BMP’s with construction activities listed/described 
g.  BMP details provided, should be per current Alabama Erosion Control Manual or other applicable standard 
h. Stockpile area and batch plant areas shown and labeled 
i. Areas to be sodded or seeded shown and specified with permanent perennial vegetation 
j. Areas of permanent erosion control (other than vegetation) clearly shown 
k. Construction Entrance location 
  
6.  Grading  
 
a.  Both onsite and offsite existing/proposed contours shown clearly labeled 
b.  Date and name of firm who prepared geotechnical report with corresponding note stating: “Work shall be done in accordance with the Geotechnical Report by  , dated   .” 
c. Drainage clarified by flow arrows, high points, sags, ridges, and valley gutters 
d. Show driveway locations for all lots adjacent to storm inlets 
e. Positive overflow provided at all low points, easements dedicated as needed 
f. Finished pad and/or floor elevations shown 
g. Minimum finished floor elevations shown adjacent to floodplains, ponds, creeks/channels, etc. 
h. Clearly show all walls and label top/bottom elevations of wall at key locations 
i. Cross-sections and flow data for all swales and open channels provided 
j. Spot shots shown to ensure proper drainage and adequate ADA routing where applicable 
 
7. Drainage Area Map 
a.  Existing contours clearly shown for entire site and adjacent areas. 
b. Drainage areas and sub areas delineated and labeled 
c. Flow arrows for surface drainage shown 
d. Existing and proposed storm lines shown 
e. Inlet designation labels shown 
f. Detention pond shown and labeled 
g. Drainage easements shown and labeled 
h. Zoning indicated for all offsite areas and/or land use assumptions specified 
i. Rational Method Peak Runoff Rate Computation Table shown (Q=KCIA) 
j. Time of concentration and weighted runoff coefficient calculations shown as needed 
k. List the total site impervious area (ft2 of all paving, roof areas, etc.)-Commercial Projects 
 
8. Hydraulic Calculations 
a.  Street Flow Computation Table provided for all public streets 
b.  Inlet Interception Computation Table provided for all public inlets 
c.  Pipe Hydraulics Computation Table provided for all public lines 
 
9. Detention Pond Design & Calculations 
a.  Detention pond design calculations shown, method used specified 
b.  Provide detention pond volume sizing calculations and/or computation table 
c.  Provide stage-discharge table and/or curve information 
d.  Provide weir and/or orifice sizing calculations for outfall structure 
e.  Existing and proposed contours shown and labeled. 
f.  Cross-section of pond including side slopes, normal pool elevation (if applicable), show 100 year 25 year WSE, 10 year WSE, and 1 year, 24 hour 
g. Detail of pond outfall structure showing all elevations as necessary 
h. Trash rack (and detail) provided for smaller orifice openings 
i. Overflow spillway location and design information provided 
j. Show and label all existing/proposed utilities and easements 
k. Access/maintenance ramp provided (max slope 6:1) 
l. Maintenance Manual 
 
10. Storm Drain Plan 
   
Plan Review: 
a.  Show and label all existing and proposed utilities 
b.  Dimension location/spacing of utilities 
c.  Label inlet type, size, paving station, and top of curb elevation at a minimum 
d. Label type and size, of existing/proposed structures (i.e. headwalls, manholes/junction boxes) 
e. Label type, size and dimensions of all permanent outfall erosion protection 
f. Show centerline stationing for pipe with PC and PT stations and curve data 
g. Label centerline stations for lateral connections, manhole and junction box locations, pipe size changes, headwalls, and future stub out connections 
h. 25 year gutter flows and bypass shown at each inlet along public streets and fire lanes 
i. Provide applicable construction details for all drainage structures 
 
Profile View 
a.  Existing and proposed ground line at centerline of pipe shown and labeled correctly 
b. Show all hydraulic data including pipe flow, pipe capacity, hydraulic slope, velocity, velocity head, and partial flow data if under partial flow conditions (velocity and flow depths) 
c. Label station and flowline elevation information for all structures, crossings, laterals, etc. 
d. Label flowlines at every 50 foot station 
e. Indicate length, type/class, slope and size of all storm pipes 
f. Show and label 100 year and 25 year HGL, label HGL elevations at all junctions 
g. All utility crossings and parallel sewer lines shown in  profile 
 
 
 
11. Water Plan 
   
Plan View 
a.  Show and label all existing proposed utilities 
b.  Label size, type and pressure class for all proposed water mains 
c.  Show location for all water services and meters 
d.  Show and label all easements 
e.  Dimension location of all mains, services, meters, and spacing from other utilities 
f. Curve data and stationing provided as necessary 
g. Show and label all fire hydrants, valves, fittings, FDC locations, and back-flow prevention 
 
  Profile View 
a.  Profile all water mains 12” and larger, or where a potential conflict may arise 
b. Existing and proposed ground line at centerline of pipe shown and labeled correctly 
c. Label station and flowline elevations at 100’ intervals, and for all fittings, laterals, and crossings 
d. Indicate length, type/class, slope and size of all lines 
e. All utility crossings and parallel sewer/storm lines shown in profile 
f. Indicate length, type and size of encasement as needed 
 
12. Sanitary Sewer Plan 


 
  Plan View 
a.  Show and label all existing and proposed utilities 
b.  Dimension location of all mains from other utilities 
c.  Label line name, size, and type of all proposed sanitary sewer lines 
d.  Stubouts labeled with size, slope, length, and flowline elevations (if not profiled) 
e. Show and label all easements 
f. Show centerline stationing for sanitary sewer 
g. Show and label all manholes with rim elevations, as well as cleanouts 
h. Indicate type and size of encasement where needed 
i. Show flow direction arrows for sewer main 
j. Topographic contours shown to delineate sewer basins 
 
  Profile View 
a.  Profile shown for all mains 8” and larger, or where a potential conflict may arise 
b. Existing and proposed ground line at centerline of pipe shown and labeled 
c. Label station and flowline elevation information for all manholes, cleanouts, crossings, laterals 
d. Label flowlines at every 50 foot station 
e. Manhole inflow and outflow elevations to be designed with a minimum of 0.2’ drop 
f. Indicate the type and diameter for all manholes 
g. Indicate length, type/class, slope and size of all sanitary sewer pipes between manholes 
h. All utility crossings and parallel storm lines shown in  profile 
i. Indicate length, type and size of encasement as needed 
 
13. Paving Plan 


 
  Plan View 
a.  For all new streets, a site specific geotechnical evaluation and pavement design submitted with plans 
b. Typical Pavement Section details shown (fire lane, parking areas, streets, subgrade, etc.) 
c. For streets, centerline stationing at every 100’, PC’s, PT’s, and curve data labeled 
d. Intersection, driveway and island curb radii labeled 
e. All sidewalks and barrier free ramps shown, labeled and dimensioned 
f. Existing, proposed, future streets and drives shown and labeled 
g. Right-of-way corner clips and sight visibility easements provided 
h. Storm inlets identified with paving stations and top of curb elevations at center of inlet 
i. Drainage clarified by flow arrows at crests, sags, ridges, intersections, and valley gutters 
j. Show driveway locations for all lots adjacent to storm inlets 
k. For Commercial/Industrial Parking Lots show all parking stall locations, types, counts, and dimensions 
l. Ensure all appropriate warnings, signage, and arrows are shown for parking areas to ensure appropriate traffic flow 
 
  Profile View 
a.  Existing ground line for left, right, and center of right-of-way shown 
b.  Proposed top of curb line shown for all public streets, proposed invert line shown for all alleys 
c. Show right and left top of curbs at intersections where split grade occurs 
d. Top of curb/pavement elevations labeled at every 50 foot stations 
e. Vertical Curve stationing and elevations including PVC, PVI, PVT, crest/sag location, curve length, algebraic grade difference, and “K” values shown at a minimum 
f. Street grades shown to the nearest 0.01’.  Max. and min. grades per street design manual 
g. Show “compacted fill” callout/note for all areas of fill 
 
 
 
14. Sidewalk Layout Plan (Residential Subdivisions) 
a.  Provide a single scalable sheet showing all sidewalks to be installed with the development 
b. Distinguish between developer installed sidewalks and homebuilder installed sidewalks 
c. Show actual layout locations and sizes of all proposed sidewalks 
d. Confirm sidewalk layout and grades meet ADA standards 
 
15. Street Light and Signage Plan (Arterial Streets and Residential     Subdivisions) 
a.  Show all street light locations, consideration should be given to electrical layout from utility company 
b. Show all stop signs and traffic related signage locations 
c. Street lights located on opposite side of street from stop sign 
d. Verification of fire hydrant placement relative to street lights and stop signs (3’ clear area) 
e. If symbols used in plan, appropriate legend included for verification 
   
 
Section 902.13.  Design Review Standards.   
 
A.  Site Standards.  The standards for site plans listed below are intended only as minimum requirements, so that the general development pattern in the City may be adjusted to a wide variety of circumstances and topography, and to ensure reasonable and orderly growth.   
 
1. All proposed development shall meet or exceed the City's most current zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations and any other City ordinance as may pertain to such developments, as well as the Americans with Disabilities Act. 


 
2. Applications shall state the estimated increase in vehicle trips per day to the subject property which would be generated by the proposed development. Further, the applicant shall also provide for the necessary engineering studies needed to determine that entrances and exits onto public streets do not unduly increase congestion or traffic hazards to the public streets and the proposed site. Such requirements for engineering studies may be waived by the Planning Commission where the proposed use is not expected to contribute substantially to traffic and the spirit of this ordinance is not unduly compromised. 


 
Entrances, internal roads, and driveways shall be constructed to accommodate anticipated traffic flows after the development is complete. Preparation of plans and specifications are the responsibility of the applicant. 
 
Applicants may be required to install, at their own expense, turn lanes, street intersection lights, signs, and other improvements necessary to handle the increased traffic and potential traffic hazards. 
 
3.   The proposed development shall be designed in accordance with the requirements of the City's Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance #2012-07. 
 
4.   Developers shall provide for fences, landscaping and other improvements as are necessary to buffer the proposed use from the existing or surrounding land uses as set forth in Article V, "Landscaping Requirements", of the zoning ordinance. 
 
5.   Lighting facilities and lighted signs shall be placed and shielded in such a manner, and of such a height and intensity, as not to cause direct light to shine on other properties to the extent a public nuisance is created or a safety hazard is created on a public street. Lighting fixtures shall be compatible with the design objective of this article. 
 
6.   To the greatest extent possible, utilities should be placed underground, unless the applicant can demonstrate that it is unfeasible due to the costs or other constraints. 
 
7.   The proposed development shall be designed to prevent danger from fire, explosion, or other safety hazards to the general public, and the persons residing or working on surrounding property. 
 
8.   Loading docks, garbage collection areas and similar facilities and functions should, to the greatest extent possible, be incorporated into the overall design of the building and the landscaping, so that the visual and acoustic impacts of these functions are fully contained and are not visible from adjacent properties or public streets. In the case of collection areas, enclosed dumpsters or other equipment, screening shall be at least two feet taller than the equipment and not less than six feet in height. Use of screening materials should be consistent with the principal materials of the building and landscaping. 
 
B.  Architectural standards.  The standards of this section are intended to promote the health, safety and welfare of citizens by setting limited guidelines for construction with an emphasis on aesthetics. The guidelines may be supplemented or superseded by the Planning Commission and/or City Council by specific design guidelines applicable to specific uses or portions of the City as set out herein.   
 
1.   Height and massing.     
 
a.   Shall conform to the height requirements of each district. 
 
b.   Multifamily, commercial and office structures shall be designed to be compatible and consistent with the architectural style and character of single family residential structures in the immediate vicinity. The exterior of multifamily structures may be designed to appear as a single building, such as a large single family detached dwelling. 
 
c.   Lengthy unbroken facades should be avoided. As a general guide, the maximum horizontal length of an unbroken facade plane should be 50 feet in residential districts, and 75 feet in commercial and office districts. Facade offsets shall be sufficient to create a strong shadow line. 
 
d.   Buildings on corner lots shall be considered more significant structures, due to the fact that they have at least two front facades visibly exposed to the street. It is strongly encouraged that such buildings be designed with additional height and architectural embellishments, such as corner towers, relating to their location. 
 
e.   Buildings should be located to front towards and relate to public streets, both functionally and visually, to the greatest extent possible. 
 
2.   Roofs.     
 
a.   The pitch and style of roofs should be consistent with that of surrounding structures. Generally roofs should project enough beyond the facade to cast a shadow and shall be of a color which would be consistent and compatible with the natural environment. 
 
b.   Architectural embellishments which add visual interest to roofs, such as dormers, belvederes, masonry chimneys, cupolas, clock towers and other similar elements are strongly encouraged. 
 
c.   Mechanical equipment should be concealed from public streets within the volume of the roof or enclosed within penthouse structures or screening that will substantially eliminate visibility of the equipment from public streets. 
 
3.   Facades.    
  
a.   Front facades should be architecturally emphasized through fenestration, entrance treatments and details. Architectural elements such as doorways, dormers, gables, and porches should be used to effectively articulate facades and reduce the scale of larger structures. Diverse architectural treatments should be integrated to avoid a cluttered appearance. 
 
b.   The architectural treatment of the front facade should be continued, in its major features, around all sides of a building that are visible from a public street. It is recommended that all sides of a building should be architecturally designed to be consistent with regard to style, materials, colors and details. Blank wall or service area treatment on side and/or rear elevations visible from a public street is discouraged. 
 
c.   Fenestration should be architecturally compatible with the style, materials, color and details of the building. Windows should be vertically proportioned wherever possible. To the greatest extent possible, upper story windows should be vertically 
aligned with the location of windows and doors on the ground level, including storefront or display windows. 
 
d.   Blank, windowless walls are discouraged. If necessitated by local building codes, the wall should be articulated by the provision of blank window openings trimmed with frames, sills and lintels. 
 
e.   Each principal commercial building should have a highly visible customer entrance. All entrances to a building should be defined and articulated by architectural elements such as lintels, pediments, pilasters, columns, porticos, porches, overhangs, railings, balustrades and other similar elements. Any such element utilized should be architecturally compatible with the style, materials, colors and details of the building as a whole, including the doors. 
 
4.   Materials.  Materials such as brick, stone and wood are preferred. Metal siding shall be prohibited on all sides of a building which are visible from any public street.  Developers are encouraged to vary materials from building to building while limiting the number of different materials on any individual structure.   
 
5.  Parking areas.    See Parking Section 611 
 
6.  Landscaping standards.  See Landscape Bufferyard Article V 
 
7.  Signage.  See Sign Article VIII 
 
 
Section 903.  Conditional Uses.   
 
Conditional uses are those uses that have some special impact which differs from the potential impacts of permitted uses or exceeds them in intensity, or have uniqueness such that their effect on the surrounding environment cannot be determined in advance of the use being proposed in a particular location.   
 
Upon submission of a request for conditional use approval, a review of the location, design, configuration, and impact shall be conducted to determine whether the proposed use would have a detrimental impact on neighboring properties.   
 
The review considers the proposal in terms of: 
. existing zoning and land use in the vicinity of the use;  

. planned and proposed public and private developments that may be adversely affected by the proposed use;  

. whether, and to what extent, the use at the particular location for which it is proposed is consistent with the intent of the Zoning Ordinance, Comprehensive Plan and; any other development policies and/or regulations of the City of Lincoln; and  


. whether, and to what extent, all steps possible have been taken by the developer to minimize any adverse effects of the proposed use on the immediate vicinity and on the public health, safety, and welfare in general. 


 
 
Section 903.01.  Applicability.  Any use designated as a conditional use by Table 4-1 of this Ordinance shall comply with this Section.   
 
In addition, the following shall be approved only as conditional uses:   
 
A.  Any use that involves filling of a floodplain.   
 
B.  Any alternative residential use. 
  
 
Section 903.02.  Procedures.  Applications for a conditional use permit shall be submitted and approved prior to application for a zoning certificate.  A subdivision plat, or a site plan meeting the requirements of Section 902 shall be submitted to support applications for conditional uses in all districts.  Site plan or subdivision approval shall not be granted prior to or contingent upon conditional use approval. 
 
The Planning and Development Services Department shall process applications for a conditional use permit as follows:   
 
A.  Applications for a conditional use permit must be submitted to the Planning Commission and/or their designee not later than the 3rd Tuesday of the month proceeding the month in which the case is to be heard.  Copies of the application shall be distributed to the appropriate departments.   
 
B.  A public hearing shall be held by the Planning Commission after adjoining property owners have been notified of the public hearing by certified mail.  Not later than seven (7) days prior to the date set for the hearing on the application, the Site Plan Committee shall file a written report thereon with the Planning Commission.   As a courtesy, signs announcing the public hearing may be placed on the property in question. 
 
C.  The application shall be denied if the Planning Commission finds that the application and record fail to establish compliance with the standards of this Ordinance.  Further, the application shall be denied if the adverse impacts of the development, despite any mitigating conditions that might be imposed by the Planning Commission, outweigh any public or private benefits of the proposal and require denial in the interest of the overall public health, safety, and welfare.   
 
D.  In order to prevent or minimize adverse effects on other properties in the neighborhood and on the general health, safety, and welfare of the City of Lincoln, the Planning Commission may impose such restrictions and conditions on approval of the proposed use as it determines are required by the general purposes, goals, and objectives 
of this Ordinance.  All conditions imposed upon any conditional use permit approval, except those which are otherwise stated in this Ordinance, shall be expressly set forth in the resolution granting such conditional use permits.   
 
E.  The Planning Commission shall render to the City Council its recommendation to grant the application for a conditional use permit, grant it subject to conditions, or deny it.   Following a public hearing at the City Council upon an Ordinance for Conditional Use Approval, the City Council shall either approve, or disapprove, the application and shall establish the specific conditions under which the application is approved.   
 
F.  In the event a permit for a conditional use is approved or approved subject to conditions, the applicant shall submit a site plan meeting all conditions of approval. The Planning and Development Services Department shall then take action to process the application on the zoning certificate for the development to which the conditional use permit applies.  In the event such permit is not approved or is approved subject to conditions that are not acceptable to the applicant, the applicant may, either appeal such decision or abandon the application.  Appeals must be filed with and received by the staff within fifteen (15) days of said decision. 
 
Section 903.03.  Conditions on Conditional Use Approvals.  Every conditional use permit shall be contingent upon the proposed development fully complying with all requirements of this Ordinance and, where applicable, with the Subdivision Regulations.  The violation of any condition contained in a conditional use permit shall be a violation of this Ordinance.   
 
Section 903.04.  General Use Standards.   No application for a conditional use permit shall be approved unless the City Council shall specifically find the proposed conditional use is appropriate in the location for which it is proposed.  This finding shall be based on the following criteria:   
 
A.  The proposed use shall be in harmony with the general purpose, goals, objectives, and standards of this Ordinance, or any other plan, program, map, or ordinance adopted, or under consideration pursuant to official notice, by the City.   
 
B.  The proposed use at the proposed location shall not result in a substantial or undue adverse effect on adjacent property, the character of the neighborhood, traffic conditions, parking, public improvements, public sites or rights-of-way, or other matters affecting the public health, safety, and general welfare; either as they now exist or as they may in the future be developed as a result of the implementation of provisions and policies of this Ordinance, or any other plan, program, map, or ordinance adopted, or under consideration pursuant to official notice, by the City or other governmental agency having jurisdiction to guide growth and development.   
 
C.  The proposed use will be adequately served by and will not impose an undue burden on any of the improvements, facilities, utilities, and services specified in this subsection.  Where any such improvements, facilities, utilities, or services are not available or adequate to service the proposed use in the proposed location, the applicant shall, as part 
of the application and as a condition to approval of the proposed conditional use permit, be responsible for establishing ability, willingness, and binding commitment to provide such improvements, facilities, utilities, and services in sufficient time and in a manner consistent with this Ordinance, and other plans, programs, maps, and ordinances adopted by the City to guide its growth and development.  The approval of the conditional use permit shall be conditioned upon such improvements, facilities, utilities, and services being provided and guaranteed by the applicant.   
 
D.  The Planning Commission may attach to any recommendation for conditional use approval, additional criteria dealing with bufferyards, parking, lighting, building materials, or any other aspect of site plan approval they deem necessary to mitigate the impact of the proposed conditional use on the surrounding property. 
 
903.05.  Conditional Use Approval to Run with Land.  Conditional use approvals are issued for uses of land and may be transferable from one owner of the land to another.  All conditions place on said approval, including specific use types, shall be applicable to any new owner or developer.  Any change to plans or uses by any owner shall require re-approval through the normal approval process for Conditional Use. 
 
903.06.  Filling of Floodplain.  The filling of areas within the 100-year floodplain shall be approved only where plans and specifications have been submitted that meet all requirements of Section 412 and where the following conditions exist which necessitate the filling of the floodplain:   
 
A.  The property would otherwise be able to accommodate at least one residential dwelling with a lot meeting all requirements of Articles IV and VI but cannot, because of the floodplain, accommodate even one single-family unit; or,   
 
B.  That the location and/or configuration of the buildable land are such that the intensity of the permitted land use cannot be realized without filling in the floodplain.  In no event shall the filling of the floodplain be permitted to increase the allowable buildable area. 
 
 
Section 904.  Zoning Certificates.   
 
No development permitted by this Ordinance, including accessory and temporary uses, may be established and no existing building may be altered with respect to its use after the effective date of this Ordinance until a zoning certificate has been secured from the Planning and Development Services Department.   
 
 Nothing herein shall relieve any applicant of the additional responsibility of seeking any permit required by any applicable statute, ordinance, or regulations in compliance with all of the terms of this Ordinance.  Conditions for permits to raze or remove buildings are set by other ordinances.    
 
The violation of any condition contained in a conditional use permit shall be a violation of this Ordinance. 
 
 
Section 905.  Certificate of Occupancy.   
 
No land or building for which a zoning certificate has been issued shall be occupied or used in whole or in part for any use whatsoever after the effective date of this Ordinance until the owner, tenants, contract purchaser, or authorized agent thereof has been issued a certificate of occupancy by the Building Inspector, indicating that the building or use complies with all zoning requirements of this Ordinance, the building code, and other applicable codes and regulations.   
 
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the premises in question have been inspected and found by the Building Inspector to comply with the requirements of this Ordinance. 
 
 No permit for any new use or construction that will involve the on-site disposal of sewage or waste, and no permit for a change in use or an alteration that will result in an increased volume of sewage or waste to be disposed of on the site, or which requires the County Health Department’s approval shall be issued until said approval has been issued by said Health Department. 
 
The issuance of a certificate of occupancy in no way relieves any recipient thereof from compliance with all of the terms of this Ordinance and all other applicable regulations. 
 
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless required landscaping and bufferyards have been installed or appropriately bonded. 
 
   
Section 906.  Access.   
 
906.01.  Legal Access.  As a precondition to approval of any site plan, subdivision plat, zoning certificate, building permit, or any other type of development permit, any development site shall have legal access to a publicly owned and maintained road.  Physical access alone shall not qualify any development site for such permits.  Legal access shall consist of the required length of road frontage, a flag lot approval pursuant to Section 613, or a permanent access easements under this Section.  
 
906.02.  Access Easements.  Access by easement shall be approved only by specific action of the Planning Commission, and where normal requirements cannot be met.  In all such cases, the following conditions shall apply:    
 
 A.  The property owner seeking a permit shall possess a valid legal instrument, recorded in the Office of the Judge of Probate, indicating ownership of an access strip or easement at least 15 feet in width connecting the subject property with a public road;   
 
B.  No such access shall serve more than one (1) building site;   
 
C.  No development shall be authorized on any such building site other than one (1) single family dwelling and permitted accessory structures;   
 
D.  Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the access shall be graded and/or covered with a suitable surface so as to be passable to emergency vehicles; and   
 
E.  The permit applicant shall sign a statement indicating that the City of Lincoln has no obligation to repair and/or maintain the access in a usable condition, and that the City shall not be liable for injuries to persons or damage to property resulting from the site’s lack of direct access to a public road. 
 
   
Section 907.  Fees.   
 
A schedule of application fees for site plan and subdivision approval, zoning certificates, and other permits and public hearings required under this Ordinance shall be established by separate resolution or ordinance.  This fee schedule shall be computed so as to recover all actual costs incurred by the City in reviewing and processing requests, and shall be revised as necessary by recommendation from the Planning Commission and action by the City Council.  


ARTICLE X.    ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
   
 
Section 1000.  Purpose.   
 
The powers and duties of the following officers and boards are specified herein insofar as administration of this Ordinance is concerned:  the Planning Commission, Board of Zoning Adjustment, Planning Commission, Planning & Zoning Administrator and Code Enforcement Officers.  This Article also specifies the requirements for amendments, variances, administrative appeals, and interpretations of this Ordinance. 
 
   
Section 1001.  Planning & Zoning Administrator:  Duties and Powers.   
 
The Planning & Zoning Administrator shall perform duties prescribed by this Ordinance, as well as any other assigned by the Planning Commission or the City Council.  Appeals of administrative decisions of the Planning & Zoning Administrator and/or the Planning Commission may be made to the Board of Zoning Adjustment.   
 
The Planning & Zoning Administrator shall have the following powers and responsibilities as they pertain to:   
 
 Planning Commission: 
 
A.  Advise and cooperate with the Planning Commission in the implementation, amendment and enforcement of this Ordinance. 
 
B.  Attend all public hearings at which zoning matters are discussed, including meetings of the Planning Commission, Board of Zoning Adjustment and City Council. 
 
C.  Process and account for all departmental permits, applications, certificates and fees. 
 
D.  Evaluate, in coordination with the Code Enforcement Officer and appropriate Planning Commission Committee, each proposed site plan and subdivision plat for consistency with this Ordinance. 
 
E.  Ensure that all time limits prescribed by this Ordinance are met. 
 
F.  Monitor the progress of all development applications through the review process and be available to respond to inquiries from interested persons. 
 
G.  Record and file all applications for zoning certificates with accompanying plans and documents.  All applications, plans, and documents shall be a public record. 
 
H.  Promptly indicate any zone boundary or other change to the Official Zoning Map, and make available for public inspection an up-to-date copy of the Official Zoning Map, 
as amended, in the office of the Planning & Development Services Department during its regular business hours. 
 
I.  Other duties assigned. 
 
 
 Board of Zoning Adjustment: 
 
A.  Receive applications for variances and forward them to the Board of Zoning Adjustment for action. 
 
B.  Following refusal of a permit, receive applications for variances and appeals and forward them to the Board of Zoning Adjustment for action. 
 
C.  Advise and cooperate with the Board of Zoning Adjustment in carrying out their duties as they related to this Ordinance. 
 
D.  Attend all Board of Zoning Adjustment meetings.  
 
E.  Collect and account for all application fees required for variance and appeals actions. 
 
F.  Evaluate each proposed request for variance and appeals compliance with the standards of this Ordinance. 
 
G.  Ensure that all time limits prescribed by this Ordinance are met. 
 
H.  Monitor the progress of all applications through the review process and be available to respond to inquiries from interested persons. 
 
I.  Record and file all BZA applications with accompanying plans and documents.  All applications, plans, and documents shall be a public record. 
 
J.  Notifies the BZA and applicants of scheduled meeting dates and times. 
 
K.  Coordinates Board of Adjustment meetings. 
 
L.  Maintains files of Board of Zoning Adjustment. 
 
M.  Insures that meetings of the Board of Zoning Adjustment are properly recorded and transcribed. 
 
N.  Issue a report on all BZA approvals to the Planning Commission. 
 
   
Section 1002.  Code Enforcement Officer:  Duties and Powers.   
 
The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the following powers and responsibilities:   
 
A.  Receive and examine all applications for building permits and certificates of occupancy. 
 
B.  Process all building permit applications and applications for certificates of occupancy. 
 
C.  Issues permits only after receipt of a zoning certificate indicating all requirements of approval have been met. 
 
D.  Conduct inspections and surveys to determine compliance or non-compliance with the terms of this Ordinance. 
 
E.  Evaluate, in coordination with Planning & Zoning Administrator, each proposed request for variance and appeals compliance with the standards of this Ordinance. 
 
F.  Revoke, by writing, a permit or approval issued contrary to this Ordinance or based on a false statement or misrepresentation in the application. 
 
G.  Revoke any zoning certificate issued under a mistake of fact or contrary to the law or provision of this Ordinance. 
 
H.  Stop, by written order, work being done contrary to the building permit or to this Ordinance.  Such written order, posted on the premises involved, shall not be removed except by written order of the Code Enforcement Officer.  Removal without such order shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance. 
 
I.  Institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or use; restrain, correct, or abate such violation, so as to prevent the occupancy or use of any building, structure, or land; or prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about such premises. 
 
J.  Insures that all applications for permits with accompanying plans and documents are properly recorded and filed. 
 
   
Section 1003.  Duties of the Planning Commission and Their Subcommittees.   
 
A. General Duties:   


 
1. The Planning Commission shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its affairs and in keeping with the provisions of this Ordinance.   
2. The Planning Commission, in cooperation with the staff and other that may be consulted, shall study land use and development trends, collect data and analyze such information with regard to future development of the City of Lincoln. 
 
3.  The Planning Commission shall study and report on all proposed amendments to the text of this Ordinance.  When reviewing any such proposed amendments, the Planning Commission shall, within 45 days of receipt of same from the staff or the appropriate committee, submit its recommendations and findings to the City Council. 
 
4.  The Planning Commission shall study and report on all proposed amendments to the Official Zoning Map, the procedure for which is contained in Section 1006 of this Article. 
 
5.  The Planning Commission shall refer each proposed site plan, zoning request or subdivision plat to the appropriate committee for evaluation for consistency with this Ordinance and other planning documents that may apply. 
 
6.  The Planning Commission shall review and act upon, all site plans submitted to it by the Site Plan Committee in accordance with Section 902. 
 
7.   The Planning Commission shall hear all applications for conditional use permits submitted to it by the Site Plan or Zoning Committee and shall make a report and recommendation to the City Council in accordance with Section 903. 
 
8.  The Planning Commission shall review and act on all proposed zoning amendments submitted to it by the Zoning Committee and prepare a report on said zoning amendments for the City Council in accordance with Section 1006. 
 
9.  The Planning Commission may cause the posting of notice, in the form of a courtesy sign, on property that is subject to a public hearing for conditional use permit, rezoning or subdivision. 
 
10. The Planning Commission shall review the character, location, and extent of any street, square, park or other public way, ground or open space or public building or structure or major utility project whether publicly or privately owned, in accordance with Section 11-52-11 of the Code of Alabama of 1975, as amended. 
 
B.  Review Duties:   
 
The Planning Commission shall regularly review the Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning Ordinance, and the Subdivision Regulations and report on them to the City Council at least once every 3 to 5 years.  Specifically, the Planning Commission shall:   
 
1.  Analyze the extent to which development has occurred in Lincoln as compared to the projected growth at the time of adoption of the Comprehensive Plan and the last mapping of zoning districts created by this Ordinance. 
 
2. Recommend any changes in the mapping of Lincoln which would be required in order to accommodate the expected 20-year growth projections of the Comprehensive Plan for residential, industrial, commercial, and other land uses. 


 
3. Analyze the continued validity of any other regulations imposed by this Ordinance in terms of changed conditions since the last review. 


 
  
Section 1004.  Board of Zoning Adjustment:  Duties and Powers. 
 
 The Board of Zoning Adjustment heretofore established is continued, and shall be appointed as provided in Section 11-52-80 of The Code of Alabama, 1975, as amended.  No member of the Board shall vote upon any matter in which he or she, a spouse or a dependent has a direct interest. No member of the Board shall vote upon any matter involving a business with which he or she, a spouse or dependent has any interest or ownership.  The Board shall have the following powers and duties:   
 
A.  The Board of Zoning Adjustment shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its affairs and in keeping with the provisions of this Ordinance.   
 
B.  The Board of Zoning Adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be a public record and be immediately filed in the Planning and Development Services Department. 
  
C.  The Board of Zoning Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals from a decision of the staff, made in the performance of their duties. 
 
D.  The Board of Zoning Adjustment shall hear and decide all petitions for variances, as provided for in Section 1007. 
 
E. The Board of Zoning Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Planning Commission, Planning & Zoning Administrator, Code Enforcement Officer or any other City official in the enforcement of this Ordinance. 
 
F.  The Board of Zoning Adjustment may cause, at its discretion, the posting of notice in the form of a sign on the property that is subject to a public hearing on matters coming before it. 
 
   
 
 
 
Section 1005.  Interpretations.   
 
1005.01.  Purpose.  The provisions of this section are intended to provide a simple and expeditious method for clarifying ambiguities in the text of this Ordinance, the zoning map which it incorporates, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to it.  It is also intended to provide a simple procedure for overcoming rigidities and limitations of finite use lists. 
 
 1005.02.  Authority.  The Planning Commission may, subject to the procedures, standards, and limitations set forth in this Section, render interpretations of any provision of this Ordinance or any rule or regulation issued pursuant to it, including interpretations of the various uses in any district not expressly mentioned in this Ordinance. 
 
 1005.03.  Procedure.   
 
A.  Written Request for Non-Use Interpretation.  Except as provided below, a request for interpretation of any provision of this Ordinance, the zoning map, or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this Ordinance shall be submitted in writing to the Planning Commission.  No fee shall be required in connection with any such request.  Each such request shall set forth the specific provision or provisions to be interpreted, the facts of the specific situation giving rise to the request for an interpretation, and the precise interpretation claimed by the applicant to be correct.  Before rendering any interpretation, the Planning Commission shall receive such further facts and information as are in their judgment necessary to a meaningful interpretation of the provision in question.   
 
B.  Application for Use Interpretation.  Applications for a use interpretation shall be submitted to the Planning Commission and shall, in all instances, contain at least the following information and documentation:   
 
1. The applicant’s names, address, and interest in the subject property. 
 
2.  The owner’s name and address, if different from the applicant’s, and the owner’s signed consent to the filing of the application. 
 
3.  The names and addresses of all professional consultants advising the applicant with respect to the interpretation. 
 
4.  The street address and/or legal description of the subject property. 
 
5.  The zoning classification and present use of the subject property. 
 
6.  A complete description of the proposed use. 
 
7.  The uses permitted by the present zoning classification, which are most similar to the proposed use. 
 
8.  Documents, statements, and other evidence demonstrating that the proposed use will comply with all use limitations established for the district in which it is proposed to be located. 
 
9.  Such other and further information or documentation as the Planning Commission may deem necessary or appropriate to a full and proper consideration and disposition of the particular application.                
 
C.  Planning Commission.  Within 30 days following the receipt of a completed request or application for interpretation, a written interpretation shall be mailed to the applicant.  The specific precedent, reasons, and analysis on which such interpretation is based shall be stated.  
 
Failure to render an interpretation within the aforementioned time, or such longer period of time as may be agreed to by the applicant, shall be deemed to be a rejection of the applicant’s proposed interpretation.  A copy of each such interpretation shall be kept on file and a copy of each such file interpretation shall be made available for public inspection during normal business hours.     
 
D.  Appeal.  Appeals on interpretations rendered by the Planning Commission, or other responsible staff, pursuant to this Section may be taken to the Board of Zoning Adjustment as provided in this Article. 
 
1005.04.  Conditions on Use Interpretations.  The following conditions shall govern the Board of Zoning Adjustment on appeals from the Planning Commission, in issuing use interpretations:   
 
A.  No use interpretation shall allow the establishment of any use that was previously considered and rejected by the Board of Zoning Adjustment on an application for amendment.   
 
B.  No use interpretation shall permit a use in any district in which such use is not listed either as permitted or conditional in Table 4-1.   
 
C.  No use interpretation shall permit any use in any district unless evidence shall be presented which demonstrates that it will comply with each use limitation established for the particular district.   
 
D.  No use interpretation shall permit any use in a particular district unless such use is substantially similar to other uses permitted in such district and is more similar to such other uses than to uses permitted or conditionally permitted in a more restrictive district.   
 
E.  If the proposed use is more similar to a conditional use than a permitted use in the district in which it is proposed to be located, then any use interpretation permitting such use shall be conditioned on the issuance of a conditional use permit.   
 
F.  Any use permitted pursuant to this Section shall fully comply with all requirements and standards imposed by this Ordinance.   
 
1005.05.  Effect of Favorable Use Interpretation.  No use interpretation finding a particular use to be permitted or conditionally permitted in a specific district shall authorize the establishment of such use or the development, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or moving of any building or structure, but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing, and processing of applications for any permits and approvals which may be required by the codes and ordinances of the City of Lincoln, or other governmental agencies having jurisdiction.  These permits and approvals include, but are not limited to, zoning certificates, site plan, conditional use, building permits, and certificates of occupancy.   
 
1005.06.  Limitations on Favorable Use Interpretations.  No use interpretation finding a particular use to be permitted or conditionally permitted in a specified district shall supersede subsequent amendment to this Ordinance. 
 
   
Section 1006.  Amendments.   
 
This Ordinance may be amended from time to time as conditions warrant in the following manner.  As used herein, the term “application” includes City Council resolution/ordinance.   
 
A.  Application for an amendment to the zoning ordinance or zoning map of the City of Lincoln shall be made on forms furnished by the Planning and Development Services Department, and shall include a proper legal description of the subject lot or tract of land.  Additionally, all required fees and any other graphic information requested by the Planning Commission shall be submitted along with the completed application. 
 
B.  Initiation Procedures.  A proposed change to the zoning district boundaries or of the regulations may be initiated by the City Council, the Lincoln Planning Commission, or by petition of one or more owners, or authorized agents of such owners, of property within the area proposed to be changed.   
 
C.  Text Amendments.  The application for an amendment to the text of this Ordinance shall state in particular the article, section, subsection, and paragraph sought to be amended.  The application shall contain the language of the proposed amendment and shall recite the reasons for such proposed change in the text.   
 
D.  Map Amendments.   
 
1. Applications to rezone any property, or any application which seeks to change or modify the standards and requirements imposed on a particular piece of property by the text and maps of this Ordinance, including applications for variances and conditional use permits, may be instituted by the City of Lincoln or all the owners of the property sought to be affected, or their assigns.   
 
2. In the case where the applicant is not the owner of the subject property, said applicant shall secure a notarized authorization to act as applicant from the property owner, along with the regularly required copy of the deed for the property.   
 
3. When a development proposal involves approval of a site plan or subdivision plat in addition to a zoning map amendment, no site plan or subdivision plat approval shall be granted prior to approval of the map amendment.  If a development plan and the corresponding request for zoning change are to be addressed at the same public hearing, the Planning Commission shall render a recommendation to the City Council on the zoning application before considering any related site plan or subdivision plat.  Such decision shall be based on the requirements of the Comprehensive Plan, this Ordinance and the full range of uses permitted in the requested district, and not on the specific development concept proposed by the applicant.  No zoning certificate shall be issued for site plan or subdivision development until the City Council has taken final action on the recommendation for zoning change. 
 
4. All properties annexed into the City of Lincoln shall receive the Residential Estate (RE) District zoning designation.  If another zoning designation is desired, the owner or authorized representative shall make separate application for rezoning in accordance with these regulations.  Application for rezoning may be made simultaneously with a request for annexation. 
 
D.  Public Hearing.  Upon application, the Planning Commission shall, after giving seven (7) days notice, conduct a public hearing on the proposed amendment.  The Planning Commission shall consider and make recommendations on all proposed amendments, taking into account:  (1) the testimony at the hearing; (2) a site inspection of the property in question; (3) the recommendations from interested official bodies; (4) compliance with the Comprehensive Plan and (5) the standards provided below. 
 
1006.01.  Standards for Map Amendments.   
 
A.  No request, other than those made by the City Council, Planning Commission, the Planning and Development Services Department, or any department or agency of the city, for a change in zoning classification or creation of a separate district shall be considered which involves an area of less than two (2) acres, except in the following cases: 
 
 1.  The extension of existing district boundaries; 
2.  The addition of O-I or NC zoning contiguous to existing commercial or residential zones. 
3.  The zoning of an existing lot of record, surrounded by unzoned property, which was outside the municipal limits and is requesting annexation. 
 
B.  No rezoning of land to the Manufacturing (M) District shall be permitted except on a specific and documented finding that:   
 
1. There is an inadequate supply of land zoned for these uses or the proposed use cannot be accommodated by those sites due to lack of transportation, water, or sewer, or that the market area to be served by the proposed use cannot be efficiently served by the geographical location of the existing Industrial District.   
 
2. Roads, floodplains, or other existing or planned features will insure sufficient buffering to protect surrounding land and uses from the negative impacts of the proposed industrial use.   
 
C. There shall be no rezoning of land from Residential Estate (RE) District to any other district until such time as adequate public utilities are available. 


 
1006.02.  Annexation 
 
The following requirements must be fulfilled for a petition to be considered by the Planning Commission. 
 
A.  Ownership.  The petitioner must be the owner of the property, and must submit an accurate description of the property proposed for annexation. This requirement can be met by submitting a survey and a legal description prepared and signed by a surveyor registered in the State of Alabama; or a legally recorded subdivision plat showing the property in question. 
 
B.  Contiguity.  The property to be annexed must be contiguous to the existing corporate boundary of the City of Lincoln. For this purpose the term "contiguous" means either: 
 
1. A boundary of the property proposed for annexation adjoins the existing corporate boundary of the City of Lincoln for a distance of at least one (1) foot; or, 


 
2. At least one (1) foot of the boundary of the property proposed for annexation is directly across the right-of-way of a publicly dedicated street, a railroad right-of-way; or across from a creek or river, a utility right-of-way, or similar natural boundary from the existing corporate boundary of the City of Lincoln.  


 
3. A strip of land at least sixty (60) feet wide connects the property proposed for annexation to the corporate boundary of the City of Lincoln; and the connecting strip is included in the annexation petition. 


 
C.  Review of Petitions.  Each annexation petition will be submitted to all City department heads for review and comment. All such comments will be 
presented to the Planning Commission and City Council for consideration in making a decision. 
 
D.  Property Located in a Fire District.  If the property requested to be annexed lies within the territory of a fire district, other than the Lincoln Fire District, the property owner must provide proof that they have been released from said fire district prior to a petition for annexation being processed.  Proof may be provided in the form of written documentation from the Board of Commissions of the Fire District certifying that such a release has been granted and that all fees associated with said release have been paid in full.  In the event the applicant fails to remove the property from any fire district prior to annexation, applicant shall reimburse the City for all costs, including all attorneys’ fees, for the removal by the City of this property from any fire district after annexation. 
 
E.  Guidelines for Review.  The following guidelines will be used by the Planning Commission in reviewing petitions for annexation. 
 
1. Zoning Classification.  Any area annexed into the City of Lincoln shall be given a zoning classification of RE (Residential Estate).   



 
 In the event a petition for annexation seeks a zoning classification other than RE, a separate zoning request shall be submitted for recommendation to the City Council by the Planning Commission under the standards for rezoning set out in the City of Lincoln Zoning Ordinance.  The Council, upon receiving such recommendation shall take into consideration the recommendations of the City’s Comprehensive Plan for the area in question. 
 
2. Minimum Area.  If the property for which annexation is being requested is less than three (3) acres in area, consideration should only be given to annexation of the entire parcel. 
 
 If the property for which annexation is being requested is more than three (3) acres in area, consideration will be given to annexing a portion of said property. However, neither the portion recommended for annexation, nor the portion remaining unincorporated, should be less than three (3) acres; nor should the annexation of such portion make it unduly difficult for other property owners in the vicinity to achieve the degree of contiguity necessary to make their property eligible for annexation. 
 
3. Public Access.  The property for which annexation is being requested should have direct access to a public right-of-way. For this purpose the term "direct access" means fronting on a dedicated public right-of-way; or having an unrestricted connection to a public right-of-
way, capable of providing safe and ready access for public service vehicles, and approved by the Planning Commission. 
 
1006.03.  Report of the Planning Commission.     
 
A.  The Planning Commission shall make a report to the City Council outlining the proposed amendment.  No amendment shall be passed except by a majority vote of the members of the City Council present. 
 
B.  The Planning Commission shall not recommend the adoption of a proposed amendment unless it finds that the adoption of such an amendment is in the public interest and not solely for the interest of the applicant. 
 
C.  For each disapproved map amendment, the Planning Commission shall make findings on each of the following matters based on the evidence presented to it: 
 
1.  The proposed amendment’s ability to uphold the policies of the Comprehensive Plan. 
 
2. The suitability of the property in question for the uses permitted under the proposed zoning.   


 
3. The adequacy of public facilities, such as sewer and water, and other required public services. 


 
 
Section 1007.  Variances.   
 
1007.01.  Purpose.  The purpose of this Section is to empower the Board of Zoning Adjustment to vary or adapt the strict application of any of the requirements of this Ordinance.  It is expected that the granting of variances will be rare.  However, a variance may be appropriate where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape; or by reason of other exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary and exceptional situations or conditions on a piece of property, the strict application of any regulation enacted under this Ordinance would result in peculiar, exceptional, and undue hardship on the owner’s use of such property.   
 
Those developments requiring a variance from any regulation of this Ordinance in conjunction with site plan review shall have the appropriate request acted upon by the Board of Zoning Adjustment prior to approval of any such site plan.  This shall include existing development sites, proposed for expansion or reconfiguration, which are nonconforming to any requirement of this Ordinance.  The site plan may be reviewed concurrently with review and action on the variance request, but the site plan shall not be approved until the variance has been approved. 
 
1007.02.  Application.  Any property owner may apply to the Board of Zoning Adjustment for a variance using forms to be obtained from the Planning and Development Services Department. Applications must be submitted by noon on the date of the applicable deadline for the meeting at 
which it is to be heard.   All required fees and any other information requested by the Planning Commission shall be submitted along with the completed application. 
 
1007.03.  Standards for Variances.  The Board of Zoning Adjustment shall grant no variance in the strict application of the provision of this Ordinance unless it finds that the following requirements and standards are satisfied.  In general, the power to authorize a variance from the terms of this Ordinance shall be sparingly exercised.  It is the intent of this Ordinance that the variance be used only to overcome some exceptional physical condition of a parcel of land which poses practical difficulty to its development and prevents its owner from using the property as intended by the Zoning Ordinance.  Any variance granted shall be the minimum adjustment necessary for the reasonable use of the land.   
 
The applicant must prove that the variance will not be contrary to the public interest and that practical difficulty and unnecessary hardship will result if it is not granted.  In particular, the applicant shall establish and substantiate in writing that the appeal for the variance conforms to all of the requirements and standards listed below:   
 
A.  The granting of the variance shall be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the regulations imposed by this Ordinance on the district in which it is located and shall not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare.   
 
B.  There must be proof of unique circumstances:  there must exist special circumstances or conditions fully described in the findings, applicable to the land or buildings for which the variance is sought, which circumstances or conditions are peculiar to such land or buildings and do not apply generally to land or buildings in the district, and which circumstances or conditions are such that the strict application of the provisions of this Ordinance would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of such land or building.   
 
C.  There must be proof of unnecessary hardship.  It is not sufficient proof of hardship to show that greater profit would result if the variance were granted.  Furthermore, the hardship complained of cannot be self-created; nor can it be established on this basis by one who purchases with or without knowledge of the restrictions; it must result from the application of this Ordinance; it must be suffered directly by the property in question; and evidence of other variances granted under similar circumstances shall not be considered.   
 
D.  That the granting of the variance is necessary for the reasonable use of the land or building and that the variance as granted by the Board of Zoning Adjustment is the minimum variance that will accomplish this purpose.   
 
E.  That the proposed variance will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, substantially increase the congestion in the public streets, increase the danger of fire, endanger the public safety, or substantially diminish or impair property values within the adjacent neighborhood.   
 
F.  That the granting of the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this Ordinance to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district.   
 
G.  The granting of the variance will not permit the establishment of any use, which is not permitted in the district.   
 
The Board may prescribe any safeguard that it deems necessary to secure substantially the objectives of the regulations or provisions to which the variance applies.   
 
1007.04.  Public Hearing.  Upon application, the Board of Zoning Adjustment shall schedule a public hearing on the proposed variance to be held at least ten (10) days after a public notice has been posted, and after the adjacent property owners most affected by the variance request have been notified by certified mail.  The Board of Zoning Adjustment shall consider and decide all proposed variances taking into account the standards enumerated above.  After the close of a public hearing and within ten (10) days the Board of Zoning Adjustment shall render a written decision, setting forth the reasons for such decision, which shall be accompanied by finding of fact(s) specifying the reason(s) for such decision.  All such decisions are final and binding on all parties. 
 
   
Section 1008.  Appeal of an Administrative Interpretation or Action.   
 
Appeals to the Board of Zoning Adjustment may be made by any person aggrieved or affected by any provision of this Ordinance or by any decision, or any order to stop, cease, and desist, issued by the Planning Commission, Code Enforcement Officer, or their designated representative, in enforcing the provisions of this Ordinance.   
 
1008.01.  General Rules and Procedures for Appeals.   
 
A.  Any appeals from the rulings concerning the enforcement and interpretation of any provision of this Ordinance shall be filed with the Planning and Development Services Department within 15 days after the date of said ruling.  All required fees shall be submitted along with a completed application and any additional information requested by the staff. 
 
B.  All appeals and applications made to the Board shall be in writing on forms prescribed by the Board and accompanied by fees prescribed by resolution of the City Council.   
 
C.  All appeals and applications shall refer to the specific provisions of this Ordinance involved; and the grounds for the appeal.  
 
D.   The Board shall select a reasonable time and place for hearing the appeal and give due notice thereof to the parties and shall render a written decision on the appeal without unreasonable delay.  The Board may affirm, reverse, wholly or in part, or modify the 
order, requirement, decision, or determination, as in its opinion it determines ought to be done, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken.  Complete records of all appeal actions of the Board shall be maintained in the Planning and Development Services Department.   
 
E.  Within ten (10) days after the close of a public hearing the Board shall render a written decision giving the reason(s) for its decision.   
 
F.  In rendering a decision with respect to an appeal from any order, decision, or determination the Board shall strictly interpret the language of the Ordinance and shall find that the city official was correct in his/her decision or in error.  Should the Board find that the interpretation, decision or actions was in error they must provide what is in their opinion the correct interpretation, decision or action.  However, the Board shall not render any decision which shall modify an order, decision, or determination which confers rights or privileges on the appellant that are not otherwise permissible under the strict interpretation of the language of this Ordinance.   
 
G.  Such decision shall be submitted to the appellant and the Planning and Development Services Department.   
 
1008.02.  All decisions rendered by the Board shall be final and binding on all parties.  No request for a variance or appeal of an administrative decision shall be reheard, and no further application shall be accepted, once a decision has been given, except under one or more of the following conditions:   
 
A.  New evidence or information pertinent to the request has been discovered which was not available to the applicant at the time of the original hearing. 
 
B.  The decision resulted from an error, made by the Board, or any other City official, in procedures required by this Ordinance or State law. 
 
C.  The decision resulted from an error in substantive law under the provisions of this Ordinance or the Code of Alabama.   
 
Where no error is alleged and no new evidence is available a new or more effective presentation by the applicant shall not constitute grounds for rehearing a decision of the Board of Zoning Adjustment.  Any applicant wishing a rehearing shall appear before the Board to present one or more of the qualifying conditions listed in this Section.   
 
If the Board finds that one or more of these conditions exists, the applicant shall be permitted to submit a new application, together with the required fees.  The new application shall be heard at a subsequent meeting, and shall be subject to all regular advertising and procedural requirements.  Allowing a new application does not obligate the Board to grant the request.   
 
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Board may within 15 days after such decision appeal to the Circuit Court having jurisdiction. 
Section 1009.  Penalties.   
 
Any violation of any provision of this Ordinance, shall constitute a Class C misdemeanor.  Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be fined in an amount not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and may also be sentenced to imprisonment for a period of not exceeding six (6) months, in the discretion of the court trying the case, and violations on separate days shall each constitute a separate offense. 
 
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
 
 
1009.01.  Failure to Obtain a Zoning Certificate.  Any person who fails to obtain a Zoning Certificate or other permit prior to beginning construction or erecting any structure or sign shall be subject to doubling of all applicable fees. 
 
 
Section 1010.  ADOPTION. 
 
All sections of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable, and if any word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this ordinance shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining words, phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this ordinance. 
 
All ordinances or resolutions inconsistent with this ordinance are hereby repealed. 
 
This ordinance shall become effective after adoption and publication as required by law. 
 
 
ADOPTED AND APPROVED by the City Council of the City of Lincoln, Alabama this the _______ day of _____________________, 2015. 
. 
 
 
        ______________________________ 
        Claude Kitchin, Mayor 
 
        ______________________________ 
        Sadie Britt, Councilmember 
 
        ______________________________ 
        Billy Pearson, Councilmember 
 
        ______________________________ 
        Chris Watson, Councilmember 
 
        ______________________________ 
        Shelly L. Barnhart, Councilmember 
 
        ______________________________ 
        Jean B. Burk, Councilmember 
 
 
Attest: 
 
________________________________ 
Laura S. Carmack, City Clerk 
 
 
 
 
      


Table 4-1 
TABLE OF PERMITTED USES 
USE 
CATEGORY 
  
ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
 
 SDS 
 RE 
 RS 
 RHD 
 MH 
 O-I 
 NB 
 GB 
 HC 
 LC 
 DH 
 M-1 
 M-2 
 
Agricultural Uses: 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Agricultural/Farming 
  
 P 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Forestry 
 x 
 P 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 SDS 
 RE 
 RS 
 RHD 
 MH 
 O-I 
 NB 
 GB 
 HC 
 LC 
 DH 
 M-1 
 M-2 
 
Agricultural Support : 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Farm Equipment sales/repair 
  
  
C 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
P 
  
  
  
P 
  
C 
 
Farm produce sales 
  
 P 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 P 
  
  
  
  
 
Farm produce supply 
  
 P 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 P 
  
  
 P 
 C 
 
Farm product processing 
  
 C 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
 C 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 SDS 
 RE 
 RS 
 RHD 
 MH 
 O-I 
 NB 
 GB 
 HC 
 LC 
 DH 
 M-1 
 M-2 
 
Nurseries: 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Wholesale 
  
 C 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
  
  
 C 
 C 
 
Retail 
 x 
 C 
  
  
  
  
  
 P 
 P 
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 SDS 
 RE 
 RS 
 RHD 
 MH 
 O-I 
 NB 
 GB 
 HC 
 LC 
 DH 
 M-1 
 M-2 
 
Residential Uses: 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Single Family Detached 
  
 P 
 P 
 P 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Multi-Family 
 x 
  
  
 P 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Manufactured /Modular Home Individual 
 x 
 P 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Manufactured /Modular Home Subdivision 
 x 
  
 C 
  
 C 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Manufactured Home Park 
 x 
  
  
  
 C 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Bed & Breakfast Inn 
 x 
 C 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 SDS 
 RE 
 RS 
 RHD 
 MH 
 O-I 
 NB 
 GB 
 HC 
 LC 
 DH 
 M-1 
 M-2 
 
Institutional Uses: 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Schools – Public/Private 
  
  
 C 
  
  
 P 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Cemetery 
  
 P 
  
  
  
 P 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Place of Worship 
 x 
 P 
 C 
  
  
 P 
  
 P 
  
  
  
  
  
 
Community Center 
 x 
  
 C 
 P 
 P 
 P 
  
 P 
  
  
  
  
  
 
Daycare  
 x 
  
  
 C 
 C 
 P 
  
 P 
  
  
  
  
  
 
Group Homes 
 x 
 C 
 C 
 P 
  
 P 
  
 C 
  
  
  
  
  
 
Nursing Home/ Assisted Living Facility 
 x 
 C 
  
 C 
  
 P 
  
 P 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 

USE 
CATEGORY 
  
ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
 
 SDS 
 RE 
 RS 
 RHD 
 MH 
 O-I 
 NB 
 GB 
 HC 
 LC 
 DH 
 M-1 
 M-2 
 
Office Uses: 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Business/Professional Office 
  
  
  
  
  
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
  
  
 C 
 C 
 
Bank or Financial Svs. 
  
  
  
  
  
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
  
  
 C 
  
 
Urgent Care/Surgery Centers 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 SDS 
 RE 
 RS 
 RHD 
 MH 
 O-I 
 NB 
 GB 
 HC 
 LC 
 DH 
 M-1 
 M-2 
 
Commercial & Entertainment Uses: 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Auto Accessory Store 
 x 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 P 
 P 
  
  
  
  
 
Barber/Beauty Shop 
  
  
  
  
  
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
  
  
 
Building Material Sales 
 x 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
 P 
  
  
 P 
 P 
 
Commercial or trade school 
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
  
 P 
 P 
  
  
 P 
 P 
 
Convenience Store  
(no fuel) 
 x 
  
  
  
  
  
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
  
  
  
 
Dance/Gymnastics Studio 
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
 P 
 P 
 P 
  
 P 
  
  
 
Entertainment, Indoor 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
  
  
 
Entertainment, Outdoor 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 P 
 C 
 C 
 C 
  
  
 
Garden Center or Nursery 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
 P 
 P 
 C 
 C 
  
  
 
General Retail, Enclosed 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
  
  
 
Greenhouse/Farm Produce Sales 
  
 P 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 P 
  
  
 C 
  
 
Home Improvement Ctr. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
 P 
  
  
 P 
  
 
Pawn/Smoke/Tattoo/Title Pawn/Payday Loan  
 x 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 P 
 P 
  
  
  
  
 
Recreation, Indoor 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
 P 
 P 
 P 
  
  
  
 
Restaurant, Eat-In 
 x 
  
  
  
  
 C 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 C 
 
Shopping Center 
 x 
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
 P 
 P 
 P 
  
  
  
 
Veterinary Office/kennel 
   Large Animal 
 x 
 P 
  
  
  
 C 
 C 
 P 
 P 
  
  
 P 
  
 
Wine  Bar/Brew Pub 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 SDS 
 RE 
 RS 
 RHD 
 MH 
 O-I 
 NB 
 GB 
 HC 
 LC 
 DH 
 M-1 
 M-2 
 
Road Service Uses 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Auto repair, paint/body 
 x 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 P 
  
  
 P 
 P 
 
Car Wash 
 x 
  
  
  
  
  
 P 
 P 
 P 
 C 
  
  
  
 
Flea market 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
 C 
  
  
  
  
 
Gasoline/service station 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
 C 
 P 
 C 
  
 P 
  
 
Hotel/Motel 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 P 
 P 
 P 
  
  
  
 
Outdoor/Drive-In Theatre 
 x 
 C 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
 C 
  
  
  
 
Restaurant, Fast Food 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
 P 
 P 
 C 
  
 P 
  
 
Small Engine Repair 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
 P 
  
  
 P 
  
 
Vehicle Sales or Rental 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
 P 
  
  
 P 
  
 

USE 
CATEGORY 
  
ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
 
 SDS 
 RE 
 RS 
 RHD 
 MH 
 O-I 
 NB 
 GB 
 HC 
 LC 
 DH 
 M-1 
 M-2 
 
Shopping Center 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Regional Shopping Ctr. 500,000+ sf. Floor area 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 P 
 P 
  
  
  
  
 
Neighborhood Shopping Ctr. 
 x 
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
 P 
 P 
 P 
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 SDS 
 RE 
 RS 
 RHD 
 MH 
 O-I 
 NB 
 GB 
 HC 
 LC 
 DH 
 M-1 
 M-2 
 
Commercial Support: 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Bottling plant/bakery 
 x 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 P 
  
  
 P 
 P 
 
Contractor storage yard 
 x 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
  
  
 P 
 P 
 
Printing/publishing 
 x 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 P 
  
  
 P 
 P 
 
Recycled materials collection/storage 
 x 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
  
  
 P 
 P 
 
Sales/minor storage of gaseous fuels 
 x 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 P 
  
  
 P 
 P 
 
Sales/repair of heavy equipment 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
  
  
 P 
 P 
 
Veterinary Office/kennel w/outdoor pens 
  
 C 
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
 C 
  
  
 C 
  
 
Warehouse 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
  
  
 P 
 P 
 
Mini-warehouse 
 x 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
 P 
 C 
  
 P 
  
 
Office Warehouse 
 x 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
 C 
  
  
 P 
 P 
 
Wholesale distributor 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
  
  
 P 
 P 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 SDS 
 RE 
 RS 
 RHD 
 MH 
 O-I 
 NB 
 GB 
 HC 
 LC 
 DH 
 M-1 
 M-2 
 
Commercial Recreation Uses 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Miniature Golf/driving range 
 x 
 C 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
 P 
  
 C 
  
 
Amusement Park 
 x 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 P 
  
 C 
  
 
Fairground 
 x 
 C 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 P 
  
 C 
  
 
Amphitheater 
 x 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 P 
  
 C 
  
 
Race track 
 x 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
  
 C 
 C 
 
Stadium/arena 
 x 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
  
 C 
 C 
 
Skate Rink 
 x 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
 P 
 P 
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 SDS 
 RE 
 RS 
 RHD 
 MH 
 O-I 
 NB 
 GB 
 HC 
 LC 
 DH 
 M-1 
 M-2 
 
Recreational Rental Dwellings 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Campground 
 x 
 C 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
  
  
  
 
Cottages/cabins 
 x 
 C 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
  
  
  
 
Recreation vehicle park 
 x 
 C 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 

USE 
CATEGORY 
  
ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
 
 SDS 
 RE 
 RS 
 RHD 
 MH 
 O-I 
 NB 
 GB 
 HC 
 LC 
 DH 
 M-1 
 M-2 
 
Recreational Uses: 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Golf Course 
  
 P 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 P 
  
  
  
 
Park 
  
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 
Tennis Court 
  
 P 
 P 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 P 
  
  
  
 
Swimming Pool 
  
 P 
 P 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 P 
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 SDS 
 RE 
 RS 
 RHD 
 MH 
 O-I 
 NB 
 GB 
 HC 
 LC 
 DH 
 M-1 
 M-2 
 
Public Service Uses: 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Communication Tower 
 x 
 P 
  
  
  
 P 
  
 C 
 P 
 C 
  
 P 
 P 
 
Hospital 
 x 
  
  
  
  
 C 
 C 
 C 
 C 
  
  
 C 
 C 
 
Municipal Office/Facility 
  
 C 
  
  
  
 P 
 C 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 C 
 P 
 P 
 
Public Utility 
  
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 C 
 P 
 P 
 
Utility service yard, garage, or substation 
 x 
 C 
  
  
  
  
 C 
 C 
 P 
 C 
  
 P 
 P 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 SDS 
 RE 
 RS 
 RHD 
 MH 
 O-I 
 NB 
 GB 
 HC 
 LC 
 DH 
 M-1 
 M-2 
 
Industrial Uses: 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Bulk storage of chemicals or fuels 
 x 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
 C 
 
Commercial incinerator 
 x 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
 C 
 
Food processing/packing 
 x 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
 C 
 
Freight/trucking terminal 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
 C 
 
Manufacture of building materials 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
 P 
 
Manufacture/storage of explosives 
 x 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Manufacturing 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
 P 
 
Outdoor storage of machinery 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Recycled materials processing 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Scientific testing/research laboratory 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
 P 
 
Slaughterhouse 
 x 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Storage of sand/gravel/blocks 
 x 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
  
  
 C 
 P 
 
Salvage Yard (Auto,etc) 
 x 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Mine/quarry 
 x 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Warehouse, Distribution 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 C 
 P 
 
Windmill Farm 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 

 


Table 4-2:  Standards for Nonresidential Uses by District 
 
 
 
District 
  
Uses 
 Maximum 
FAR 
 Maximum 
ISR 
 Minimum 
Site Area2 
 Minimum 
Lot Width3 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
Residential Estate (RE) 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 Agriculture/Nurseries 
 na 
 0.05 
 3 ac. 
 none 
 
 
 Agriculture Support 
 0.25 
 0.50 
 1 ac. 
 none 
 
 
 Institutional 
 0.25 
 .50 
 3ac. 
 none 
 
 
 Recreation Rental 
 0.01 
 0.10 
 3 ac. 
 none 
 
 
 Recreation 
 0.02 
 0.40 
 3 ac. 
 none 
 
 
 Public Service2 
 0.20 
 0.50 
 3 ac. 
 none 
 
 
 Conditional Use 
 0.12 
 0.30 
 3 ac. 
 none 
 
 
 All Other Uses 
 0.15 
 0.30 
 3 ac. 
 none 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
Office-Institutional (O-I) 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 Institutional 
 .75 
 .85 
 40,000 sf. 
 100’ 
 
 
 Office 
 .75 
 .85 
 40,000 sf. 
 100’ 
 
 
 Commercial & Entertainment 
 .40 
 .60 
 None 
 75’ 
 
 
 Recreational 
 .10 
 .40 
 10,000 sf. 
 none 
 
 
 Public Service2 
 .35 
 .60 
  7,500 sf. 
 75’ 
 
 
 Conditional Use 
 .50 
 .70 
 40,000 sf. 
 100’ 
 
 
 All Other Uses 
 .70 
 .65 
 20,000 sf. 
 100’ 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
Neighborhood Business (NB) 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 Office 
 .50 
 .60 
 20,000 sf. 
 75’ 
 
 
 Commercial & Entertainment 
 .40 
 .70 
 None 
 75’ 
 
 
 Road Service 
 .35 
 .70 
 30,000 sf. 
 100’ 
 
 
 Shopping Center 
 .40 
 .60 
 3 ac. 
 100’ 
 
 
 Recreational 
 .10 
 .40 
 10,000 sf. 
 none 
 
 
 Public Service2 
 .35 
 .60 
 7,500 sf. 
 75’ 
 
 
 Conditional Uses 
 .50 
 .70 
 40,000 sf. 
 100’ 
 
 
 All Other Uses 
 .70 
 .65 
 20,000 sf. 
 100’ 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 

 
Table 4-2:  Standards for Nonresidential Uses by District 
 
 
 
District 
  
Uses 
 Maximum 
FAR 
 Maximum 
ISR 
 Minimum 
Site Area2 
 Minimum 
Lot Width3  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
General Business (GB) 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 Nurseries 
 .05 
 .50 
 80,000 sf. 
 none 
 
 
 Institutional 
 .60 
 .70 
 30,000 sf. 
 75’ 
 
 
 Office 
 .60 
 .70 
 30,000 sf. 
 75’ 
 
 
 Commercial & Entertainment 
 .40 
 .80 
 None 
 75’ 
 
 
 Road Service 
 .35 
 .80 
 30,000 sf. 
 100’ 
 
 
 Shopping Center 
 .40 
 .70 
 3ac. 
 100’ 
 
 
 Commercial Support 
 .50 
 .70 
 40,000 sf. 
 100’ 
 
 
 Recreational 
 .10 
 .40 
 15,000 sf. 
 none 
 
 
 Public Service2 
 .35 
 .70 
 7,500 sf. 
 75’ 
 
 
 Conditional Uses 
 .50 
 .80 
 40,000 sf. 
 100’ 
 
 
 All Other Uses 
 .70 
 .75 
 20,000 sf. 
 100’ 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
Highway Commercial (HC) 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 Agricultural Support 
 .40 
 .70 
 20,000 sf. 
 75’ 
 
 
 Nurseries 
 .05 
 .50 
 40,000 sf. 
 None 
 
 
 Office Uses 
 .60 
 .70 
 30,000 sf. 
 75’ 
 
 
 Road Service 
 .35 
 .90 
 30,000 sf. 
 100’ 
 
 
 Recreational 
 .10 
 .40 
 30,000 sf. 
 None 
 
 
 Public Service1 
 .35 
 .80 
  7,500 sf. 
 75’ 
 
 
 Conditional Uses 
 .50 
 .90 
 40,000 sf. 
 75’ 
 
 
 All Other Uses 
 .35 
 .90 
 30,000 sf. 
 100’ 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
Leisure Commercial (LC) 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 Commercial & Entertainment 
 .40 
 .80 
 None 
 75’ 
 
 
 Road Service 
 .35 
 .80 
 30,000 sf. 
 100’ 
 
 
 Shopping Center 
 .40 
 .60 
 3 ac. 
 100’ 
 
 
 Commercial Support 
 .50 
 .70 
 40,000 sf. 
 100’ 
 
 
 Recreational Rental  
 See Section 409 (I) for RV Parks 
 
 
 Recreational 
 .10 
 .40 
 15,000 sf. 
 none 
 
 
 Public Service1 
 .35 
 .70 
 7,500 sf. 
 75’ 
 
 
 Conditional Uses 
 .50 
 .80 
 40,000 sf. 
 100’ 
 
 
 All Other Uses 
 .70 
 .75 
 30,000 sf. 
 100’ 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 

 
 
Table 4-2:  Standards for Nonresidential Uses by District 
 
 
 
District 
  
Uses 
 Maximum 
FAR 
 Maximum 
ISR 
 Minimum 
Site Area2 
 Minimum 
Lot Width3  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
Downtown Historic (DH) 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 Commercial & Entertainment 
 3.00 
 1.00 
 None 
 None 
 
 
 Recreational Uses 
 .10 
 .40 
 15,000 sf. 
 none 
 
 
 Public Service1 
 .35 
 .70 
 7,500 sf. 
 75’ 
 
 
 Conditional Uses 
 As determined by Planning Commission & Council 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
Industrial  (M-1) & (M-2) 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 Agricultural Support 
 .80 
 .90 
 40,000 sf. 
 100’ 
 
 
 Nurseries 
 .05 
 .50 
 80,000 sf. 
 None 
 
 
 Office 
 .80 
 .90 
 40,000 sf. 
 100’ 
 
 
 Road Service 
 .35 
 .90 
 30,000 sf. 
 100’ 
 
 
 Commercial Support 
 .80 
 .90 
 10,000 sf. 
 100’ 
 
 
 Commercial Recreation 
 .40 
 .90 
 40,000 sf. 
 100’ 
 
 
 Recreational 
 .10 
 .40 
 10,000 sf. 
 None 
 
 
 Public Service1 
 .50 
 .80 
 10,000 sf. 
 100’ 
 
 
 Industrial 
 .80 
 .90 
 40,000 sf. 
 100’ 
 
 
 All Other Uses 
 .40 
 .90 
 80,000 sf. 
 100’ 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
Special District (SD)4 
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
 

 
 
1 No minimum lot size/width is required for public service distribution facilities for sewer, water, telephone, gas and electricity; minimum lot area for communication towers shall be determined by setbacks requirements as set out in Section 602. 


 
2 For lots not meeting the minimum size requirement in any district, see Article VIII. 


 
3 In cases where side lot lines are not parallel because the lot fronts on a curved right-of-way, minimum width at road frontage shall be as follows: 

a. Curved right-of-way:  75 percent of normal width requirement 

b. Subdivision cul-de-sac:  50 percent of normal width requirement 



Width at road frontage shall be measured along a straight line connecting the foremost points of side lot lines. 
 
4 See Section 606. 


 
 


Table 5-1: Approved Plant Materials 
 
Trees contained in the following list are preapproved for use and meet the requirements of this article.  Any tree which is not on this list may be submitted for approval to the Planning Commission and/or their designee, prior to the approval of a Land Development Permit.  Tree which exhibit poor health characteristics, are not native to the climate range in Lincoln or are considered invasive will not be approved for installation. 
 
Scientific Name 
 Common Name 
 
 
CANOPY TREES: 
  
 
 
  
 
Acer rubrum  
 Red Maple 
 
Acer saccharum  
 Sugar Maple 
 
Acer freemanii 
 ‘Autumn Blaze’ 
 
Acer x freemanii  
 Freeman Maple  
 
Betula nigra  
 River Birch 
 
Carpinus caroliniana  
 American Hornbeam 
 
Carya ssp.  
 Hickory 
 
Cedrus deodora  
 Deodor Cedar 
 
Celtis laevigata  
 Sugarberry 
 
Celtis occidentalis 
 Hackberry 
 
Cornus x ‘Rutican’  
 Constellation Dogwood 
 
Cryptomeria japonica  
 Japanese Cedar 
 
Fagus grandifolia  
 American Beech 
 
Fraxinus americana  
 White Ash 
 
Fraxinus pennsylvanica  
 Green Ash 
 
Ginkgo biloba  
 Ginkgo; Maidenhair 
 
Liquidambar styraciflua ‘Rotundaloba’ 
 Fruitless Sweetgum 
 
Liriodendron tulipifera  
 Tulip Tree; Tulip Poplar; Yellow Poplar 
 
Magnolia grandiflora  
 Southern Magnolia 
 
Metasequoia glyptostroboides  
 Dawn Redwood 
 
Nyssa sylvatica  
 Black Tupelo (Black Gum, Sour Gum) 
 
Ostrya virginiana  
 Hophornbeam 
 
Pinus elliotii  
 Slash Pine 
 
Pinus glabra  
 Spruce Pine; Walter’s Pine 
 
Pinus palustris  
 Longleaf Pine 
 
Pinus taeda  
 Loblolly Pine 
 
Pinus virginiana  
 Virginia Pine 
 
Pistacia chinensis 
 Chinese Pistache 
 
Platanus occidentalis  
 Sycamore 
 
Quercus spp.  
 Oak Tree 
 
Salix babylonica  
 Weeping Willow 
 
Sequoia sempervirens  
 Redwood 
 
Taxodium distichum  
 Bald Cypress 
 
Tsuga candensis  
 Eastern Hemlock; Canadian Hemlock 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 

CANOPY TREES: (cont.) 
  
 
 
  
 
Ulmus alata  
 Winged Elm 
 
Ulmus parvifolia  
 Chinese Elm; Lace Bark Elm 
 
Zelkova serrata  
 Japanese Zelkova 
 
 
  
 
UNDERSTORY TREES: 
  
 
 
  
 
Acer barbatum  
 Florida Maple 
 
Acer buergeranum  
 Trident Maple 
 
Acer palmatum  
 Japanese Maple 
 
Amalanchier x ‘Autumn Brilliance’ 
 Autumn Brilliance Serviceberry 
 
Cercis canadensis  
 Eastern Redbud 
 
Cornus florida  
 Flowering Dogwood 
 
Cornus kousa  
 Kousa Dogwood 
 
Crataegus phaenopyrum  
 Washington Hawthorn 
 
Ilex latifolia  
 Lusterleaf Holly 
 
Ilex x attenuate fosteri 
 Foster Holly 
 
Ilex x ‘Emily Bruner’  
 Emily Bruner Holly 
 
Ilex x ‘Nellie R. Stevens’  
 Nellie R. Stevens Holly 
 
Ilex x attenuate ‘Savannah’ 
 Savannah Holly 
 
Ilex x attenuate ‘East Palatka” 
 East Palatka Holly 
 
Ilex verticillata  
 Winterberry; Holly; Black Alder 
 
Juniperus virginiana  
 Eastern Red Cedar 
 
Juniperus virginiana ‘Idylwild’  
 Idylwild Juniper 
 
Lagerstroemia indica  
 Crape Myrtle 
 
Magnolia grandiflora  
   ‘Claudia Wannamaker’ 
 Claudia Wannamaker Magnolia 
 
Magnolia grandiflora  
   ‘Bracken’s Brown Beauty 
 Bracken’s Brown Beauty Magnolia 
 
Magnolia grandiflora ‘Little Gem’ 
 Little Gem Magnolia 
 
Magnolia grandiflora ‘D.D. Blanchard 
 D.D. Blanchard Magnolia 
 
Magnolia grandiflora “Margaret Davis” 
 Margaret Davis Magnolia 
 
Magnolia stellata  
 Star Magnolia 
 
Magnolia x soulangiana  
 Saucer Magnolia 
 
Magnolia virginiana  
 Sweet Bay Magnolia 
 
Malus spp.  
 Crabapple 
 
Myrica cerifera  
 Southern Wax Myrtle 
 
Osmanthus fortunei  
 Fortune’s Osmanthus 
 
Osmanthus fragrans  
 Tea Olive 
 
Oxydendrum arboreum  
 Sourwood; Lily of the valley tree; Sorrell tree 
 
Prunus serrulata  
 Japanese Flowering Cherry 
 
Prunus subhirtella  
 Higan Cherry 
 
Prunus x yedoensis  
 Yoshino Cherry 
 
Thuja occidentalis  
 Eastern White Cedar 
 
Vitex agnus-castus  
 Lilac Chaste Tree 
 
 
  
 

DECIDUOUS SHRUBS: 
  
 
 
  
 
Abelia x grandiflora 
 Glossy Abelia 
 
Aesculus parviflora 
 Bottlebrush Buckeye 
 
Berberis thunbergii atropurpurea  
‘Crimson Pygmy’ 
 Crimson Pygmy Barberry 
 
Buddleia davidii 
 Butterfly-Bush 
 
Chaenomeles speciosa 
 Common flowering quince 
 
Cotinus coggygria 
 Common Smokebush 
 
Euonymus alatus compactus 
 Burning Bush; winged euonymus 
 
Exochorda racemosa 
 Pearlbush 
 
Forsythia xintermedia 
 Border Forsythia 
 
Hibiscus syriacus 
 Shrub althea; Rose of Sharon 
 
Hydrangea macrophylla 
 Big Leaf Hydrangea 
 
Hydrangea quercifolia 
 Oakleaf Hydrangea 
 
Jasminum floridum 
 Showy Jasmine 
 
Jasminum nudiflorum 
 Winter Jasmine 
 
Kerria japonica 
 Japanese kerria 
 
Kolkwitzia amabilis 
 Beautybush 
 
Lagerstroemia indica/fairiei 
 Crape Myrtle 
 
Magnolia stellata 
 Star Magnolia 
 
Spiraea x bumalda ‘Anthony Waterer’ 
 Anthony Waterer Bumalda Spirea 
 
Spiraea cantoniensis 
 Reeves Spirea; Double Reeves Spirea 
 
Spiraea prunifolia 
 Double Bridalwreath Spirea 
 
Spiraea thunbergii 
 Thunberg Spirea 
 
Spiraea x vanhouttei 
 Vanhoutte Spirea 
 
Viburnum x burkwoodi 
 Burkwood Viburnum 
 
Viburnum carlesii 
 Korean Spicebush 
 
Viburnum dentatum 
 Arrowwood viburnum;  
Southern arrowwood 
 
Viburnum prunifolium 
 Blackhaw Viburnum 
 
Viburnum plicatum 
 Japanese Snowball 
 
Viburnum plicatum var. tomentosum 
 Doublefile viburnum 
 
Vitex agnus-castus 
 Lilac Chastetree 
 
Weigela florida 
 Old Fashioned Weigela 
 
 
  
 
EVERGREEN SHRUBS: 
  
 
 
  
 
Berberis sargentiana 
 Sargent Barberry 
 
Berberis julianae 
 Wintergreen Barberry 
 
Buxus microphylla japonica 
 Japanese Boxwood 
 
Buxus microphylla koreana 
 Korean Boxwood 
 
Buxus microphylla cultivars 
 Wintergreen boxwood 
 
Eaeagwus ebbengai 
 Ebbengei elaeagnus 
 
Elaeagnus pungens reflexa 
 Bronze Eaeagnus 
 
Ilex x ‘Nellie R. Stevens’ 
 Nellie R. Stevens Holly 
 
Ilex x aquipernyi 
 Brillian Holly 
 
Ilex x attenuate ‘Savannah’ 
 Savannah Holly 
 

EVERGREEN SHRUBS: (cont.) 
  
 
 
  
 
Ilex attenuate ‘Fosteri’ 
 Foster Holly 
 
Ilex cassine 
 Dahoon 
 
Ilex cornuta ‘Burfordii’ 
 Burford Chinese Holly 
 
Ilex cornuta ‘Carissa’ 
 Carissa Holly 
 
Ilex cornuta ‘Needlepoint’ 
 Needlepoint Holly 
 
Ilex cornuta ‘Rotunda’ 
 Rotunda Chinese Holly; Dwarfed horned holly 
 
Ilex cornuta ‘Burfordii Nana’ 
 Dwarf Burford Holly 
 
Ilex crenata ‘Hetzii’ 
 Hetz Japanese Holly 
 
Ilex crenata ‘Rotundifolia’ 
 Roundleaf Japanese Holly 
 
Ilex crenata ‘Helleri’ 
 Heller Japanese Holly 
 
Ilex crenata ‘Compacta’ 
 Compacta Japanese Holly 
 
Ilex crenata ‘Convexa’ 
 Convexleaf Japanese Holly 
 
Ilex glabra 
 Inkberry 
 
Ilex latifolia 
 Lusterleaf Holly 
 
Ilex vomitoria 
 Yaupon Holly 
 
Ilex vomitoria ‘Pendula’ 
 Weeping Yaupon 
 
Ilex vomitoria “nana’ 
 Dwarf Youpon Holly 
 
 Illicium parviflorum 
 Small Anise-tree 
 
Juniperus chinensis spp. 
 Juniper 
 
Juniperus conferta ‘Blue Pacific’ 
 Shore Juniper; Blue Pacific Juniper 
 
Juniperus horizontalis ‘Bar Harbor’ 
 Bar Harbor Juniper 
 
Juniperus horizontalis ‘;Plumosa compacta’ 
 Andorra juniper 
 
Juniperus horizontalis ‘Wiltoni’ 
 Blue Rug Juniper 
 
 Juniperus parsoni 
 Parsons Juniper 
 
Leucothoe populiforia 
 Rainbow Leucothoe 
 
Ligustrum japonicum 
 Japanese Privet 
 
Ligustrum japonicum ‘Rotundifolium’ 
 Curlyleaf Ligustrum 
 
Lonicera fragrantissima 
 Winter Honeysuckle 
 
Mahonia bealei 
 Leatherleaf Mahonia 
 
Michelia figo 
 Banana Shrub 
 
Myrica cerifera 
 Southern Waxmyrtle 
 
Nandina domestica 
 Nandina 
 
Osmanthus heterophyllus 
 Holly Osmanthus; Holly Tea Olive; False Holly 
 
Osmanthus x fortunei 
 Fortunes Osmanthus/Tea Olive 
 

 
 



