
CODE OF ORDINANCES
CITY OF
OPP, ALABAMA
_____________________________
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY 
_____________________________
Published in 1990 by Order of the City Council 
_____________________________
Adopted March 19, 1990 
_____________________________
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
OPP, ALABAMA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
_____________________________
James L. Nolen 
Mayor
_____________________________
Barney Durden 
Jimmy Flowers 
Eddie Hill 
James O. Simmons 
City Council
_____________________________
Larry Grissett 
City Attorney
_____________________________
Betty Kelley 
  
City Clerk
PREFACE 
This Code is a codification of the ordinances of the City of Opp, Alabama, of a general and permanent nature. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this volume, the reader can locate any section of any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this volume. 
Numbering System
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of Chapter 2 is numbered 2-1 and the third section of Chapter 7 is 7-3. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 4-5 and 4-6 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 4-5.5. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 6 and 7, it will be designated as Chapter 6.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. 
Indices
The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within each index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 

Looseleaf Supplements
A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the Code. With this system, the Code will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Successfully keeping this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments
The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of B. Meade White, Supervising Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to the Honorable James L. Nolen, Mayor, Larry Grissett, City Attorney, and Betty Kelley, City Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 

Tallahassee, Florida 

ORDINANCE NO. 1990-1 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF OPP, ALABAMA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF OPP, ALABAMA: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Opp, Alabama," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 14, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before June 6, 1989, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine not less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisonment at hard labor not exceeding six (6) months, or both, except as otherwise provided by law. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after June 6, 1989, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective March 19, 1990. 
Passed and adopted by the City of Opp this 19th day of March, 1990. 
;sigr; J.L. Nolen\ Mayor 
;sigl; Betty Kelley\ City Clerk 
Certificate of Adoption 
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the City Council of the City of Opp, Alabama, held on the 19th day of March, 1990. 
;sigr; Betty Kelley\ City Clerk 
 
PART I 
CHARTER 
 
Sec. 1. Incorporated; name; rights.
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of Alabama, that the town of Opp, in the county of Covington, be and the same is hereby incorporated, and the corporate limits of said town shall embrace an area of land one square mile, the boundary lines of which shall be equidistant east, west, north and south from the center of the railroad depot in said town; and the present and future inhabitants of the said town of Opp, as by this act incorporated, shall be and they are by this act made and constituted a body corporate and politic under the name and style of the "Town of Opp," under and by which name, all the corporate powers and privileges of said town, by this act granted, shall be executed, and the said corporation shall sue and be sued, and plead and be impleaded, answer and be answered in all manner of suits, either in law or equity; may keep a common seal, and may purchase, receive, hold, sell, encumber and let real and personal property to the amount of fifty thousand dollars. 
State law reference(s)—Classification as city, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-40-6. 
 
Sec. 2. Town government.
Be it further enacted, that the government of said town shall be styled: "The Town Council of Opp," and shall consist of a mayor and five councilmen, inhabitants of said town, who shall serve for the term of two years, and until their successors shall be duly elected and qualified, to be elected by the legal voters of said town, who shall consist of all male persons of the age of twenty-one and upwards, who have resided within the limits of said town for the space of six months next preceding the election at which they propose to vote, provided that in the first election that shall be held, a residence of thirty days shall be sufficient. 
Editor's note(s)—The term of office is now four years. 
 
Sec. 3. Qualifications for office.
Be it further enacted, that no person shall be eligible to the office of mayor or councilman, who shall not have been a resident of said town for the space of one year next preceding the date of election or appointment, provided that the first mayor and councilmen shall be eligible after residing in said town thirty days. 
 
Sec. 4. Oath.
Be it further enacted, that the mayor and councilmen, and each of them, and all other officers of said town shall in addition to the oath prescribed for public officers, before entering upon their respective offices, take and subscribe the following oath, to-wit: "I, A. B., (as the case may be, mayor, councilman or other officer), do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will to the best of my skill and ability, discharge all the duties incumbent on me, so help me God." Which oath may be administered by the mayor or any councilman of said town, or by any other officer authorized by the laws of the State to administer oaths, and a certificate of such oath, made by the officer administering the same, shall be filed with the records of the town council. 
 
Sec. 5. Election.
Be it further enacted, that an election for a mayor and five councilmen of said town shall be held on the first Monday in July, 1901, and every two years thereafter, at and between the hours prescribed by law for State elections, but should an election not take place at the time designated, the corporation for that cause, shall not be dissolved, but the mayor and councilmen shall remain in office until their successors are elected and qualified, and shall proceed to appoint some other day, as near as may be, not exceeding thirty days, on which such election shall be held. 
Editor's note(s)—Such elections are now held every four years. 
 
Sec. 6. Rules for elections.
Be it further enacted, that all the elections for mayor and councilmen shall be held and supervised by two (2) citizens of said town, to be appointed by the mayor and councilmen, and at such election the marshal shall preserve order, and act as returning officer, and the mayor and councilmen shall, at a meeting to be held for that purpose, on the day succeeding the day of election, or as soon thereafter as practicable judge of the legality of such elections, and declare who has been elected, and in all cases of a tie between two (2) or more persons, shall determine which of said persons shall be mayor or councilman, as the case may be, only those members voting who are not interested in the result, and the persons so declared elected, shall immediately take the oath of office and enter upon the discharge of their duties. 
Editor's note(s)—This section is inaccurate in several respects. 
 
Sec. 7. Vacancies.
Be it further enacted, that should a vacancy occur at any time in the office of mayor or councilmen during the term for which the mayor and councilmen may have been elected, by death, resignation, absence from the board for three months, or from any other cause, such vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the remaining members of the board. 
 
Sec. 8. Quorum.
Be it further enacted, that for the transaction of any business other than is hereinafter especially provided for, a majority of the board of mayor and councilmen shall be necessary, but a less number may make adjournment from time to time, and the board may by its bylaws compel the attendance of its members by a reasonable fine. 
 
Sec. 9. Powers.
Be it further enacted, that the board of mayor and councilmen of said town shall have power: 
First. To elect a clerk, treasurer, marshal, policemen and such other officers as they may deem necessary, removable at the pleasure of the board, to prescribe the duties, and to require of them bonds with security, in such amount as they may deem necessary for the faithful discharge of their duties, and to impose fines upon them for the neglect or violation of duty, not to exceed in any case the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) in amount for a single offense. 
Second. To determine and fix the salary of the mayor and other officers. 
Third. To enact such laws and by-laws and ordinances as may be necessary and proper to carry out and enforce the powers in this charter granted, and for their own government, not contrary to the laws of the State, or to the restrictions imposed by this act. 
Fourth. To impose and collect taxes on all real and personal property within said town, within the limitations of the constitution of the State. 
Fifth. To prevent nuisances and to remove the same, at the cost of the persons on whose premises they may have been found or who may have caused them. 
Sixth. To tax, license, restrain, and regulate all kinds of public amusements, shows, exhibitions and entertainments for pay. 
Seventh. To prohibit and restrain all disorderly conduct, all gaming houses, houses of ill fame, racing, prize-fighting, games of chance, cock-fighting, breaches of peace, vagrancy, drunkenness, prostitution, and unlawful assemblies, and to disperse the same. 
Eighth. To establish and regulate markets, to build market houses and manage the same, to prohibit the selling of fresh meats, fish, vegetables and other articles usually kept in town markets, except at the town market house, during market hours, establish, keep in repair and control public wells, reservoirs and water works, and make all needful provisions for supplying said town with wholesome water, to keep in repair all sidewalks and streets; to open the same when they may be closed, and at all times keep the streets and sidewalks free from obstructions, to widen and improve streets and sidewalks now existing, and to establish and open new ones, and make and build bridges and drains and regulate the same. 
Ninth. To license, under such restrictions as they may deem proper, all conveyances running for hire in said town. 
Tenth. To license and tax hotels and restaurants, shops or stores for the sale of any kind of goods, merchandise, wares, produce or manufactures, and to tax and regulate itinerant and transient merchants and dealers. 
Eleventh. To tax and license peddlers, hawkers and medicine vendors, insurance and real estate agents, cotton brokers and other agents, auctioneers, commission merchants and undertakers, to license and tax livery and sale stables, marble and wood and lumber yards, cabinet shops, blacksmiths and shoe shops and barber shops. 
Twelfth. To tax and regulate auction sales except sales by the State and county officers, administrators and guardians, and to compel auctioneers to make return under oath of the gross amount of their sales. 
Thirteenth. To enforce all measures deemed necessary and proper to prevent the introduction of infectious and contagious diseases within said town and to preserve the health of the inhabitants of the same. 
Fourteenth. To prevent and punish all violations of the Sabbath, to prevent and punish any disturbance of or interference with the worship of Almighty God; to prevent and punish any disturbance or interference with any lawful assemblage of the citizens of said town; to prevent and punish any indecent exposure of the person, profane or obscene language or exhibitions or anything else pernicious to the morals and good order of society. 
Fifteenth. To prevent and punish malicious and willful mischief to houses, fences, ornamental and shade trees, signs, sign posts, tombs, monuments or any other kind or description of property whatever. To have control of the public cemetery and adopt any regulations concerning the same. 
Sixteenth. To fix the tax on all licenses issued under authority of this act, and to enforce the collection of the same, by penalty, within the restrictions hereinafter imposed or by execution against the property of the person failing or refusing to pay said tax as the board may deem best. 
Seventeenth. To punish by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) and by imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30) days, all violations of the laws, by-laws and ordinances passed by authority of this act, and all fines and costs imposed in such cases may be collected by execution issued by the mayor or any councilman, on the non-payment punished by fine or imprisonment, or hard labor as aforesaid at the rate of forty cents a day, and in each case of conviction under this section the marshal or other officer making the arrest shall be entitled to two dollars, and the mayor or other officer presiding at the trial, to one dollar, which amounts shall be collected as costs as hereinafter provided and there shall be no other costs imposed; provided, where any person has been convicted and punished in a State court for any act he shall not again be punished by the authorities of said town for the same act. 
Editor's note(s)—The municipal court may now impose greater punishment. The credit for labor is now fifteen dollars ($15.00) per day. Officers do not now receive fees. 
Eighteenth. To punish by fine not exceeding five dollars ($5.00) or imprisonment not exceeding twenty-four (24) hours, or both, for each offense, all contempts of the board of mayor and councilmen or any one of them while engaged in the discharge of the duties imposed by this act. 
Editor's note(s)—Contempt jurisdiction is now fifty dollars ($50.00). 
 
Sec. 10. Duties and powers of mayor.
Be it further enacted, that it shall be the duty of the mayor to preside at all meetings of the board of mayor and councilmen, and to preserve order and decorum at the same, and he may call special meetings of the board whenever in his opinion it may be necessary, and in his absence any two councilmen may call a meeting, and any councilman may in the absence of the mayor, be called to preside at any meeting. He shall keep an office in said town open at prescribed hours every day, to attend to, hear and determine all cases of the breach or violations of the laws and ordinances, and in his absence or when he is disqualified, or at his request, one of the councilmen shall attend in his stead to perform said duties, and no councilman shall have power or authority to hear and determine cases except in the absence of the mayor, or when he is disqualified, or at the request of the mayor. 
 
Sec. 11. Marshal and police.
Be it further enacted, that the marshal and policemen of said town shall have authority, and it shall be their duty, to execute the laws, by-laws, and ordinances of the town council, to arrest without warrant all offenders against the peace and good order of the town and all violations of its laws, ordinances and carry them before the mayor or councilmen sitting in his stead, or confine them in the guard house until they can be brought before the proper authority, and if necessary they may call to their assistance any of the citizens of said town to enable them to make the arrest, and any person refusing or neglecting to assist them when so called upon shall be fined not exceeding ten dollars or imprisonment not exceeding ten hours, and in the absence of the marshal, the deputy marshal and policemen, or either, shall perform the duties and be entitled to the privileges conferred by this section. 
 
Sec. 12. Assessments; levy and sale; right to redeem.
Be it further enacted, that an assessment of all the property of said town subject to taxation shall be made annually, naming the owners of the property if known, or otherwise assessing it to owners unknown, and upon failure or refusal of any person to give in his or her property for the period of thirty days from the opening of books of assessment, ten days previous notice having been given by the officer appointed by the board of mayor and councilmen to make said assessments, by posting in three public places in said town of the place where and the time when said books of assessment will be opened, the assessor must proceed to assess such property from the first knowledge he can obtain. The assessment when completed, must be returned to the board, who shall cause ten days notice to be given, by posting in three public places, of the time and place when their board or a committee of its members appointed by the mayor shall hear complaints and correct errors and mistakes when any citizen who shall consider himself assessed in too great amount may make complaint thereof, demand an investigation, and cause witnesses to be examined in his or her behalf; complaints having been heard and all mistakes corrected, the assessment shall be marked approved by the mayor or the committee, and delivered to the person appointed to collect the taxes. The assessment so approved shall have the force and effect of a judgment and execution at law, and the collector on the failure of any person to pay the sum assessed to him or her may proceed after the expiration of sixty days from the date of the approval of the assessment, to levy upon and sell the property or a sufficient amount thereof of such delinquent to pay said taxes and all reasonable cost which may have accrued, and if the property is assessed to a person unknown, may proceed to levy upon and sell the same. All sales of personal property under this section must be advertised ten days by posting in a public place for thirty days. The advertisement herein provided for must contain a description of the property to be sold and the name of the owner, if known, and the amount of the taxes for which it is sold, including the cost for sale and advertising. All sales of property under this act must be held in the town of Opp, before the postoffice, in Covington county, between the hours of 12 m. and 4 p.m. and continue from day to day till the sale is completed. The person appointed to collect the taxes and make the sales herein provided for shall give to the purchaser of real estate a certificate similar in form to those given by the State and county tax collector, and which shall have the same effect, and the said collector may in case no person shall bid for such real estate an amount sufficient to pay said taxes and costs, bid off said property in the name of the town of Opp, and make a certificate of purchase to the town of Opp, and deliver the same to the mayor on his final settlement, which said certificate shall be governed by the same laws as if it had been given to a private individual. All real estate sold under this act may be redeemed at any time under two years from the day of sale, by the payment to the purchaser thereof the amount of such purchase money, together with interest on the same at the rate of ten percent, from date of sale and all taxes and costs which may have accrued thereon; or if the purchaser does not reside in the town, then into the town treasury for the benefit of the purchaser. Infants, married women and lunatics shall be allowed two years from the removal of their disabilities to comply with the requirements herein specified. 
State law reference(s)—Tax rate, Const. Am'd. No. 17 (Acts 1923, p. 597). 
 
Sec. 13. Work on streets.
Be it further enacted, that every male resident of said town between the ages of eighteen and forty-five years shall be liable, and may be required to work on the streets and alleys of said town not exceeding ten days in any one year, and on failure or refusal to perform such work when required, may be punished in such manner within the restrictions of this act as the town council may determine; Provided, that at least two days notice shall be given of the time when such work shall be required to be performed. And, provided further, that all such persons be exempt from such work on payment of such street tax as the town council may impose, not exceeding five dollars in any one year. 
Editor's note(s)—This section and § 14 are obsolete. 
 
Sec. 14. Exempt from road duty.
Be it further enacted, that all persons residing within the limits of said town shall be exempt from such work on the public road outside of said town limits. 
 
Sec. 15. Police jurisdiction.
Be it further enacted, that all the police powers and jurisdiction conferred by this act upon the corporate authorities of the town of Opp, may be enforced, exercised in and extended over all the territory lying and being within one mile from and outside of the corporate lines of said town as herein created or as may hereafter exist. 
Editor's note(s)—Police jurisdiction is now one and one-half miles. 
 
Sec. 16. Records.
Be it further enacted, that the board of mayor and councilmen shall cause to be kept a full and fair record of all acts, ordinances and proceedings of said board, a docket of all cases tried before the mayor or any councilman acting in his stead, with the judgment rendered therein, a regular and complete account of all receipts and expenditures, and of the condition of the finances of said town, to be posted at the court house door in said town, and every citizen of said town shall at all times have free access to and the right to inspect any and all records of said board. 
 
Sec. 17. When act goes in effect.
Be it further enacted, that this act shall go into effect on and after its approval and any three citizens are authorized to call and appoint an election by giving thirty days' notice, of a mayor and board of aldermen. 
 
Sec. 18. Repeal.
Be it further enacted, that all laws heretofore passed for the incorporation of the town of Opp, or relating to the government of the same heretofore alluded to and except such acts as may be passed at the present session of the general assembly [and all acts of the general] assembly in conflict with this act be and are hereby repealed. 
Approved February 28, 1901. 
 
Chapter 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
 
Sec. 1-1. How Code designated and cited.
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated and cited as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Opp, Alabama." Such Code may also be cited as the "Opp City Code." 
State law reference(s)—Authority to codify ordinances, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-7. 
 
Sec. 1-2. Definitions and rules of construction.
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed; provided, these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this Code or any ordinance which contains any express provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter or content of such section may be repugnant thereto: 
General rule. All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
City. The word "city" shall mean the City of Opp in the County of Covington in the State of Alabama, incorporated under the laws of the State of Alabama. 
City officials, officers and employees. Whenever reference is made to officials, boards, commissions, departments, officers or employees by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the City of Opp" and shall be taken to mean the official, board, commission, department, officer or employee of this city having the title mentioned or performing the duties indicated; and powers and authority granted to them shall be deemed to be grants of such powers and authority to their respective duly designated subordinates. 
Code of Alabama. Whenever reference is made to the "Code of Alabama" or the "Alabama Code" it shall mean the Code of Alabama 1975, as amended, or any subsequent code of this state. 
Computation of time. In computing any period of time, the day of the act, event or default from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included, unless it is a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is not a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal holiday. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven (7) days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
State law reference(s)—For similar provisions, see Code of Ala. 1975, § 1-1-4; legal holidays, Code of Ala. 1975, § 1-3-8. 
Council, city council, governing body. The terms "council," "city council" and "governing body" shall mean the city council of the City of Opp, Alabama. 
County. The words "county," "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Covington, State of Alabama. 
Gender. When any subject matter, party or person is described or referred to by words importing one gender, the other gender shall be deemed to be included. 
In the city or within the city. The phrases "in the city" or "within the city" shall mean within the corporate limits of the city. 
Joint authority. All words giving joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers, shall give such authority to a majority of such persons or officers, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Jurisdiction. All provisions of this Code and other laws and ordinances of the city prescribing police or sanitary regulations and prescribing penalties for violations thereof, shall have force and effect in the corporate limits of the city and in the police jurisdiction thereof and on any property or rights-of-way belonging to the city, except those provisions, laws and ordinances which specifically limit their force and effect to the corporate limits, or which, for any reason mentioned under the definition of "city" in this section, cannot legally apply in any such area outside of the corporate limits. 
State law reference(s)—Under Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-30, city planning commission jurisdiction over the subdivision of land extends five miles from the city, with exceptions. 
May. The word "may" is permissive. 
Month. The word "month" means a calendar month, unless otherwise expressed. 
Number. When any subject matter, party or person is described or referred to by words importing the singular number, the plural and separate matters and persons and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural includes the singular. 
Oath. The word "oath" includes affirmation. 
Or, and. The word "or" may be read "and" and the word "and" may be read "or," where the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner" shall include not only the owner of the whole, but the owner of any part of the property, any tenant in common or joint tenant of the whole or a part of property. 
Person. The word "person" shall include a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, body politic and any other group acting as a unit as well an individual. 
Police jurisdiction. The term "police jurisdiction" shall include the territory outside, but within one and one-half miles of, the corporate limits of the city, but such term does not include territory within the corporate limits of any other incorporated municipality or the police jurisdiction thereof. 
State law reference(s)—Police jurisdiction, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-40-10. 
Preceding; following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property. The word "property" shall include real and tangible and intangible personal property. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes land, tenements, and hereditaments. 
Reasonable time. In all cases where any provision shall require any act to be done in a reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, such reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of such duty, or compliance with such notice. 
Shall. The word "shall" is mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curblines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when a person cannot write. 
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall mean the State of Alabama. 
Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public ways in the city, and shall embrace all parts thereof within the designated right-of-way. In those instances where the context requires, the word shall embrace only the area between the opposite curbs or curblines designated for vehicular traffic. 
Tense. Words used in the present, future or past tense shall include each of the other tenses. 
Writing or in writing. The term "writing" or "in writing" may be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The word "year" means a calendar year. 
State law reference(s)—For state law as to definitions and construction of words, see Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 1-1-1, 1-1-2. 
 
Sec. 1-3. Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances.
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same in substance as those of ordinances of the city existing at the time of the adoption of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
 
Sec. 1-4. Catchlines of sections.
The catchlines of the sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of any section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any section, including its catchline, is amended or reenacted. 
 
Sec. 1-5. Severability of parts of Code.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the board of commissioners that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
 
Sec. 1-6. Effect of repeal of ordinance.
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance, whether or not such former ordinance is expressly repealed, as to any offense committed under such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provision upon the same subject or in any other ordinance. 
Nothing contained in this Code shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the city herein repealed; or as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, or as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of adoption of this Code. 
 
Sec. 1-7. Supplementation of Code.
(a)	By contractor or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete; and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)	In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)	When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them in a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)	Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)	Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)	Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing sections or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)	Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)	Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect or ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
 
Sec. 1-8. General penalty.
(a)	Wherever in this Code, or in any ordinance or resolution of the city, or rule, regulation or order promulgated by any officer or agent of the city under authority duly vested in such officer or agent, any act is prohibited or is declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor and no specific penalty is provided for the violation thereof, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation, or order shall be punished by a fine not less than one dollar ($1.00) and not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment at hard labor not exceeding six (6) months, or both; provided, however, that any person found to be in violation of section 32-5A-191, Code of Alabama 1975, as amended, shall, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with the provisions set out in such section 32-5A-191. Each day any violation of this Code or any such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)	Any person committing an offense within the corporate limits of the city, or within the police jurisdiction thereof, which is declared by a law or laws of the state, now existing or hereafter enacted, to be a misdemeanor, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and/or may be imprisoned or sentenced to labor for the city for a period of not exceeding six (6) months for a class A or class B misdemeanor, and not exceeding three (3) months for a class C misdemeanor, at the discretion of the court trying the case. 
(c)	Any person committing an offense within the corporate limits of the city, or within the police jurisdiction thereof, which is declared by a law or laws of the state, now existing or hereafter enacted, to be an offense as defined in section 13A-1-2, Code of Alabama 1975, as amended, which is not declared by a law of the state to be a felony, misdemeanor or violation, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and/or may be imprisoned or sentenced to labor for the city for a period of not exceeding six (6) months, at the discretion of the court trying the case. 
(d)	Any person committing an offense within the corporate limits of the city, or within the police jurisdiction thereof, which is declared by a law or laws of the state, now existing or hereafter enacted, to be a violation shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), and/or may be imprisoned or sentenced to labor for the city for a period of not exceeding thirty (30) days, or double the pecuniary gain to the defendant or loss to the victim as authorized in section 13A-5-12, Code of Alabama 1975, at the discretion of the court trying the case. 
(e)	Any corporation found to be in violation shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than one dollar ($1.00), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), at the discretion of the court trying the case. 
(f)	In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this Code or of an ordinance, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided, the revocation of a license or permit, or the abatement of a nuisance and the assessment, of the cost thereof, shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar the enforcement of any other penalty. 
(g)	No penalty shall consist of a fine or sentence of imprisonment exceeding the maximum fine and sentence established under state law for the commission of a substantially similar offense. 
(h)	Whenever a minimum, but not a maximum, fine or penalty is imposed, the court may in its discretion fine the offender the minimum or any sum exceeding the minimum fine or penalty so imposed, but not exceeding the maximum provided in this section. 
(i)	No provision of this Code or any ordinance designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine or penalty for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of the council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. 
(Ord. No. 1983-4, §§ 4, 5, 8-15-83)
Cross reference(s)—Powers of municipal court, § 6-11; court costs, § 6-11(d); schedule of court costs, state fees, and fines, § 6-13; adoption of state offenses, § 10-1. 
State law reference(s)—Authority of city to enforce obedience to ordinances by fine not exceeding $500.00 and by imprisonment or hard labor not exceeding 6 months, or both, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-45-1, 11-45-9; punishment for DUI up to $5,000.00 and one year in jail, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-9; authority to abate nuisances, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-47-117, 11-47-118; as to municipal courts, see Code of Ala, 1975, § 12-14-1 et seq.; punishment, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-5-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 1-9. Violation of orders, rules and regulations adopted.
Any person who shall violate, or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any lawful order of any lawful officer of the city made in pursuance of and under such officer's authority as such officer, or who shall violate, or shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the codes, rules, regulations or laws adopted in this Code, shall be guilty of an offense; provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not apply to violations of official duty imposed by this Code upon officers or employees of the city as such, unless the provision imposing the duty also expressly makes the violation thereof unlawful or punishable. 
 
Sec. 1-10. Imprisonment in default of payment of fine.
If a fine is assessed against any party by the judge, upon conviction under this Code or any of the ordinances of the city, and in the event the fines and costs are not then paid, the judge shall sentence the party so in default to work out the fine and costs under the direction of the city authorities, allowing not less than ten dollars ($10.00) for each day's service, within the limit prescribed by Rule 10(g) of the Rules of Criminal Procedure—Temporary Rules, for the courts of the state. 
State law reference(s)—Authority, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-12; such rules are found in Code of Ala. 1975, Vol. 23. 
 
Sec. 1-11. Payment of costs by city.
No part of the costs, or any of the fees due any officer in any case or proceeding for a violation of the city laws shall be taxed against or be paid by the city. 
 
Sec. 1-12. Conflicts with technical codes.
In case of conflict between this Code of Ordinances and any technical code adopted herein by reference, the more restrictive provision shall apply. 
 
Sec. 1-13. Altering Code.
It shall be unlawful to change or amend by deletion any part of this Code or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
 
Sec. 1-14. Ordinances, resolutions and activities not affected by Code.
The adoption of this Code shall not repeal or otherwise affect any of the following: 
(1)	Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty of forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)	Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(3)	Any resolution not mentioned in the Code and not inconsistent with it; 
(4)	Any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(5)	Any ordinance prescribing zoning or subdivision regulations, or zoning particular property, or accepting any plat or subdivision; 
(6)	Any right or franchise granted by the city; 
(7)	Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(8)	Any appropriation ordinance; 
(9)	Any administrative or personnel ordinance not mentioned in the Code and not inconsistent with it; 
(10)	Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat; 
(11)	Any ordinance or resolution not in conflict with such Code regulating traffic on specific streets or portions thereof or in specific areas of the city; 
(12)	Any ordinance levying any tax; 
(13)	Any ordinance establishing any board, commission or authority, not mentioned in the Code and not inconsistent with it; 
(14)	Any ordinance enacted after June 6, 1989. 
 
Chapter 2 ADMINISTRATION
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 2-1. Form of government; commencement of terms.
Pursuant to the provisions of section 11-43-2, Code of Alabama 1975, as amended, the city council shall consist of a mayor and five (5) councilmembers, who shall be elected from the city by the qualified electors of the city, at general municipal elections to be held quadrennially. Such officers elected at general municipal elections shall commence their terms of office on the first Monday in October following their election and serve for four (4) year terms, or until their successors are lawfully chosen and installed in office. 
(Ord. of 2-17-64, § 1)
 
Sec. 2-2. Election by district; district descriptions.
Beginning for the term of office for municipal council members and mayor which originally begin on the first Monday in October, 1988 pursuant to the 1987 Dillard v. Crenshaw, Civil Action No. CV-85-T-1332-N, mandate and will begin on the first Monday in October 2004, the council members shall be elected from one (1) of five (5) districts, one (1) council member from each district, the area and boundaries of which districts are as herein below described and set forth: 
(1)	Voting District One (1) shall include all that part of the city beginning at the intersection of Opine Road and Opp City Limits to the center of Section 19 T4NR18E; thence South along the City limits line to a point where City limits line turns West on the North section line Section 30, Township 4 North, Range 18; thence Westerly until said City limits intersects with Poley Creek; thence South along city limits boundary line along Poley Creek where city limits, following Poley Creek to the intersection of Poley Creek and Light Wood Knot Creek, thence along Light Wood Knot Creek until it intersects with Highway 84 and West boundary of Section 36, Township 4 North, Range 18 East; thence continue along West city limits boundaries where city limits intersects with the Northeast corner of Section 1, Township 3 North, Range 18 East; thence Easterly along City limits boundary to a point where the City limits boundary intersects County Road 85; thence along joint boundaries of Horn Hill and Opp City Limits; thence Easterly to the intersection of Opp City limits boundary and County Highway 40, thence Northwesterly to the North Right of Way of Highway 331, thence Northeasterly along the North Right of Way of Highway 331 to Hub Brown Road (proposed Opp Bypass); thence West to the South center line of Section 5 T3NR18E; thence North to the intersection of Walding Road; thence continue along Samuel Drive to a point where Samuel Drive intersects with Dorsey Street; thence North on Dorsey Street to Virginia Avenue; thence Westerly to South Jackson Street; thence North to Douglas Avenue; thence Westerly crossing U.S. Highway 84 (Covington Avenue) to Perdue Street; thence Easterly to Rush Street; thence North on County Highway 85 (Pittman Road) to County Road 42 (Opine Road); thence left on County Highway 42 to point of beginning. 
(2)	Voting District Two (2) shall include all that part of the city beginning at the intersection of County Highway 42 (Opine Road) and County Highway 85 (Pittman Road) South to Rush Street; thence East on Rush Street to Perdue Street to intersection of Perdue Street and Douglas Avenue East to South Jackson Street; thence South to Virginia Avenue; thence East along Virginia Avenue to Dorsey Street; thence South to Maude Avenue; thence East to Brown Street; thence North on Brown Street to Hill Street, thence East on Hill Street to Barnes Street; thence North to Cummings Avenue; thence East to College Street; thence North to Ida Avenue; thence East to Spurlin Street; thence North to East Stewart Avenue thence West to North Jackson Street; thence North to Pearl Drive; thence West on Pearl Drive to Gore Street; thence North to Nelson Drive; thence West to Lassiter Street; thence North on Lassiter Street to County Highway 42 (Opine Road); thence West on County Highway 42 (Opine Road) to intersection of County Highway 85 (Pittman Road) the point of beginning. 
(3)	Voting District Three (3) shall include all that part of the city beginning at the North West corner of Opp City limits and travel South along said City limits to a point being the Northwest corner of the Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of section 19 T4NR18E; thence East along the City Limits Boundary to the intersection of County Highway 42 (Opine Road); thence east to intersection of Opine & Lassiter thence south along Lassiter to Nelson; thence east along Nelson Drive to Gore Street; thence South to Pearl Drive; thence East to North Jackson Street; thence South to West Stewart Avenue; thence East to Old Elba Road; thence North to Fairview Avenue; thence east to Wilson street; thence north to Old Elba Road; thence Northeast to U. S. Highway 84; thence North to County Highway 26 (Cool Springs Road); thence along County Highway 26 (Cool Springs Road) to the intersection of County Highway 26 (Cool Springs Road) and Opp City Limits, thence West to the center of the Southwest Quarter of Section 23, thence North to the Center of the Southwest Quarter of Section 14; thence generally North and West along Opp City Limits to the point of beginning. 
(4)	Voting District Four (4) shall include all that part of the city beginning at the intersection of Cummings Avenue and Barnes Street; thence South to Maude Avenue; thence West to Brown Street; thence South to Maude Avenue; thence Westerly to Dorsey Street; thence South to Samuel Drive; thence Westerly to Samuel Drive; thence South to Hub Brown Road (proposed Opp Bypass); thence East to Highway 331; thence south along Highway 331 to intersection of County Road 40; thence South to Southern City limits boundary; thence East along City limits boundary to Holloway Lane; thence North to South right-of-way of Donaldson Road; thence due East to County Highway 91; thence South to Opp City Limits; thence continue along City limits boundary to Folsom Street; thence North on Folsom Street to Brandon Avenue; thence West on Brandon Avenue to intersection of County Highway 91; thence south to Donaldson Road; thence West along Donaldson road to Opp Bypass; thence to the North right of way line of the Opp by-Pass to the east right of way of U S Highway 331 North; thence Northeast to the end of the divided portion of the By-Pass, thence Northeast along U S Highway 331 to the intersection of Covala Road; thence to Alabama Highway 52; thence Southeast to Maloy Street; thence Northeasterly to Martin Luther King Drive; thence Northwest to Morgan Street; thence to Cummings Avenue; thence West on Cummings Avenue to point of beginning. 
(5)	Voting District Five (5) shall include all that part of the city beginning at intersection of County Highway 26 and the Eastern City limits boundary along County Highway 26 to U. S. Highway 84 thence South to the Old Elba Road; thence South to Wilson Street to Fairview Avenue; thence West to Old Elba Road; thence South to East Stewart Avenue; thence West to Spurlin Street; thence South to Ida Avenue; thence West to College Street; thence South to Cummings Avenue; thence East along Cummings Avenue to Morgan Street; thence South on Morgan Street to Martin Luther King Drive; thence Southeasterly to Maloy Street; thence Southwest to Alabama Highway 52; thence Northwest of Highway 52 to Covala Road; thence Southeast to U. S. Highway 331; thence Southwest to the beginning of the divided highway; thence along the East right of way line of U S Highway 331 South to the intersection of the Opp By-Pass; thence east to a point North of the intersection of Donaldson Road and the By-Pass; thence South to Donaldson Road; thence East on Donaldson Road to County Highway 91; thence North to Brandon Avenue; thence East to Folsom Street; thence South to City limits boundary continue East and North along City limits to point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1987-2, § 1, 10-5-87; Ord. No. 2004-01, § 1, 1-5-04)
State law reference(s)—Division of municipality into districts, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43C-13; filing as candidate in district, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43C-14. 
 
Sec. 2-3. Mayor elected at large.
The mayor shall be elected at large by a majority of all voters of the city, as provided by the laws of the state and the prior ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1987-2, § 2, 10-5-87)
 
Sec. 2-4. Election days; conduct of elections under law.
(a)	Elections for the offices of mayor and councilmember for the term beginning the first Monday in October, 1988, shall be held on the fourth Tuesday in August, 1988, and if a runoff becomes necessary, such runoff election shall be held three (3) weeks later, under the provisions of Code of Alabama 1975, as amended, sections 11-43-2 and 11-46-21. 
(b)	Elections for such officers in terms following the terms of office which begin the first Monday in October, 1988, shall be conducted under the provisions of Code of Alabama 1975, as amended, title 11, subtitle 2. 
(Ord. No. 1987-2, § 3, 10-5-87)
State law reference(s)—Authority to set election date, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-46-145. 
 
Sec. 2-5. Voting places; location of voting machines; absentee ballot location; hours.
(a)	The Senior Activity Center on Brantley Street is designated as the centralized polling place for all municipal elections for the city, and the required number of voting machines shall be located there and separated into voter district sections with a separate voter list maintained for each voter district. 
(b)	The polls during all municipal elections shall open at 8:00 a.m. and remain open continuously until 7:00 p.m. 
(c)	The Opp Civic Center, located at 101 East Ida Avenue is established as the on-site absentee balloting location for the general election to be held on August 22, 2000 and all other municipal elections occurring thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 1988-5, §§ 1—3, 6-15-88; Ord. No. 2000-3, § 1, 6-19-00; Ord. No. 2000-4, § 1, 7-7-00; Ord. No. 2003-02, §§ 1, 2, 4-8-03; Ord. No. 2014-03, 5-12-14)
 
Sec. 2-6. Compensation of mayor and councilmembers.
(a)	That the salary of the Mayor of the City of Opp, Alabama, shall be and the same is hereby fixed at the sum of one thousand two hundred dollars ($1,200.00) per month. In addition, the city shall purchase health insurance for the mayor and pay the premiums thereon and shall purchase term life insurance in the face amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) on the life of the mayor, with whomever he/she shall name as beneficiary(s), and the city shall pay the premiums thereon. 
(b)	That each councilmember shall be compensated at the sum of four hundred dollars ($400.00) per month. In addition, the city shall purchase health insurance for each councilmember and pay the premiums thereon and shall purchase term life insurance in the face amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) on the life of each councilmember with whomever he/she shall name as beneficiary(s), and the city shall pay the premiums thereon. 
(c)	That an incentive compensation for continuing education shall be paid to the mayor and councilmembers who achieve the Certified Municipal Official designation from the Alabama League of Municipalities, in the sum of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per month to commence the month following the award of the designation; and those who achieve the Advanced Certified Municipal Official designation from the league will be paid an additional incentive in the sum of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per month to commence the month following the award of the designation provided they keep this advanced certification current annually as defined by the league. 
(d)	This section shall become effective on the first Monday in November, 2008, and shall continue in force and effect until repealed by action of the council. All prior ordinances contrary to this section are repealed effective the first Monday in November, 2008. 
(Ord. No. 1988-3, §§ 1, 2, 2-15-88; Ord. No. 1997-1, §§ 1—3, 6-16-97; Ord. No. 2007-04, §§ 1—4, 10-15-07)
State law reference(s)—Authority to fix salaries, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-43-2, 11-43-6, 11-43-9, 11-43-40. 
 
Sec. 2-7. Tort claims processing.
(a)	Whenever any claim for damages against the city growing out of an alleged tort is properly filed in according to law with the city clerk by any person who claims to have been injured as to person or property, the clerk shall immediately furnish a complete copy of such filed claim to the city's liability insurance carrier, and shall also furnish a complete copy of such claim to the city attorney. 
(b)	Upon receipt of a copy of such tort claim by the city attorney, such attorney shall, as soon as practicable investigate or cause to be investigated the merits of such claim and make a written report of the findings to the city clerk. 
(c)	City employees of all departments of the city shall cooperate with the city attorney in the investigation of such claim, including but not limited to given written or sworn statements. 
(d)	Upon receipt of the written report by the clerk from the attorney, the clerk shall present the same to the city council as provided by section 11-43-101, Code of Alabama 1975, as amended, so that the council shall have adequate information upon which to base its decision regarding such claim. 
(Ord. No. 1984-4, §§ 1—4, 10-15-84)
State law reference(s)—Auditing of claims, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-101; liability for tort claims, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-93-1 et seq.; filing of statement as to manner of injury and damages claimed, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-192. 
 
Sec. 2-8. Qualification fees for persons seeking election.
(a)	A qualification fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) is hereby fixed and imposed upon all candidates seeking election as mayor of the City of Opp, Alabama, except as hereinafter provided for. 
(b)	A qualification fee in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) is hereby fixed and imposed upon all candidates seeking election as council member of the City of Opp, Alabama, except as hereinafter provided for. 
(c)	Such qualification fee shall be paid to the city clerk and deposited to the general fund of the city at or prior to the time of taking out qualification papers by any such candidates. 
(d)	Any person desiring to qualify who is not financially able to pay the required fee may qualify provided such prospective candidate furnishes the clerk with an affidavit stating that he or she is financially unable to pay the required fee fixed by this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2004-02, §§ 1—4, 6-7-04)
 
Secs. 2-9—2-19. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. COUNCIL MEETINGS
 
Sec. 2-20. Regular meeting place.
All regular meetings of the council shall be held at the council chamber in city hall. 
(Ord. No. 1984-3, § 4, 10-1-84; Ord. No. 1996-5, § 1, 10-21-96; Ord. No. 2003-05, § 1, 4-21-03)
State law reference(s)—Number of meetings required, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-50; executive or secret sessions prohibited, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-14-2. 
 
Sec. 2-21. Regular meeting days and time.
Regular meetings of the city council shall be held on the first and third Monday of each month at 6:00 p.m.; except on any legal holiday falling on the first or third Monday. The meeting shall then be held on the first or third Tuesday. 
(Ord. No. 1984-3, § 1, 10-1-84; Ord. No. 1996-5, § 2, 10-21-96)
 
Sec. 2-22. Calling special meetings.
Special meetings may be held at the call of the mayor by serving notice upon each member of the council not less than twenty-four (24) hours before the time set for each special meeting; or special meetings may be held as provided by section 11-43-50, Code of Alabama 1975, as amended, relating to the call of meetings by members of the council. 
(Ord. No. 1984-3, § 2, 10-1-84)
 
Sec. 2-23. Quorum.
A quorum shall be determined according to the provisions of section 11-43-48, Code of Alabama 1975, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1984-3, § 3, 10-1-84)
 
Sec. 2-24. Rules of procedure.
For the orderly transaction of business, the following rules are adopted for the government of the city council: 
Rule 1: At the appointed hour the mayor shall call the meeting to order, and, if a quorum be present, proceed to business. 
Rule 2: In the absence of the mayor, the mayor pro-tem of the council will preside. In the event that the mayor and mayor pro-tem of the council are absent, then the members of the council shall elect one of their number to preside as mayor pro-tem for the meeting. 
Rule 3: The order of business at all regular meetings shall be as follows: 
a.	Call to order. 
b.	Roll call. 
c.	Prayer. 
d.	Reading and approval of minutes of the previous meeting. 
e.	Recognition of guests. 
f.	Hearing of petitions, applications, appeals, complaints; all of which shall be in writing and signed and which must be submitted to the council by filing with the city clerk by 12:00 noon on Friday before the scheduled time for a regular meeting of the council, in order to be considered at such meeting. 
g.	Resolutions, ordinances, other business. 
h.	Reports by committees. 
Rule 4: No person, not a member of the council, shall be allowed to address the same while in session, without permission of the presiding officer. 
Rule 5: Motions shall be reduced to writing, when required, by the presiding officer of the council or any member of the council. All resolutions and ordinances shall be in writing. 
Rule 6: Motions to reconsider must be by a member who voted with the majority and at the same or next succeeding meeting of the council. 
Rule 7: Whenever an item is up for vote, the votes shall be cast by the use of "yeas" for favorable vote and "nays" for unfavorable vote and "abstain" for no vote. 
Rule 8: All questions of order shall be decided by the presiding officer of the council with the right to appeal to the council by any member. 
(Ord. No. 1984-3, § 5, 10-1-84; Ord. No. 2000-5, § 1, 10-2-00)
State law reference(s)—Determining rules of procedure, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-52. 
 
Secs. 2-25—2-40. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. BOARDS AND COMMITTEES
 
Sec. 2-41. Cemetery rehabilitation authority board.
(a)	There is hereby created and established a cemetery rehabilitation authority board to oversee the registration and maintenance of neglected and/or abandoned cemeteries within the municipal limits of the city. 
(b)	The cemetery rehabilitation authority board hereafter "authority" shall be composed of no less than three (3) members and no more than five (5) members. 
(c)	The committee shall be selected by the mayor and approved by the city council, and shall serve a four-year term to coincide with the council's term of office. The board shall consist of at least two (2) residents of the city. All members shall reside in Covington County, Alabama. 
(d)	Any member may be removed by a majority vote of the city council for cause, including without limitation, failure to regularly attend scheduled meetings of the committee. 
(e)	Vacancies on the committee shall be filled in accordance with the processes set forth above and where applicable, shall be for unexpired term of the member replaced. 
(f)	The committee shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman and such other officers as the members deem necessary to the extent of the same do not conflict with the laws of the city or the state, the committee shall adopt rules and procedures and by laws to govern its operations and shall therein certify the number of committee members constituting a quorum. 
(g)	The committee shall meet regularly, but not less than semi-annually at a frequency responsive to the needs and demands of the city and its citizens, members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed of expenses adopted by the committee and subject to budgetary approval of the city council. 
(h)	Regularly scheduled meetings of the committee shall be public meeting and shall be conducted in accordance with Alabama Open Meetings Act, or succeeding legislation, as the same is most recently amended and codified. 
(i)	The cemetery rehabilitation authority is created under the authority of the Code of Alabama 1975, section 11-80-13. 
(1)	The cemetery rehabilitation authority committee shall identify, designate, and register any and all neglected and/or abandoned cemeteries within the city limits. 
(2)	Once the authority identify, designate and register a neglect and/or abandoned cemetery it shall oversee the maintenance of said cemeteries within the city limits. 
(3)	The designated cemetery authority may work with private landowners to determine the frequency of access, either for specific workdays, or for visits by family to restore and/or maintain the graves or by genealogical researchers. 
(4)	The cemetery rehabilitation authority created herein may accept the assistance of private citizens as well as money donated by private citizens or family or corporate entities, in order to afford the upkeep and restoration of cemeteries designated as neglected and/or abandoned. A trust fund may be established to supply continuing needs over a long period of time. 
(5)	The cemetery rehabilitation authority has the ability to contract to provide for the services to restore, rehabilitate and maintain the above designated properties. 
(6)	The cemetery rehabilitation authority shall provide for identification, cataloguing, and/or recording of neglected/abandoned cemeteries in the city limits. A copy of any and all registration, identifications, locations and surveys shall be forwarded to the Alabama Historical Commission for establishing of a statewide inventory. The registration shall take place within one (1) year of notification being made to the board by any interested party of the existence of the neglected/abandoned cemetery. 
(7)	No county or municipality nor any person under the supervision or direction of the county or municipality providing good faith assistance in securing or maintaining a cemetery and providing good faith assistance in securing or maintain a cemetery under this section, may be subject to civil liabilities or penalties of any type. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07, § 1, 7-3-17)
 
Chapter 3 ANIMALS AND FOWL 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 3-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Animal. Any male or female dog, pet fox, wolf or other member of the canine family, or member of the feline (cat) family; provided that no such animal shall be deemed to be a dog within the terms of this chapter unless it is at least three (3) months old. 
At large. Unrestrained and not under the control of the owner or other person acting for the owner, such control to be exercised either: (1) by confinement within a fence, wall or other enclosure in such a manner as to effectively prevent the escape of the animal; or (2) by the restraint of the animal by a leash, cord or chain not less than ten (10) feet in length and secured to a collar, with swivel connections, in such a manner as to effectively prevent the escape of the animal; provided, however, that the length of the leash, cord or chain shall be reduced to such length as to prevent the animal, when so secured, from entering premises other than that of the owner; (3) when the animal is in a public place and off the premises of the owner by the restraint of the animal by a leash, cord or chain not more than six (6) feet in length and secured to a collar, with swivel connections, in such a manner as to effectively prevent the escape of the animal. No animal shall be restrained in an inhumane manner. 
Chief animal control officer. The person designated by the council who shall be primarily responsible for the enforcement of this chapter, and the deputies and assistants thereof. 
Dog. Any member of the canine family three (3) months or more of age, including pet foxes, wolves and other such members of the canine family. 
Kennel. An establishment or structure used for harboring, raising, training, or boarding more than two (2) dogs or cats that are more than six (6) months old. 
Neighbor. Any owner of land within three hundred (300) feet. 
Owner. Any person owning, harboring or keeping an animal within the city or its police jurisdiction, or who has a right of property in an animal or who has an animal in such person's care or acts as its custodian or who permits an animal to remain on or about the premises occupied by such person. 
Vicious dog.` A dog which, without provocation, has bitten or shall bite or fiercely attack any person or other animal. It shall be prima facie evidence that a dog is a vicious dog if it shall without provocation bite or shall fiercely attack any person or any other animal. 
(Ord. No. 1982-2, § 1, 9-20-82; Ord. No. 1984-2, §§ 1, 11, 9-17-84; Ord. No. 2011-02, § 3, 7-18-2011)
State law reference(s)—Definitions, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 3-5-1, 3-7-1. 
 
Sec. 3-2. Chief animal control officer; enforcement of chapter.
(a)	There shall be appointed a chief animal control officer and such deputies and assistants as may be necessary, who shall be employees of the city. The expenses of the chief animal control officer, deputies and assistants, together with their salaries, shall be paid from the general fund of the city. 
(b)	It shall be the duty of the chief animal control officer to enforce the provisions of this chapter; to catch and impound any dog running at large within the city and within the police jurisdiction of the city; to attempt to rid the city of stray, homeless, unclaimed and diseased dogs; to cooperate with the humane officer and the county rabies inspector; and to perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the city council. 
(c)	The chief animal control officer, deputies and assistants and members of the police department shall have the right, for the protection of the public health, welfare and safety, to enter upon any property within the city for the purpose of capturing and impounding any dog found running at large. The chief animal control officer, deputies and assistants and members of the police department, upon verified written complaint that a dog has bitten a human being, shall have the further right, for the protection of the public health, welfare and safety, to enter upon any property within the city for the purpose of capturing and confining the dog, under the direct care, custody, control and supervision of a licensed veterinarian, for a period of ten (10) days, in accordance with the provisions of section 3-7-9, Code of Alabama 1975, as amended. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful and punishable as a misdemeanor for any person who is the owner or custodian of a dog which has bitten a human being to fail to promptly turn over or deliver such dog to the chief animal control officer or members of the police department upon demand of one of such persons. 
(e)	Any expense incurred in the handling of any dog, under the provisions of this section, shall be borne by the owner or custodian of such dog. 
(Ord. No. 1984-2, § 2, 9-17-84)
 
Sec. 3-3. Interference with enforcement.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, molest or interfere with any person authorized or empowered to perform any duty under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1984-2, § 10, 9-17-84)
 
Sec. 3-4. Bird sanctuary.
(a)	The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the city is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any wild bird or wild fowl or to rob wild bird nests or wild fowl nests; provided, however, if starlings or similar birds are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or menace to health or property in the opinion of the proper health authorities of the city, such health authorities shall meet with representatives of the Audubon Society, Bird Club, Garden Club or Humane Society, or as many of such clubs as are found to exist in the city, after having given at least three (3) days actual notice of the time and place of such meeting to the representatives of such clubs. 
(c)	If as a result of such meeting no satisfactory alternative is found to abate such nuisance, such birds may be destroyed in such numbers and in such manner as is deemed advisable by such health authorities under the supervision of the chief of police. 
(Ord. of 12-6-62)
 
Sec. 3-5. Noisy animals.
(a)	It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to keep on a residential lot or premises within the city any animal or group of animals, known to such a person habitually, continuously or intermittently to make or emit sounds or noises of such volume and nature as unreasonably to interfere with or disturb the peace, quiet, comfort and repose of a person of ordinary sensibilities within the neighborhood in the reasonable use and enjoyment of adjacent property. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to keep on any tract, lot or premises within the city any animal or group of animals, whether housed in a corral, kennel, building or other structure, under such circumstances that the sounds or noises emitted by such animals are of such volume and nature as unreasonably to interfere with or disturb the peace, quiet, comfort and repose of persons of ordinary sensibilities in the reasonable use and enjoyment of any adjacent property used for residential purposes. 
(c)	Any owner or person in charge violating this section shall be guilty of maintaining a nuisance; however, no prosecution shall be commenced and no arrest made pursuant to the section except upon affidavit made before and warrant issued by a municipal judge or magistrate of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, § 5, 7-18-2011)
 
Sec. 3-6. Harboring dogs or cats.
It shall be unlawful to harbor, keep custody or take care of more than two (2) dogs and cats, six (6) months old or older, upon any property in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, § 6, 7-18-2011; Ord. No. 2019-02, § 1, 7-1-19)
 
Sec. 3-7. Duty of owner to remove overturned or scattered garbage.
It shall be the duty of the owner or person in charge of any dog or cat which has been allowed or suffered by such person to run at large, to pick up and remove to the landfill, or to secure in an authorized container, any garbage or refuse which the animal has caused to be overturned, spilled, or scattered upon any residential lot occupied for human habitation, or upon any adjacent right-of-way, upon demand from the owner or occupant, or upon demand of the director or any animal control officer under the supervision of the director. It shall be unlawful for any such person to fail or refuse to do so; however, no prosecution shall be commenced and no arrest made pursuant to this section except upon affidavit made before and warrant issued by a duly appointed municipal judge or magistrate of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, § 7, 7-18-2011)
 
Sec. 3-8. Duty of owner for removal of feces.
(a)	It shall be the duty of the owner or person in charge of any dog or cat to remove and dispose of any feces deposited by the animal upon the grounds of any public park or public place, upon any residential lot of another occupied for human habitation, or upon any adjacent right-of-way, and will be done on demand by the owner or occupant or the director or any animal control officer. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to remove such feces; however, no prosecution shall be commenced and no arrest made pursuant to this section except upon affidavit made before and warrant issued by a municipal judge or magistrate. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, § 8, 7-18-2011)
 
Sec. 3-9. Cruelty to animals prohibited.
(a)	It shall be unlawful if a person in charge of a dog or cat, whether in a kennel or at a private residence: 
(1)	Fails to provide a source of water or source of food which is adequate to keep the animal properly nourished. The source of the water must also be of an adequate amount given the size of the animal and the environment in which the animal is kept to prevent the animal from overheating or dehydrating; 
(2)	Beats, tortures, injures, torments, poisons, deprives of necessary sustenance or mutilates any animal, causing physical pain, suffering or death; 
(3)	Fails to provide adequate medical treatment for any sick, diseased or injured animal or any animal suffering from any type of parasitic infestation; 
(4)	Keeps any animal under unsanitary or inhumane conditions which are detrimental to the animal's health and general welfare, or fails to maintain the animal in condition of good order or cleanliness which increases the probability of transmission of disease; 
(5)	Teases, molests, baits, or harasses any animal; 
(6)	Sets any rabbit, raccoon, fox or other such animal loose for the purpose of chasing or hunting the animal or conducting a race using such animal; 
(7)	Promotes, permits, stages, holds, manages, conducts, carries on, or attends any game, exhibition, contest, fight or combat involving one (1) or more animals or involving animals and humans; 
(8)	Fails to provide adequate shelter for an animal, within twenty-four (24) hours, wherein the animal can be protected from the extremes of weather (heat, cold, rain, wind, sun, etc.), provided such person is the owner or person in charge of such animal; 
(9)	Transports or carries any animal in a motor vehicle unless the animal is safely enclosed within the vehicle or protected by a cab or container, cage, cross-tether, or other device to prevent the animal from falling out of or being thrown from the vehicle; 
(10)	Places or confines an animal or allows an animal to be placed or confined in a motor vehicle under such conditions or for such a period of time as to endanger the health or welfare of the animal because of temperature, lack of food or water, or such other conditions as may reasonably be expected to cause suffering, disability or death; 
(11)	Restrains an animal with a leash or humane restraining device more than ten (10) feet long, unless walking or training such animal, and such restraint must be fixed in such a manner to allow the animal free use of the restraint without it becoming tangled. The restraint must also be an appropriate weight for the animal and must be affixed to a proper tethering collar with a swivel attachment. An allowable tethering collar shall be a collar which is properly fitted to the dog, made of a suitable material other than metal that does not cause damage to the dog's skin, and affixes the dog to a fixed point tether or runner. 
(b)	Any person who unlawfully or maliciously kills, disables, disfigures or injures any animal shall be guilty of a misdemeanor; but this subsection shall not be construed as prohibiting the dehorning or neutering of cattle or other livestock. 
(c)	The violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall result in the removal of the animal when the director or an enforcement officer determines that such removal is necessary for the safety of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, § 4, 7-18-2011)
State law reference(s)—Malicious injury, Code of Ala. 1975, § 3-1-10; cruelty, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-11-14. 
 
Sec. 3-10. Livestock at large—Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any horse, mule, cow, goat, hog or other livestock, to permit such livestock to be at large in the city. 
(Ord. of 9-4-11, Art. 1)
State law reference(s)—Authority to regulate, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-110. 
 
Sec. 3-11. Same—Impounding.
It shall be the duty of the chief animal control officer and the city police to take up all livestock whenever found at large on the streets or other public places in the city and confine them in a suitable enclosure to be provided for such purpose, and if the owner of such livestock is unknown to the city authorities, the chief animal control officer shall immediately advertise such livestock by posting three (3) notices in different public places in the town, one notice at the place of impoundment, giving in such notice the color, mark or brand of such livestock, or in case there be no marks or brands on any of such livestock to state in such notices the words "unmarked", and in case there shall be no claim for such livestock within five (5) days from the date of posting such notices, the chief animal control officer shall proceed to sell any such livestock at public auction to the highest bidder for cash, such sale to be at the place in which such livestock is enclosed. The proceeds of such sale shall first be applied to the payment of the expense of catching and penning such stock and expense of feeding, etc., and the balance if any to be paid into the city treasury, which shall be kept as a separate account from other accounts. The city shall charge fees for catching and penning such livestock as prescribed by the council from time to time. 
Any citizen of the city shall have the right to take up any of such livestock found at large on such person's premises, and dispose of same as required by law in stock law districts of this state. 
(Ord. of 9-4-11, Art. 2)
State law reference(s)—Stock laws, Code of Ala. 1975, § 3-5-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 3-12. Prohibitions and restrictions on keeping of livestock.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to keep within an R-1 (Single Family Residential District) of the city any animals of the swine type (hogs), equine type (horse), bovine type (cow), ovine type (sheep), or fowl. 
(b)	It shall also be unlawful to keep any of the above types of animals in an R-2 (Two Family District) or R-3 (Multi-Family District) if they are within three hundred (300) feet of any residence, church, school, public building, park, playground or public thoroughfare unless a petition is signed by all adjoining property owners and/or other property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the boundary of this property. 
(c)	Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)	Animal and fowl slaughterhouses licensed under permit by the county health department. 
(2)	Animals and fowl in veterinary hospitals operated by duly licensed veterinarians. 
(3)	Baby fowl such as baby chicks transported into the city for selling purposes or kept within the city for selling purposes. 
(4)	Animals or fowl kept at hospitals or scientific institutions for scientific purposes, such as diagnostic laboratories. 
(5)	Animals at sale barns not kept for a period of longer than thirty-six (36) hours unless quarantined by the department of agriculture. 
(6)	Animals and fowl at a coliseum for show purposes. 
(7)	Animals with circuses or carnivals which have been issued a permit by the county health department for operating within the city. 
(8)	Animals on farms, such as dairy farms, the owner of which holds a valid permit from the county health department. 
(d)	Having complied with the requirements of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, such premises where animals or fowl are permitted shall at all times be kept in a sanitary condition acceptable to the county health officer, for the protection of the public health. 
(Ord. of 5-21-79, §§ A—C)
 
Sec. 3-13. Fastening animals to shade trees, etc.
(a)	No person shall hitch or fasten any animal to any shade tree, or the box of any shade tree, planted or growing on any street or sidewalk or other public place of the city, or cut or strip off the bark or in any manner or way damage such tree. 
(b)	No person shall hitch or fasten any animal to any light post of the city, or to any house, fence or post, the property of another without the consent of the owner of such property. 
(Ord. of 10-3-10)
 
Sec. 3-14. Riding animal on sidewalk.
No person shall ride, drive or lead any animal on the sidewalks or any paved gutter of the town, except in crossing the same. 
(Ord. of 10-3-10)
 
Sec. 3-15. Distance of corrals, pens or stables from dwelling.
It shall be unlawful for any owner or person in charge to keep any animal or fowl in the city in any corral, stable or pen, any part of which is within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a dwelling occupied by a person other than the owner or person in charge of the animal or fowl, or, if such dwelling is not occupied, owned by a person other than the owner or person in charge of the animal or fowl; however, this section shall not apply to enclosures in which animals or fowl have been continuously kept before the effective date of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, § 11, 7-18-2011)
 
Sec. 3-16. Minimum area of pens.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any animals, including fowl, in any pen in the city unless such pen has a minimum area of fifteen (15) square feet of space for each animal or fowl having access. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, § 12, 7-18-2011)
 
Sec. 3-17. Impoundment and fees.
Any dog or cat which is found at large on any street, sidewalk, alley through-fare or other place in the city shall be caught and taken by the chief animal control officer, his deputies and/or assistants and impounded in the city pound. Any such dog or cat so impounded may be retaken or redeemed from the pound by the owner or the owner's duly authorized representative within seven (7) days from impoundment thereof, or at any time thereafter before sale or destruction thereof, by paying the pound master a fee of ten dollars ($10.00), plus the cost of keeping such dog in the pound at the rate of ten dollars ($10.00) per day. No such dog or cat shall be released from a pound, either to the owner or his duly authorized representative, or to a purchaser, unless and until such dog or cat has been inoculated, as prescribed by law and a certificate and tag, as likewise prescribed, shall have been issued therefor. Dogs or cats not redeemed or purchased, as herein provided, shall be humanely disposed of by the pound master. Diseased or injured dogs or cats impounded under this section may be humanely disposed of by the pound master without delay. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, § 2, 7-18-2011)
 
Sec. 3-18. Transporting animals into city for purpose of impounding.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or bring or attempt to drive or bring any animal into the city for the purpose of having the animal impounded. However, this section shall not prohibit boarding with a licensed kennel or veterinarian. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, § 9, 7-18-2011)
 
Sec. 3-19. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. DOGS; RABIES CONTROL
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 3-20. Kennels.
No person shall own, maintain, or operate any dog kennel, nor shall any person hereafter establish any animal hospital within the corporate limits of the city without a written consent of all householders within three hundred (300) feet of such kennel or hospital. 
(Ord. No. 1982-2, § 2(C), 9-20-82)
 
Sec. 3-21. Dogs at large.
(a)	Confinement of dogs on private premises: It shall be unlawful for any person owning a dog to cause, permit or allow such dog to be at large on or about any place, lot or premises or portion of same within the city. All dogs within the city shall be kept: 
(1)	Confined within a fence, wall or other enclosure in such a manner as to effectively prevent the escape of such dog. 
(2)	Reserved.
(b)	Restraint of dogs in public places and off premises: It shall be unlawful for any person owning a dog to cause, allow or permit such dog to run or be upon any street, alley, thoroughfare, sidewalk or public place in the city or in the police jurisdiction of the city unless such dog is attached to a leash, cord or chain of not more than six (6) feet in length and secured to a collar, with swivel connections, in such manner as to effectively prevent the escape of the dog, and with the leash, cord or chain being in the hands of the owner or other person in charge of such dog. 
(Ord. No. 1984-2, § 4, 9-17-84; Ord. No. 2011-02, 7-18-2011)
 
Sec. 3-22. Inoculation for rabies—Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to own a dog within the city or its police jurisdiction without having such dog inoculated annually for rabies, as required by section 3-7-2, Code of Alabama 1975, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1984-2, § 3, 9-17-84)
 
Sec. 3-23. Same—Tag to be worn only by dog for which issued.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow any dog owned by such person to wear a dog inoculation tag issued for a different dog. 
(Ord. No. 1984-2, § 5, 9-17-84)
 
Sec. 3-24. Same—Collar or harness required; tag to be attached; removal, etc.
Each dog over the age of three (3) months shall wear a substantial, durable collar or harness to which the rabies inoculation tag required herein shall be attached. It shall be unlawful to attach such tag by wire, rope or other inhumane means. No person shall remove the collar or inoculation tag, or either, from any dog without the consent of its owner. 
(Ord. No. 1984-2, § 7, 9-17-84)
 
Sec. 3-25. Fees for testing animal suspected of having rabies or animal causing bites or scratches on a human.
The owner or person in charge shall be required to pay all reasonable fees for having animals suspected of having rabies or causing bites or scratches on a human tested for rabies or disease. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, § 10, 7-18-2011)
 
Sec. 3-26. Reserved.
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2011-02, § 1, adopted July 18, 2011, repealed § 3-26, which pertained to impoundment of dogs at large; redemption procedure; disposition of unredeemed dogs; and derived from Ord. No. 1984-2, § 6, 9-17-84; Ord. No. 2001-7, § 1, 10-1-01. 
 
Sec. 3-27. Impoundment—Dogs upon premises other than owner's.
Any dog, whether wearing an inoculation tag or not, which is found upon the premises of a person other than the owner or keeper thereof, shall, at the request of the owner of the premises or the owner's duly authorized representative, be impounded by the chief animal control officer or the humane officer as provided in this article. Such dog may be redeemed upon the payment of the fee set out in section 3-26. If such dog is not redeemed, the same shall be subject to disposition as provided for in section 3-26. 
(Ord. No. 1984-2, § 9, 9-17-84; Ord. No. 2011-02, 7-18-2011)
 
Secs. 3-28, 3-29. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. VICIOUS DOGS
 
Sec. 3-30. Confinement required.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or other person in charge thereof to keep in the city a vicious dog, unless the same is securely confined, bound or adequately leashed in such a manner as to prevent such dog from biting or attacking a person or other animal. 
(Ord. No. 1984-2, § 12, 9-17-84)
Cross reference(s)—Confinement of vicious animals for protection of sanitation department personnel, § 9-63; animal showing vicious habits, § 3-8. 
 
Sec. 3-31. Posting of premises.
Whenever a vicious dog is permitted to be at large within a wall, fence, or other enclosure, it shall be the duty of the owner of such dog to give public notice or warning that such dog is at large within such enclosure by conspicuous posting of a written or printed notice at every unlocked entrance to such enclosure. 
(Ord. No. 1984-2, § 13, 9-17-84)
 
Sec. 3-32. Authority of chief animal control officer when enclosure deemed inadequate.
(a)	Whenever a vicious dog is not properly and securely confined, the chief animal control officer may order confinement of the dog until the owner of such dog provides an enclosure which in the opinion of the chief animal control officer is adequate. Until an enclosure is provided which the chief animal control officer deems adequate, the chief animal control officer may order confinement of such dog with such person or organization as the chief animal control officer shall determine. 
(b)	The cost of feeding and caring for the dog shall be paid by the owner, at a rate not exceeding two dollars ($2.00) per day. 
(c)	If the owner of such dog fails to provide an enclosure which the chief animal control officer deems to be adequate within seven (7) days, such dog may be disposed of by extermination or by whatever method selected by the humane officer or the dog may be otherwise disposed of as directed by the chief animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 1984-2, § 14, 9-17-84)
 
Sec. 3-33. Reporting by sworn statement; procedure upon first indication of viciousness.
(a)	When any person claims that a dog is vicious, such person shall make a sworn statement before an officer authorized to administer oaths in the city, and in such sworn statement shall set forth the reasons for believing the dog to be vicious. Such sworn statement shall be delivered to the chief animal control officer. Upon receipt of such sworn statement, the chief animal control officer shall immediately make an investigation. 
(b)	If, in such officer's opinion, the dog is vicious, and if such officer further finds that the incident reported is the first incident or indication of viciousness on the part of the dog, the chief animal control officer shall order such dog confined. 
(c)	If the owner of the dog does not immediately provide a proper enclosure, the chief animal control officer shall confine such dog with such person as the chief animal control officer shall determine, for a period of not exceeding thirty (30) days. 
(d)	If the owner or person in charge of the dog does not provide an enclosure within seven (7) days which meets the approval of the chief animal control officer, and pay the expense of confinement, the chief animal control officer shall order such dog exterminated. 
(Ord. No. 1984-2, § 15, 9-17-84)
 
Sec. 3-34. Examinations for rabies.
At any time the chief animal control officer determines, after investigation, that a dog has bitten a person or has bitten another animal, such officer shall order such dog confined with such person as such officer shall determine for a period of not less than ten (10) days and not more than thirty (30) days, to determine whether or not such dog is affected with rabies. 
(Ord. No. 1984-2, § 18, 9-17-84)
 
Sec. 3-35. Procedure—When there has been prior indication of viciousness but control officer has taken no action.
If upon receipt of the sworn statement provided in section 3-33, the chief animal control officer determines that the dog is vicious, and if such officer further finds that the dog has on previous occasions given evidence of its viciousness, but that no prior order has been made by such officer in reference to such dog, such officer may, in such officer's judgment, either order the dog confined as provided in section 3-33 or may file a proceeding before the municipal judge to determine whether or not such dog should be exterminated. 
(Ord. No. 1984-2, § 16, 9-17-84)
 
Sec. 3-36. Same—When there has been prior indication of viciousness and dog control officer has acted.
If upon receipt of the sworn statement provided in section 3-33, the chief animal control officer shall find such dog to be vicious, and if such officer further finds that such officer had, prior to the time of the receipt of such sworn statement, ordered the dog to be confined, then such officer shall order such dog confined for three (3) days, and at the end of such time shall have the dog exterminated, unless the owner appeals to the municipal judge, in which case the matter shall be determined by the municipal judge. 
(Ord. No. 1984-2, § 17, 9-17-84)
 
Sec. 3-37. Liability of owner.
A person owns or keeps a vicious dog in the city at such person's own risk. If a vicious dog escapes from its enclosure or injures any person outside of the enclosure, the owner of such dog shall be criminally liable, whether such escape or injury occurred with or without the negligence of the owner, the keeper or any other person. 
(Ord. No. 1984-2, § 19, 9-17-84)
State law reference(s)—Liability of owner, Code of Ala. 1975, § 3-1-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 3-38. Remedies of division to be cumulative.
The remedies provided in this division are cumulative and shall not affect any other remedies provided by law and shall be in addition to the criminal prosecution of the owner or keeper of any vicious dog. 
(Ord. No. 1984-2, § 20, 9-17-84)
 
Chapter 4 BUILDINGS, CONSTRUCTION AND RELATED ACTIVITIES 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 4-1. Technical codes adopted.
(a)	The following codes, current edition, are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied herein fully: 
(1)	International Code Council Codes, including: 
a.	2012 International Building Code; 
b.	2012 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings; 
c.	2012 International Property Maintenance Code; 
d.	2012 International Plumbing Code; 
e.	2012 International Mechanical Code; 
f.	2012 International Existing Building Code. 
(2)	National Fire Protection Association Codes, including: 
a.	National Electrical Code; 
b.	Life Safety Code; 
c.	National Fire Codes. 
(b)	Any matter in such codes which are contrary to any existing ordinance of the city shall prevail and to that extent any such existing ordinance to the contrary is hereby repealed in that respect only. 
(c)	Within such codes when reference is made to the duties of certain officials named therein that designated official in the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in such codes shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of such codes are concerned. 
(Ord. No. 1981-4, §§ 1—3, 5-4-81; Ord. No. 1986-1, § 1, 3-17-86; Ord. No. 1988-1, § 1, 1-18-88; Ord. No. 1997-4, §§ 1, 2, 9-15-97; Ord. No. 2012-02, § 1, 1-14-2013)
State law reference(s)—Authority of city to adopt technical codes by reference, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-45-8, 41-9-166. 
 
Sec. 4-2. Permits—Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to commence the construction of any building or the plumbing (including gas work) or electrical wiring of any building or the re-plumbing or re-wiring of any building within the city without having first obtained from the city a building permit. 
(Ord. of 2-16-76(2), § 1)
 
Sec. 4-3. Same—Fees.
All plumbing, construction, maintenance, and demolition work must receive the proper inspections and permitting prior to commencement of work. Fees are doubled for all work which has commenced prior to obtaining a permit. 
The permits and inspections fees prescribed in the building code are deleted and replaced with the following schedule: 
Total Valuation of Work 
	Fee 
$1,000.00 or less 	No fee, unless an inspection is required. $15.00 for each inspection. 
$1,000.01 to $50,000.00 	$15.00 for the first $1,000.00 plus $4.50 per thousand or fraction thereof, up to and including $50,000.00. 
$50,000.01 to $100,000.00 	$250.00 for the first $50,000.00 plus $3.75 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and including $100,000.00. 
$100,000.01 to $250,000.00 	$450.00 for the first $100,000.00 plus $3.00 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and including $250,000.00. 
$250,000.01 to $500,000.00 	$650.00 for the first $250,000.00 plus $2.25 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof up to $500,000.00. 
$500,000.01 and up 	$850.00 for the first $500,000.00 plus $1.50 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof. 

(Ord. of 2-16-76(2), § 2; Ord. No. 2012-02, § 1, 1-14-2013)
Cross reference(s)—Electrical fees, § 4-23; sewer connection permit fee, § 9-41. 
 
Sec. 4-4. Digging wells.
It shall be unlawful for any person to bore or dig any well in the city without first having obtained official approval of the city council. 
(Ord. of 10-13-47, § 1)
 
Secs. 4-5—4-7. Reserved.
 
Sec. 4-8. Moving of structures.
No person, firm or corporation shall relocate any building into or within the city, or move any building or structure along or across any street or alley or other public place within the city, without a permit therefor. In addition, the following shall apply: 
(1)	The intended use of the building must be a permitted use in the zoning district into which it is to be relocated. The owner/agent of the building to be relocated shall be responsible for coordinating the move with the police chief, the fire chief and the utility companies (phone, cable and electric) to ensure the move will occur without incident. Prior to issuance of a permit to move the structure, the building inspector shall receive a notice from each such entity that the appropriate permits have been issued and arrangements have been made, and that a day certain has been specified for the actual move. 
(2)	The house mover shall submit an application for a permit to relocate or move a building to the building inspector. The application shall state the existing and intended locations of the building to be moved, its length, width and height in feet, and the principal material of its walls and of its roof, the proposed route to be followed and the mode of transportation to be used. The permit to relocate or move a building may direct what streets shall be used. The owner/agent of the building and/or the contractor shall, concurrently with submittal of the application for a permit to relocate or move a building, submit a building permit application, including evidence and plans sufficient to demonstrate the intent of the owner/agent to comply with all provisions of this section. When the building inspector is satisfied that the permit application is complete, he shall accept and forward both applications to the city council for review and approval or disapproval. 
(3)	The city council shall hold a public hearing to assure that all plans for relocation and renovation comply with the requirements of this section prior to issuance of a permit for moving the building and a building permit for the renovation required to comply with provisions of this section. The city council must also approve the plan for relocation. Owners of property within one thousand (1,000) feet of the proposed new location shall, at the cost of the owner/agent for the building, be individually notified not less than ten (10) days prior to the public hearing, by certified mail, of the hearing. A sign shall be placed at the proposed new location where the structure is to be moved, indicating the date, time and location of the public hearing. 
(4)	Prior to issuance of a permit to relocate or move a building, the house mover shall furnish a security deposit in the form of a certified check, or a bond, payable to the city, with a corporate surety to be approved by the city attorney, in the penal sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), conditioned, among other things, that said house mover will pay any and all damage caused by him; that he will move the building without delay; that he will cut no trees except as specified in the permit; that he will follow the route designated by the permit; that he will save, indemnify, and hold the city harmless against any and all liabilities, judgments, costs and expenses which may accrue against the city in consequence of the granting of such permit; and that he will in all things strictly comply with the conditions of the permit and with all ordinances of the city. Any balance of this security deposit remaining shall be refunded at the time the certificate of occupancy is issued. If the costs and expenses to the city exceed the amount of the security deposit, the owner/agent for the structure shall be liable for payment of this additional amount. The permittee shall also provide the city with evidence of insurance showing the city as a named co-insured on a policy of general liability with limits not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence, and one million five hundred thousand dollars ($1,500,000.00) aggregate, for bodily injury and property damage combined. 
(5)	Prior to issuance of a permit to relocate or move a building, the owner/agent for the building shall furnish a security deposit in the form of a certified check, or a bond, payable to the city, with a corporate surety to be approved by the city attorney, in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). This security deposit shall cover any costs to the city in the event the owner/agent for the structure fails to comply with the provisions of this section and the city shall therefore have cause to remove the relocated structure. Any balance of this security deposit remaining shall be refunded at the time the certificate of occupancy is issued. Certificate of occupancy must be obtained within twelve (12) months of permit date or in cases where the structure leaves the city jurisdiction, a sworn affidavit stating the structure is to be relocated outside the city jurisdiction. If the costs and expenses to the city exceed the amount of the security deposit, the owner/agent for the structure shall be liable for payment of this additional amount. Whenever in the moving of any building along the route specified, it shall become necessary to cut, disconnect, remove or disturb any wires, guys, or cables over or across any of the streets or alleys along the line of such route, seventy-two (72) hours' notice in writing shall be given by the permittee to all persons, companies, or corporations, including the city, owning, using or controlling any such wires, guys or cables, of the time when such building or structure will arrive at any given point on any such street or alley overhung by wires, guys or cables, and that such wires, guys or cables must be cut, removed or disconnected by the time designated in such notice for the building or structure to arrive at that point, and in case of failure of the owner, user or controller of such wires, guys or cables thus notified to cut, remove, disconnect any such wires, guys or cables at the time appointed, then the city may remove or disconnect any or all such wires, guys or cables, or cause the same to be done, and shall mend, re-connect and replace the same after the building has passed. The permittee shall pay all costs and expense incident to and occasioned by the cutting, disconnecting, removing or disturbing of any such wires, guys, and cables, and the reconnecting or replacing of same, and in default of payment within a reasonable time after demand, then recourse may be had for the collection of same to the sureties on the permittee's bond. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 3, 1-14-2013)
 
Sec. 4-9. Exemptions.
Manufacturers of accessory structures, storage buildings and the like, are not required to obtain moving permits. This exemption does not remove the burden of obtaining a building/zoning permit from the property owner. Pre-fab structures twelve (12) by twenty-four (24) and smaller are exempt from the building permit fee. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 3, 1-14-2013)
 
Sec. 4-10. Penalties.
Anyone commencing construction or similar permittable activities without the proper permits will be subject to the following penalties: 
First offense—One hundred dollars ($100.00) fine plus double the permit cost. 
Second offense—Five hundred dollars ($500.00) fine plus double the permit cost. 
Third offense—One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) fine plus double the permit cost. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 3, 1-14-2013)
 
Secs. 4-11—4-19. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. ELECTRICITY
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 4-20. Building inspector's authority and duty.
The building inspector shall be vested with full authority over all electric work installed in the city, and it shall be such inspector's duty to see that all ordinances and regulations relating to inspecting the installation of electric work within the city are duly enforced, particularly the provisions of the electrical code. 
(Ord. No. 1986-1, § 2, 3-17-86)
 
Sec. 4-21. Permit for work required; information.
(a)	No alterations shall be made in the wiring of any building for light, heat or power, or increase in the load carried by such wires, nor shall any building be wired for electric lights, motors, or heating devices without a written permit therefor from the building inspector. 
(b)	Before such permit shall be issued by the building inspector in the name of the licensed electrician, the person desiring to make such alteration or installation of wiring shall submit an application accompanied by a drawing to the building inspector showing the type wiring, number of outlets and electrical appliances proposed to be installed, and further showing the capacity, voltage and amperage of such electrical appliances, and naming the type of building and what purpose it is to be used. Such drawing just above referred to may be waived in the discretion of the building inspector. 
(c)	No electrical work shall be performed on any type of structure requiring a building permit without an electrical permit. 
(Ord. No. 1986-1, §§ 3, 25, 3-17-86)
 
Sec. 4-22. Same—Who may obtain.
No person shall obtain an electrical permit to do any type of electrical work except one who is the holder of an electrical contractor's privilege license, or an electrician's privilege license. 
(Ord. No. 1986-1, § 25, 3-17-86)
 
Sec. 4-23. Same—Fees.
Such application must be accompanied by a permit fee as follows: 
(1)	Single- or three-phase service as required in any construction requiring a building permit: 
a.	200 amp $ 30.00
b.	300 amp 35.00
c.	400 amp 55.00
d.	600 amp 110.00
e.	800 amp 220.00
f.	1,000 amp 250.00
(2)	In addition to the above permit fee schedule, an inspection charge of twenty dollars ($20.00). Inspections required beyond three (3) will be subject to a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) each. 
(3)	Existing structures not involving a building permit: Any alteration to an existing electrical residential of business wiring system requiring a new or increased electrical service capacity will be subject of an inspection fee as set forth in subsection (1)a.—f. 
Improvements or modifications to existing electrical systems not requiring a new or increased service will be subject to a minimum inspection fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00). 
(Ord. No. 1986-1, § 3, 3-17-86; Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, 5-15-17)
 
Sec. 4-24. Same—Contents; restriction on issuance; signing.
(a)	At the time of issuance of the electrical permit it shall be noted on the permit the size and type of service required. 
(b)	No permit for three-phase service shall be issued to any person other than a licensed class A certificate holder. 
(c)	All applications for permits must be signed by the holder of a class A or B certificate. 
(d)	No meter bases are to be issued to anyone or any temporary service connected without first presenting a signed copy of the permit to the city utility operator's manager or the city inspector. 
(Ord. No. 1986-1, § 25, 3-17-86; Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, 5-15-17)
 
Sec. 4-25. Service connection.
(a)	No service shall be connected by the city utilities system unless the electrician obtaining the permit or a certified representative is on the job and has a copy of the inspector's report. 
(b)	It will be the responsibility of the electrician on the job to be available at the city's convenience for the connection of service. 
(Ord. No. 1986-1, § 27, 3-17-86; Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, 5-15-17)
 
Sec. 4-26. Inspection where no new service; electrician to be on job.
(a)	Permits issued for work not requiring a new service shall be inspected before the installations are concealed or any current is applied to new wiring. 
(b)	It shall be the electrician's responsibility on the job to notify the inspector in sufficient time in order not to delay the progress of the work. 
(Ord. No. 1986-1, § 28, 3-17-86; Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, 5-15-17)
 
Sec. 4-27. Issuance of certificates of approval of work.
A certificate of approval shall be issued in triplicate by the city building inspector at the time of final inspection. One (1) copy is to be turned over to the electrician on the job and one (1) copy shall be turned in to the city inspector's office for connection of service. 
(Ord. No. 1986-1, § 26, 3-17-86; Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, 5-15-17)
 
Secs. 4-28, 4-29. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. ELECTRICIANS
 
Sec. 4-30. Board created; membership, appointment, payment of expenses, qualifications, reimbursement of expenses; when examinations to be held.
(a)	There is created the city electricians' examining board, which shall consist of three (3) members to be appointed from time to time by the city council. One of the members of such board shall be the building inspector of the city, another of the members of the board shall be the person in the management of the city's electrical distribution system, whether by contract for management or through direct employment by the city, and the third member of such board shall be any resident of the city deemed by the city council as having sufficient knowledge, skill and experience in the electrical field to adequately serve as a member, such third member to be designated by the council on a calendar year basis and to serve on such board until a successor is appointed and takes office. The building inspector member of the board and the manager of the city electric distribution system member of such board shall be subject to appointment and removal by the city council for such terms as it may designate. Any member of the board may be removed by the city council at any time upon the majority vote or the council. Members of the board shall serve without compensation, but the city council is authorized to grant reimbursement for expenses incurred in performing their duties on the board, in cases where the council deems such expenses necessary. 
(b)	Examinations shall be held by the board at such reasonable times as it may from time to time fix and determine, but the board shall hold at least one (1) examination session each six (6) months. 
(Ord. No. 1986-1, § 14, 3-17-86)
 
Sec. 4-31. Application to board—Information.
All applications for certificates of capacity under this division shall be made in writing to the electricians' examining board, and shall be in such form and contain such information as the board may require. 
(Ord. No. 1986-1, § 21, 3-17-86)
 
Sec. 4-32. Same—Filing time.
All persons desiring to be examined for certificates of capacity under this division shall have the application on file at least ten (10) days prior to the date of such examination. 
(Ord. No. 1986-1, § 22, 3-17-86)
 
Sec. 4-33. Same—Fees.
Each application for a certificate shall be accompanied by a fee of five dollars ($5.00). An applicant who fails in the examination shall not have the fee returned to such person. For each subsequent examination, the applicant shall pay the regular fee of five dollars ($5.00). The fee of five dollars ($5.00) shall also accompany each application for a renewal certificate. All fees required to be paid under the provisions of this section shall be paid to the city building inspector, who shall in turn pay such fees into the treasury of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1986-1, § 23, 3-17-86)
 
Sec. 4-34. Conducting examinations; scope, quorum; granting or denying certificates of capacity, types of certificates and authority conferred.
(a)	The examining board shall thoroughly and carefully examine all applicants for certificates of capacity. Such examinations shall be supervised by one or more members of the examining board, but no certificate shall be granted, or denied, without the approval and sanction of a majority of the members of the examining board. Examinations may be given in writing or on practical work, or both, as may be deemed most advisable by the board. 
(b)	A majority shall always constitute a quorum at any meeting of the board. 
(c)	The board shall issue two (2) classes of certificates, which shall be known as the class A electricians' certificates and class B electricians' certificates. The holders of class A electricians' certificates shall be unrestricted as to the type and extent of electrical work or installations which such holders shall be permitted to perform within the city and the holders of class B certificates shall be restricted to single-phase electrical installations or work within the city and shall not be permitted to perform electrical installations or work involving anything greater than single-phase installations except under the supervision of a holder of a class A certificate holder. 
(Ord. No. 1986-1, § 15, 3-17-86)
 
Sec. 4-35. Examination passing grade; subjects covered.
(a)	The appropriate electricians' certificate shall be issued to any person engaged in, or about to engage in, the business of installing, maintaining, altering or repairing electrical wires, conduits, apparatus, fixtures, electric or neon signs or other electrical appliances, who shall have qualified for the particular certificate under the provisions of this division. 
(b)	Before any applicant shall be issued an electricians' certificate, the applicant shall be required to pass a technical examination of a grade of not less than seventy-five (75) percent for the appropriate certificate. 
(c)	The examination, which shall be given by the electricians' examining board, shall determine the applicant's familiarity with electrical theory and the laws of electric current; a thorough knowledge of the principles of commercial electrical equipment, electric circuits and construction methods, and an expert knowledge of the National Electrical Code and laws of the state and the city relative to the installation of electric wiring and equipment, to the extent the examining board deems necessary for the particular class of certificate sought by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1986-1, § 16, 3-17-86)
 
Sec. 4-36. Experienced electrician need not qualify; certificate of capacity fee.
Despite section 4-35, any person who has continuously practiced the electrical trade in the city for a period of ten (10) years or more last past, and is recognized by the city building inspector as a competent electrician, shall automatically be issued a class B certificate upon payment of the issuance fee prescribed in section 4-33 to the building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 1986-1, § 17, 3-17-86)
 
Sec. 4-37. Certificate holders from other communities need not be examined.
Electricians holding certificates from other towns or cities shall be allowed to secure a license and work in this city without taking an examination provided for in this division, provided however, that in the opinion of at least two (2) members of the board, such electricians hold a current, valid certificate issued following an adequate examination in the other municipality. 
(Ord. No. 1986-1, § 18, 3-17-86)
 
Sec. 4-38. Contents of certificate; signing by board members.
Each certificate of capacity issued under this division shall state the name of the person to whom the certificate is issued, the date issued, the expiration date, the business address of such person, the name of the employer, if any, of such person, the class of certificate; and shall be signed by a majority of the members of the electricians' examining board. 
(Ord. No. 1986-1, § 19, 3-17-86)
 
Sec. 4-39. Certificate of capacity period; renewal; required in order to work; revoking.
(a)	Each certificate of capacity issued shall be good for a period of three (3) years, and at the expiration of three (3) years from the date of issuance of any certificate, the same shall be renewed by the electricians' examining board upon application for renewal to the board and proof of good character and satisfactory professional standing. 
(b)	No person shall be permitted to perform work authorized to be done by a holder of an electricians' certificate, unless such person holds a certificate which has not expired. 
(c)	The electricians' examining board may for good and sufficient cause revoke any certificate issued by the board. 
(Ord. No. 1986-1, § 20, 3-17-86)
 
Sec. 4-40. Certificate holders and those under their supervision only authorized to do work.
(a)	All electrical work not excepted from the operation of this division shall at all times be done and performed under the direction and supervision of the holder of an electricians' certificate, and it shall be unlawful for any person to do or perform any such work unless such work is done under the direction and supervision of a holder of such electricians' certificate. 
(b)	No person shall do or perform any electrical work of any nature whatsoever, either for compensation or without compensation, unless such person is the holder of an electricians' certificate or unless such person is working directly under the direction and supervision of a holder of such electricians' certificate. The holders of class A certificates may perform any type of such electrical work, whereas the holders of class B electricians' certificates are restricted to single-phase electrical work or supervision. 
(Ord. No. 1986-1, § 24, 3-17-86)
 
Sec. 4-41. Exclusions from applicability of division.
The provisions of this division requiring a certificate for working at or engaging in the business of installing, maintaining, altering or repairing electrical wires, conduits, apparatus, fixtures or other appliances shall not apply to the following: 
(1)	The installation, construction, maintenance or repair of lines for the transmission of electricity from the source of supply to the service switch on the premises where it is used by electricity suppliers or railroad companies; or to the work of such plants or companies on the premises owned or controlled by them; or to the work of such electric suppliers in installing, maintaining, altering or repairing on the premises of customers, service connections and meters and other apparatus and appliances which remain the property of such suppliers after installation; or to work in connection with the lighting of streets, public alleys, public parks, areas or squares. 
(2)	The installation, alteration or repair of wiring devices, appliances, or equipment for the operation of signals or the transmission of intelligence, where such wiring devices, appliances, or equipment operate at a voltage not exceeding fifty (50) between conductors and do not include generating or transforming equipment capable of supplying more than fifty (50) watts of energy. 
(3)	Any work involved in the manufacture, test or repair of electrical materials, devices, appliances or apparatus, but not including any permanent wiring other than that required for testing purposes. 
(4)	The assembly, erection and connection of electric apparatus and equipment by the manufacturer of such apparatus and equipment, but not including any electric wiring other than that involved in making electrical connections on the apparatus or equipment itself or between two (2) or more parts of such apparatus or equipment. 
(5)	Electricians regularly employed by manufacturing plants or other places of business employing competent electricians for maintenance purposes may install such electrical wiring, conduits and appliances, or make such repairs, as may be required only on the premises and property of the employer. 
(Ord. No. 1986-1, § 29, 3-17-86)
 
Sec. 4-42. Privilege licenses required; revocation of certificate for failure to obtain; credit in event of license classification change.
(a)	In addition to all other requirements, the provisions of all applicable license ordinances of the city shall prevail as to the holders of all certificates hereunder who engage in business within the city. 
(b)	A business that is owned or operated by a holder of a class A or class B certificate who employs more than one (1) person must obtain an electrical contractor's privilege license. The holder of an electrical contractor's privilege license may employ as many class A or class B certificate holders as required to perform such licensee's business without each certificate holder being required to purchase individual privilege licenses. 
(c)	Any certificate holder who is self-employed and employs not more than one (1) person shall be required to purchase an individual privilege license. 
(d)	Persons purchasing contractors' privilege license must list each certificate holder employed by such contractor at the time of issuance. Any certificate holder whose name does not appear on a contractor's license, or who fails to purchase an individual privilege license will have such person's certificate of capacity issued under this division revoked after a period of one (1) year. 
(e)	In the event an electrician purchases an individual privilege license and later in the year becomes liable under the contractor's license must purchase a contractor's license and will be given credit for such person's original purchase against the cost of the contractor's license. 
(Ord. No. 1986-1, § 30, 3-17-86)
 
Secs. 4-43—4-49. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. FLOOD DAMAGE CONTROL 
 
DIVISION 1. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES
 
Sec. 4-50. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of Alabama has in Code of Alabama 1975, §§ 11-19-1—11-19-24, 11-45-1—11-45-11, 11-52-1—11-52-84, and 41-9-166, authorized local government units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the mayor and city council, of the City of Opp, Alabama, does ordain as follows. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, Art. 1, § A, 11-2-09)
 
Sec. 4-51. Findings of fact.
(a)	The flood hazard areas of the City of Opp, Alabama are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)	These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, Art. 1, § B, 11-2-09)
 
Sec. 4-52. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)	Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)	Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)	Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)	Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)	Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, Art. 1, § C, 11-2-09)
 
Sec. 4-53. Objectives.
The objectives of this article are: 
(1)	To protect human life and health; 
(2)	To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)	To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas, 
(4)	To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)	To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)	To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)	To insure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, Art. 1, § D, 11-2-09)
 
Secs. 4-54—4-60. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. GENERAL PROVISIONS
 
Sec. 4-61. Lands to which this article applies.
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the City of Opp, Alabama. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, Art. 2, § A, 11-2-09)
 
Sec. 4-62. Basis for area of special flood hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated November 4, 2009, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS and data for (*unincorporated county*) are hereby adopted by reference. Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, Art. 2, § B, 11-2-09)
 
Sec. 4-63. Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, Art. 2, § C, 11-2-09)
 
Sec. 4-64. Compliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, Art. 2, § D, 11-2-09)
 
Sec. 4-65. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, Art. 2, § E, 11-2-09)
 
Sec. 4-66. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and; (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, Art. 2, § F, 11-2-09)
 
Sec. 4-67. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of Covington County or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, Art. 2, § G, 11-2-09)
 
Sec. 4-68. Penalties for violation.
Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Covington County Commission from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, Art. 2, § H, 11-2-09)
 
Sec. 4-69. Savings clause.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this article is for any reason held to be noncompliant with 44 Code of Federal Regulation 59-78, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, Art. 2, § I, 11-2-09)
 
Secs. 4-70—4-80. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 3. ADMINISTRATION
 
Sec. 4-81. Designation of ordinance administrator.
The City of Opp Emergency Management Director is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, Art. 3, § A, 11-2-09)
 
Sec. 4-82. Permit procedures.
Application for a development permit shall be made to the City of Opp Emergency Management Director on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: Plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)	Application stage.
a.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the regulatory lowest floor level, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be flood-proofed; 
c.	Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential flood-proofed structure will meet the flood-proofing criteria of subsections 4-92(2) and 4-95(2); 
d.	Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
(2)	Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the City of Opp Emergency Management Director an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or flood-proofing level using appropriate FEMA elevation or flood-proofing certificate immediately after the lowest floor or flood proofing is completed. When flood-proofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The City of Opp Emergency Management Director shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, Art. 3, § B, 11-2-09)
 
Sec. 4-83. Duties and responsibilities of the administrator.
Duties of the City of Opp Emergency Management Director shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)	Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied; and, assure that sites are reasonably safe from flooding. 
(2)	Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 4-62, then the City of Opp Emergency Management Director shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of division 4. 
(4)	Verify and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the regulatory floor level, including basement, of all new construction or substantially improved structures in accordance with subsection 4-82(2). 
(5)	Verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed, in accordance with subsections 4-92(2) and 4-95(2). 
(6)	When flood-proofing is utilized for a structure, the City of Opp Emergency Management Director shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with subsections 4-82(1)c. and 4-92(2) or subsection 4-95(2). 
(7)	Notify adjacent communities and the Alabama Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), and the Alabama Department of Economic and Community Affairs/Office of Water Resources/NFIP State Coordinator's Office. 
(8)	For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six (6) months to the FEMA and state to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(9)	Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the City of Opp Emergency Management Director shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(10)	All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the City of Opp Emergency Management Director and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, Art. 3, § C, 11-2-09)
 
Secs. 4-84—4-90. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 4. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
 
Sec. 4-91. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)	New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)	New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)	New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)	Elevated buildings. All New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
a.	Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
(i)	Provide a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
(ii)	The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one-foot above grade; and, 
(iii)	Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves and other coverings and devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.	So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and, 
c.	The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partition finished into separate rooms. 
(5)	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components, all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)	Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)	New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(8)	New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(9)	On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(10)	Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, Art. 4, § A, 11-2-09)
 
Sec. 4-92. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard designated as A1-30, AE, AH, A (with estimated BFE), the following provisions are required: 
(1)	New construction and substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one-foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 4-91(4), "elevated buildings." 
(2)	Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any nonresidential structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in subsection 4-83(6). 
(3)	Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.	All manufactured homes placed and substantially improved on: (i) individual lots or parcels, (ii) in new or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (iii) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (iv) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement elevated no lower than one-foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.	Manufactured homes placed and substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
(i)	The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one-foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
(ii)	Where no base flood elevation exists, the manufactured home chassis and supporting equipment is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength and is elevated to a maximum of sixty (60) inches (five (5) feet) above grade. 
c.	All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Refer: Section 4-91.) 
d.	All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
(i)	Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, fully licensed and ready for highway use if it is licensed, on it's wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions; or 
(ii)	The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction," including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection 4-92(3)a.—c., above. 
(4)	Standards for subdivisions.
a.	All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
b.	All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
c.	All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards, and; 
d.	Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is the lesser 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, Art. 4, § B, 11-2-09)
 
Sec. 4-93. Floodways.
(a)	Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 4-62, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)	The community shall select and adopt a regulatory floodway based on the principle that the area chosen for the regulatory floodway must be designed to carry the waters of the base flood, without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one-foot at any point; 
(2)	Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the adopted regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; 
(3)	A community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM and floodway revision, fulfills the requirements for such revisions as established under the provisions of Section 65.12, and receives the approval of the administrator. 
(4)	Require, until a regulatory floodway is designated, that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one-foot at any point within the community. 
(5)	Only if subsection 4-93(a)(1), (2) or (3), above are satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of division 4. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, Art. 4, § C, 11-2-09)
 
Sec. 4-94. Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations (approximate A-Zones).
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 4-62, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (approximate A-Zones), the following provisions apply: 
(1)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 4-62, then the City of Opp Emergency Management Director shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of division 4. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (2) and (4) shall apply: 
(2)	All development in Zone A must meet the requirements of section 4-91 and subsections 4-92(1)—(4). 
(3)	In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Also, in the absence of a base flood elevation, a manufactured home must also meet the elevation requirements of subsection 4-92(3)b.(ii) in that the structure must be elevated to a maximum of sixty (60) inches (five (5) feet). [Optional] Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 4-91(4) "elevated buildings". 
The City of Opp Emergency Management Director shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, Art. 4, § D, 11-2-09)
 
Sec. 4-95. Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones).
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 4-62, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)	All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 4-91(4), "elevated buildings". 
The City of Opp Emergency Management Director shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)	New construction and the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level or two (2) feet (if no map elevation is listed), above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in subsections 4-82(1)c. and (2). 
(3)	Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, Art. 4, § E, 11-2-09)
 
Secs. 4-96—4-110. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 5. VARIANCE PROCEDURES
 
Sec. 4-111. Variance procedures.
(a)	The mayor and city council of the City of Opp shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. 
(b)	The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)	Any person aggrieved by the decision of the mayor and city council of the City of the City of Opp may appeal such decision to the appropriate court, as provided in the State of Alabama statute. 
(d)	Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)	Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this division are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)	Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)	In reviewing such requests, the mayor and city council of the City of Opp shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(h)	Conditions for variances: 
(1)	A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.	A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.	A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and, 
c.	A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)	The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)	Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)	The City of Opp Emergency Management Director shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the Alabama Department of Economic and Community Affairs/Office of Water Resources upon request. 
(i)	Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the City of Opp may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, Art. 5, 11-2-09)
 
Secs. 4-112—4-125. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 6. DEFINITIONS
 
Sec. 4-126. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article it's most reasonable application. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered "new construction". 
Appeal means a request for a review of the administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one (1) to three (3) feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 4-62. 
Base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, and storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, pilings, posts, columns, piers, or shear walls. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before September 1, 1990. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before September 1, 1990. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)	The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)	The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been designated as Zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study/flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. 
Floodway (regulatory floodway) means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Functionally dependent facility means a facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facility that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding, and ship repair facilities. The term does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)	Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)	Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.	By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
b.	Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one (1) or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this article, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced after September 1, 1990 and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after September 1, 1990. 
Repetitive loss means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two (2) separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty-five (25) percent of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)	Built on a single chassis; 
(2)	Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)	Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)	Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Remedy a violation means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local flood plain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
Section 1316 means no new flood insurance shall be provided for any property which the administrator finds has been declared by a duly constituted state or local zoning authority or other authorized public body, to be in violation of State or local laws, regulations or ordinances which are intended to discourage or otherwise restrict land development or occupancy in flood-prone areas. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: Accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements) for a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it's before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. [Substantial damage also means flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2) separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty-five (25) percent of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "repetitive loss" or "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The market value of the building should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include either: (1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or (2) Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's flood plain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) § 44, Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) and corresponding parts of this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, Art. 6, 11-2-09)
 
Chapter 5 BUSINESS LICENSES, TAXES AND REGULATIONS 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 5-1. Engaging in business without license.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or carry on any business, occupation, trade, profession or calling or to do any act, hereinafter referred to as "business," within the corporate limits or within the police jurisdiction of the city for which a license is required by this article without first having taken out such license as herein provided. 
(Ord. of 12-4-78, § 2)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-93. 
 
Sec. 5-2. License year; period for which issued; payments for less than one year; dates due and delinquent; exceptions; penalty for delinquency; certificate of occupancy prerequisite to issuance.
(a)	The license year of the city shall begin on the first day of January of each year, and shall end on the thirty-first day of December of each year; and each license issued under the authority of this article whether issued on or after the first day of January of the year for which it is issued, shall expire on the thirty-first day of December of that year. 
(b)	All licenses issued under the authority of this article shall be issued for the calendar year during which the same are issued and shall be issued upon payment or deposit of the respective amounts herein prescribed therefor; provided, however, that any license issued after the first day of July of the calendar year for which it is issued may be issued upon payment of one-half of the amount of the annual license tax required for the subject of such license, except that the foregoing provision shall not apply to licenses based on gross receipts for such period as hereinafter provided. 
(c)	All privilege license taxes levied hereunder shall be due on January 1 of each year and shall be delinquent on the following February 1, except that insurance licenses levied hereunder shall not be delinquent until the following March 2. In the event any license levied hereunder shall not be paid before the same has become delinquent, there shall be added thereto a penalty of fifteen (15) percent of the amount of such license plus interest at the rate of six (6) percent per annum from the date of such delinquency and a citation fee of one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50), which penalty, interest and citation fee shall be collected by the city clerk when the license is issued. 
(d)	No business shall be carried on at a location or place of business and no privilege license shall issue therefor until such time as the zoning ordinances and building codes and other codes and ordinances of the city are fully complied with where applicable, proof thereof to be evidenced by an appropriate certificate of occupancy issued by the building department or other responsible office or department of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-4-78, § 1)
State law reference(s)—Proration, transfer, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-92. 
 
Sec. 5-3. Payment of license tax and fee; issuance of license; information set forth; transferability.
Before any person shall engage in or carry on any business or do any act within the corporate limits or within the police jurisdiction of the city for which a license is required by this article, such person shall pay to the city clerk the amount required herein for such license, plus five dollars ($5.00) for the issuance thereof; provided, however, where the license is based on gross receipts and during the next preceding license year the applicant did not have a license which would have permitted applicant to operate the business or do the act for which applicant seeks a license at the location applicant desires to operate such business or do such act, the city clerk shall issue a license therefor only upon the applicant's depositing with the city clerk the cash bond provided for by section 5-4; and in such case, at the end of the calendar year for which such license is issued, the actual amount of the license tax for such business shall be computed on the gross receipts of the business for such year and payment made therefor within thirty (30) days from the end of such calendar year. Upon such applicant's compliance with this section and all other requirements of this article or any other ordinance of the city regulating the issuance of licenses, the city clerk shall issue the license applied for, which license shall be signed by the clerk as city clerk and shall set forth the name of the person applying therefor, the business or act which is proposed to be carried on or done thereunder, the amount paid for such license or the amount of the cash bond deposited therefor, the time for which it is issued, and the place of [or] location such business is to be operated or such act done. Licenses issued under this article shall not be transferable except with the consent of the governing body, filed with the office of the city clerk within ten (10) days after the sale of such business, or the date of taking possession thereof as a part of a subsequent sale, whichever occurs first, signed by the seller and buyer; and no license shall be transferred more than once, and never from one type of business to another, nor, except as provided in section 5-4 shall it entitle the holder thereof to carry on any business or do any other act than that named therein. 
(Ord. of 12-4-78, § 3; Ord. No. 2001-5, § 1, 10-1-01)
State law reference(s)—Issuance fee authorized, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-90(a)(2). 
 
Sec. 5-4. Bond of new licensee.
(a)	Prior to the issuance of any license for the operation of any business at a particular location when such business did not have a license to do business at such location for the next preceding license year, or when such business did not have gross receipts therefrom during the next preceding license year, where the license is based in whole or in part on gross receipts, the city clerk shall, before issuing such license, require the applicant for such license to deposit with the city clerk a cash bond in such amount as the city clerk, by inquiry or otherwise, shall determine to be sufficient to pay the city all taxes due the city under this article on account of the operation of such business at such location during the current license year; provided, that the amount of such bond may not in any event be fixed at an amount exceeding the larger of the following: (1) the minimum license fixed herein for a business of such classification, or (2) the maximum amount of the license paid during the next preceding license year by any business in the same classification. 
(b)	Such bond shall be conditioned to pay the city, within thirty (30) days after the end of the current license year, all taxes due the city under this article on account of the operation of such business. 
(c)	The city clerk shall report such actions under this section to the city council at its next regular meeting, at which meeting the council shall finally fix the amount of such bond, at an amount not exceeding the maximum prescribed above. In the event the council increases the amount of the bond required, such applicant shall, promptly after receiving notice of such action make the additional necessary deposit, and upon failing to do so, any license issued such applicant under this section shall be void. In the event the council decreases the amount of bond required, the city clerk shall immediately refund to the applicant the amount by which the bond previously deposited exceeds the bond finally fixed by the council. 
(d)	In the event that all taxes due the city under this article on account of the operation of such business at such location during such license year are paid within thirty (30) days after the end of such license year, the city clerk shall forthwith refund the amount of the deposit to the person who made it. In the event all of such taxes are not paid to the city within such time, the deposit shall be deemed to be forfeited and shall be applied by the city clerk in payment of unpaid taxes, plus any applicable interest and penalty thereon, and if after payment of such items any balance of such deposit remains, the city clerk shall forthwith refund such balance of such deposit to the person who made it; provided however, no refunds will be made unless a written report and request therefor is made to the city clerk not more than thirty (30) days after the end of such license year, and failing in that respect, such funds deposited shall be conclusively presumed to be due to the city for a portion of such license tax, and forfeited therefor. 
(Ord. of 12-4-78, § 4)
 
Sec. 5-5. Records.
It shall be the duty of the city clerk to keep a full list of all the persons doing business in the city and subject to a license, and to enter all amounts collected for licenses in a well preserved book kept for that purpose. 
(Ord. of 12-4-78, § 5)
 
Sec. 5-6. Fixing of licenses not specified.
On any business not specified in this article, the mayor shall fix such license as may be just and proper not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00), and report the same to the next meeting of the city council for such action as may be deemed proper in the premises. 
(Ord. of 12-4-78, § 6)
 
Sec. 5-7. Definition of gross receipts.
(a)	Where the amount of a privilege license tax is based upon gross receipts, the term "gross receipts," unless the contrary clearly appears, shall mean the entire receipts (whether cash or its equivalent in property) of the business engaged in, including all receipts from sales regardless of the place where the sale was solicited, or place where the contract of sale was consummated or the place of delivery, and shall not contemplate any deduction for any purpose not specifically provided for. The "gross receipts" referred to are the gross receipts for the year next preceding the current license year; provided, however, that if the business did not operate the entire next proceeding year, then the license tax shall be based upon the amount of receipts which bears the same relationship to the actual amount of receipts during such preceding year for the time operated during such preceding year; and provided further, that if the operation of such business did not commence until on or after the first day of the current calendar year; or if commenced prior to the first day of the current calendar year, and there were no gross receipts from such business, the gross receipts referred to are the actual gross receipts of such business for such current calendar year. 
(b)	However, where the license operates for a full year following a partial year, and makes application for a license for the next year, and where the gross receipts for the first full year of operation are not equal to or in excess of the projected gross receipts based on the partial year used in computing the license for the first full year of operation, the licensee shall, upon payment of the license tax for the following year, be entitled to a reduction in the amount of such next year's license tax by the difference between the license tax paid for the first full year of operation, and the amount of license tax that the gross receipts had been the basis for taxation for that year. 
(Ord. of 12-4-78, § 12)
 
Sec. 5-8. Statements required where license depends on gross receipts, value of stock, etc.
(a)	In all cases where the amount to be paid as privilege license tax depends upon the amount of capital invested, or sales made, or receipts or business done, or value of goods or stock, or any other fact or condition herein recited, it shall be the duty of such persons applying for such license to render to the city clerk a statement of the amount of such capital or sales, or receipts, or business, or the value of such goods or such other facts. When any person fails or refuses to render such statement when called upon so to do by the city clerk, or renders an incorrect statement, the clerk shall ascertain from inquiry or otherwise the property and other items of taxation upon which such person is liable to pay a privilege license, and shall assess the same according to the best of such clerk's information and judgment; provided, that if the person fails or refuses to pay on the amount assessed by the clerk, and desires an investigation of the amount of the license to be paid by such person, the matter shall be referred to the city council at its next regular meeting for investigation and settlement. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly and wilfully make any false statement as to the amount of stock of merchandise on hand, or the volume of gross receipts, revenues on business, or the amount of capital invested or the number of employees or vehicles used, or to file such statement with the city clerk, assistant or any license collector or inspector, or deputy license collector, or inspector, for the purpose or with the intent of defrauding the city by procuring a license for a less sum than is lawfully due. 
(Ord. of 12-4-78, § 7)
State law reference(s)—Authority to require, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-90(a)(3). 
 
Sec. 5-9. Information furnished for license schedule confidential.
It shall be unlawful for any person connected with the administration of this section to divulge any information obtained by such person in the course of inspection and examination of the books, papers, reports, and memoranda or the amount of license paid hereunder except to the mayor or city council, the city clerk, the city attorney, or others in connection with the administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-4-78, § 16)
 
Sec. 5-10. Audit privileges.
(a)	For the purpose of enabling the city clerk to determine: (1) whether or not there is any liability for payment of a license tax, (2) the proper classification, or (3) the correct amount of license tax due, it shall be the duty of any person engaged in or carrying on any business in the city or its police jurisdiction, upon demand of the city authorized deputy, inspector or representative, to permit inspection during business hours of all portions of the places of business, to furnish by sworn statement or otherwise all information requested bearing on the character of the business engaged in, the amount of capital invested therein, and the dollar amount of the business transacted, and to make available for inspection and examination during business hours all books of accounts, invoices, papers, reports and memoranda relating to such business, or showing the amount of purchases, sales receipts, inventory, and such other information necessary for a determination of tax liability, classification, or amount of tax, as may be demanded, including bank deposits, books, bank statements, copies of sales tax reports to the state and of state and federal income tax returns. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any such person, or for any agent, servant, or employee of such person, to fail or refuse to perform any duty herein imposed upon such person or obstruct or interfere with the city clerk, authorized deputy, inspector or representative in carrying out the purpose of this section. Each day's failure of refusal to perform any duty herein imposed shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 12-4-78, § 8)
 
Sec. 5-11. Purpose of levy outside of city within police jurisdiction.
The license tax herein imposed on each class of business, conducted or carried on wholly outside of the city but within the police jurisdiction thereof is imposed as a means of regulating same, and it is determined by the city council that the respective amounts so imposed on each of such classes as listed in each schedule are reasonably necessary to promote these objects in such police jurisdiction, "in the exercise of police power, but not for revenue." It is further determined that such amounts so imposed on each classification of business as listed in each schedule, are reasonably necessary to cover the cost of granting the license and of exercising proper police regulations of such business. The schedule shall not apply to businesses which are exempted from payment of tax by reason of their interstate character. 
(Ord. of 12-4-78, § 9)
 
Sec. 5-12. Enforcement of payment in police jurisdiction; one-half tax in police jurisdiction.
(a)	All rights of enforcement of this article for collection of license in the corporate limits of the city are hereby extended to the police jurisdiction of the city. 
(b)	The license tax will be one-half the license for a business operated within the city limits. 
(Ord. of 12-4-78, § 10)
 
Sec. 5-13. Compliance with health laws by food establishments.
No establishment, work or other endeavor controlled or covered by the provisions of section 22-20-5, Code of Alabama 1975, as amended, dealing with public health requirements, shall be issued a license until a permit or other evidence of compliance with the provisions of such law is presented. 
(Ord. of 12-4-78, § 11)
 
Sec. 5-14. Wholesale or retail license.
Where a person is engaged in furnishing or selling goods, wares, or other products at wholesale, unless the context clearly appears otherwise, such person will pay a license based on the wholesale rate for the same classification that a retail merchant would pay for the products if sold at retail. The term "wholesale sale" means a sale to a merchant, jobber, dealer or to any person for resale and a sale of building materials to contractors for use in their business and sales to schools, hospitals, and other similar institutions. Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, a person shall be entitled to the wholesale rate only if more than sixty (60) percent of such person's gross receipts are from wholesale sales. Any merchant claiming the benefit of the wholesale rate of license tax must be able to produce sufficient records of gross receipts, or the license at the retail rate shall apply. 
(Ord. of 12-4-78, § 13)
 
Sec. 5-15. Engaging in two or more businesses.
Any person engaged in two (2) or more businesses for which a license is required, shall for each business location take out and pay for a license for each line of business for which a license is required; provided, however, when all such businesses are covered by categories or classifications in which the merchants general rates, groceries rate, or professional rates apply, such person shall be required to pay, in addition to any applicable license designated herein as a public policy license, only one (1) license for each business location, which license shall be based on the gross receipts of all of such businesses or professions at such location and the rate of such tax shall be for that category which comprises the maximum dollar volume of the total receipts of such businesses at such location. 
(Ord. of 12-4-78, § 14)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-95. 
 
Sec. 5-16. Penalty for violations of article.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article by engaging in any of the businesses mentioned herein, within the city or within the police jurisdiction of the city, without first having procured a license therefor, or by doing any act herein prohibited, or by failing to do any act herein required, shall be punished by fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Ord. of 12-4-78, § 18)
State law reference(s)—Maximum fine, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-93. 
 
Sec. 5-17. License schedules.
The licenses which shall be required and which are hereby levied on all persons engaged in carrying on any business, trade, profession or calling or doing any act therein specified within the corporate limits of the city and which shall be paid to the city, as set forth in the following schedules: 
ABSTRACTOR OF TITLE (Professional rate) 
ADJUSTOR FOR INSURANCE CLAIMS (Professional rate) 
ADVERTISING: 
Per day$ 10.00
Per year50.00
AGENT (Merchant rate) 
AIR CONDITIONING (Merchant rate on sales; contractor rate on installation) 
AMBULANCE, AMBULANCE SERVICE: 
First ambulance35.00
Each additional ambulance10.00
No license shall be issued unless approval by city council for use of streets. 
AMUSEMENT MACHINE, COIN-OPERATED. Coin-operated video, video electronic games, mechanical games, electro-mechanical and solid state pinball games, foose ball tables, coin-operated pool tables, and coin-operated music machines (jukebox). 
First 10, each35.00
Each additional machine5.00
(Ord. No. 1987-3, § 1, 12-28-87) 
AMUSEMENT PARK50.00
ANTIQUES (Merchant rate) 
ARCHITECT (Professional rate) 
ASPHALT PLANT (Manufacturer rate) 
ATTORNEY AT LAW (Professional rate) 
AUCTIONEER (Professional rate) 
AUDITOR or PUBLIC ACCOUNTANT (Professional rate) 
AUTOMOBILE: 
(1)	Automobile dealer, including repair garage, body shop, paint shop, handling attachments, accessories, replacements supplies, and automobile rental.
For each such place of business for first $100,000.00 or less of annual gross receipts for such business100.00
Where gross receipts for such business exceed $100,000.00 for the next preceding year, an additional amount equal to 1/20 of 1% of the total gross receipts in excess of $100,000.00 but less than $400,000.00. 
Where gross receipts exceed $400,000.00 for the next preceding year an additional amount equal to 1/50 of 1% of the total gross receipts in excess of $400,000.00. 
(2)	Automobile parking lot (Merchant rate)
(3)	Used automobile dealer. Each person dealing in, selling, or purchasing for resale not as a part of a new car dealership; for each such place of business:
For the first $50,000.00 or less in annual gross receipts100.00
Where gross receipts exceed $50,000.00 for the next preceding year an additional amount equal to 1/50 of 1% of the total annual gross receipts in excess of $50,000.00 shall be paid. 
The dealing in selling or purchasing for resale 4 or more automobiles, trucks or other self-propelled vehicles shall be conclusive evidence of doing business for which a license is required hereunder. 
(4)	Automobile tire vulcanizing or recapping. Whether done in the city or sent out of the city (Merchant rate)
(5)	Automobile mechanic. (Not employed by license garage) (Merchant rate)
(6)	Automobile and body shop garage (Automobile Dealer rate)
(7)	Dealer in automobile accessories, tools, oils, parts attachments, and replacement supplies. For automobile not maintaining a regular place of business in the city based on the gross annual receipts of business done in the city. (Used Automobile rate)
(8)	Mechanical car wash (Merchant rate)
(9)	Automobile storage (Merchant rate)
(10)	Automobile wrecker and/or junk dealer (Junk dealer rate)
(11)	Automobile U-Drive-It. Cars and trucks or trailers for rent or lease:
First 3 units50.00
Each additional unit10.00
(12)	Automobile auctions500.00
(13)	Automobile driving school. (Professional rate). No person shall use the streets of the city in the business of operating a driving school without approval of the city council.
AWNINGS. Selling, manufacturing, or erecting. (Merchant rate) 
BAKERY. Each person operating a bakery or delivering bakery products in the city: 
On less than $50,000.00 gross annual sales100.00
Over $50,000.00 but less than $75,000.00 1/10 of 1% or .001 
Over $75,000.00 1/20 of 1% or .0005 
The above rate applies on the gross annual receipts for the preceding year. 
BANK, BUILDING AND LOAN ASSOCIATION and/or SAVINGS AND LOAN ASSOCIATION. Where capital surplus, reserve and undivided profits are: 
Less than $50,000.0010.00
$50,000.00 and less than $100,000.0020.00
$100,000.00 and less than $150,000.0030.00
$150,000.00 and less than $200,000.0040.00
$200,000.00 and less than $250,000.0050.00
$250,000.00 and less than $300,000.0060.00
$300,000.00 and less than $350,000.0070.00
$350,000.00 and less than $400,000.0080.00
$400,000.00 and less than $450,000.0090.00
$450,000.00 and less than $500,000.00100.00
$500,000.00 and less than $600,000.00110.00
Over $600,000.00125.00
The term "undivided profits" as used in this schedule shall be construed to mean the undivided profits as shown by the books of the operator together with the report made by said operator to the superintendent of banks of the state for the last preceding year. 
;rev=2;(See Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-51-130, 11-51-131) 
BANKRUPT OR FIRE SALE. Each person other than the original bona fide owner, selling goods, wares, or merchandise as an insurance, bankruptcy, mortgage, insolvent, assignees, executors, administrators, receivers, trustee's removal or closing out sale, or a sale of goods, wares and merchandise damaged by fire, smoke, water, or otherwise shall pay a license of350.00
BARBERSHOP (Merchant rate) 
BEAUTY SHOP (Merchant rate) 
BEER. See § 5-40. 
BILLIARD ROOM, POOL ROOM OR OTHER ESTABLISHMENT. Where billiard tables are operated100.00
And in addition thereto an amount equal to 1% of the total gross receipts of the business for the next preceding year. 
BILLING SERVICE (Professional rate) 
BOND. Any person or agent making appeal or appearance bonds in any court for profit100.00
Plus 1/10 of 1% of gross receipts 
BOOKSTORE (Merchant rate) 
BOTTLING WORK: 
(1)	With bottling facilities located within the city or its police jurisdiction. (Manufacturer rate)
(2)	Without bottling facilities located within the city or its police jurisdiction. (Groceries rate)
BOWLING ALLEY: 
First alley75.00
Each additional alley10.00
BOX, BASKET OR CRATE FACTORY (Manufacturer rate) 
BRICK FACTORY (Manufacturer rate) 
BROKER OR BROKER REPRESENTATIVE. Dealer in stocks, bonds or furnishing market quotations (Professional rate). Gross receipts shall apply only to commissions, salaries, or other payments for services rendered or property sold. 
BUILDING SUPPLIES: 
First $50,000.00 of gross sales100.00
From $50,000.00 but less than $1,000,000.00 1/10 of 1% or .001 
Over $1,000,000.00 1/20 of 1% or .0005 
(Ord. of 12-3-79, § 1) 
BUSINESS MACHINES. Agent or dealer (Merchant rate) 
BUS LINE AND TERMINAL. Each100.00
State law reference(s)—Maximum allowable fee, Code of Ala. 1975, § 37-3-33.         
BUTANE GAS. Each person dealing in, selling or delivering butane propane and similar types of gas or fuel commonly known as bottled gas. (Merchant rate) 
CABINET MAKER OR WOODWORKING SHOP (Merchant rate) 
CANDY. Each person engaged in the business of selling or distributing to merchants from trucks or otherwise package candy, nuts, potato chips, or similar products. (Groceries rate) 
CARTRIDGES, SHELLS, AND OTHER AMMUNITION (Merchant rate) 
CEMENT OR CONCRETE PRODUCTS (Manufacturer rate) 
CEMENT DEALER (Merchant rate) 
CEMETERY. Privately owned (Merchant, General rate) 
CHIROPODIST, CHIROPRACTOR (Professional rate) 
CIGARETTES, CIGARS, TOBACCO AND SNUFF. Wholesale dealer. (Groceries rate) 
CIRCUS. Per day500.00
(1)	Each side show concession stand ride or stand in connection with above50.00
(2)	Any street parade in connection with above200.00
COAL (Merchant rate) 
COIN-OPERATED MACHINES (See Amusement machine and vending machines) 
COLD STORAGE PLANT (Manufacturer rate) 
COLLECTION AGENCY, CREDIT ASSOCIATION (Merchant rate) 
COLLECTOR (Professional rate) 
CONCRETE PLANT (Manufacturer rate) 
CONFECTIONER (Restaurant rate) 
CONTRACTOR. A contractor is defined as any person who accepts orders or contracts from the owner of property to assume authority or control, or who is delegated authority by the owner to do so, whether at a fixed price of on a cost-plus basis or hourly basis, for doing any work on or in any building or structure, or for doing any paving or curbing, or for excavating or grading earth, rock or other material, or for constructing any sewer, street, road, bridge, dam, or railroad, or for any other type of construction or installation work, for demolishing any building or other structure, or for moving any building or other structure from one location to another. No permits for work of any kind shall be issued to any person doing work for another individual unless they first have obtained a current license. 
(1)	General contractor. A duly licensed general contractor shall be entitled to perform any or all work for which a contractor's license is required, except electrical and plumbing work, or to hire laborers to perform such work, or to award subcontracts to other contractors or subcontractors for the performance of such part of the work for which the other contractor or subcontractor shall be licensed. The general contractor license will be based on gross annual receipts as follows:
On less than $200,000.00100.00
$200,000.00 to and including $400,000.001/4 of 1%
Over $400,000.001/10 of 1%
This license shall be in addition to any other fees or permits, etc., which are required by the city. 
All general contractors shall upon request of the building and/or license inspector furnish a complete list of all subcontractors, including the address of each, who have done work on any job in the city where they were general contractors. It is the responsibility of the general contractor subcontract with licensed subcontractors and if the subcontractor is found to be working without a license as hereinabove required, the building or license inspector shall stop all work of the contractor until such time as the subcontractor shall have obtained such license. 
(2)	Subcontractor: A subcontractor is defined as a contractor who is licensed to perform one type of work for which a contractor's license is required, and who performs such work under subcontract to a general contractor. A subcontractor shall, nonetheless, be entitled to perform such work as is authorized by such subcontractor's license under direct contract to the owner of property, in which capacity the subcontractor shall perform the role of contractor; except, however, that such subcontractor shall be entitled to perform only the type of work authorized by such license and shall not be entitled to perform other types of work for which a contractor's license is required, nor to award subcontracts to other subcontractors. Classifications for subcontractors are as follows:
a.	Electrical contractor: Accepts orders to perform the electrical wiring, additions to wiring or repair of wiring for residential, commercial and/or industrial projects. Electrical contractors shall be certified by the electricians' examining board before such license is issued.
License fee50.00
Plus ¼ of 1% of all gross receipts in excess of $100,000.00, maximum license fee to be $200.00. 
b.	Plumbing contractor: Accepts orders to perform the plumbing of water, gas, air, or sewer system or parts of such systems or the repair of, modifications of or addition to any such system.
License fee50.00
Plus ¼ of 1% of all gross receipts in excess of $100,000.00, maximum license fee to be $200.00 
c.	Electrical/plumbing contractor: Accepts orders to perform the electrical wiring, additions to wiring or repair of wiring for residential, commercial and/or industrial project. Electrical contractors shall be certified by the electricians' examining board before such license is issued, as well as accepting orders to perform the plumbing of water, gas, air, sewer system or parts of such systems or the repair of, or modification of or addition to any such system.
License fee75.00
Plus ¼ of 1% of all gross receipts in excess of $100,000.00, maximum license to be $300.00. 
d.	Specialty subcontractor: Any subcontractor not included under the above listings and defined as a contractor who is licensed to perform one type of work for which a contractor's license is required, and who performs such work under subcontract to a general contractor. A subcontractor shall, nonetheless, be entitled to perform such work as is authorized by such subcontractors license under direct contract to the owner of property, in which capacity the subcontractor shall perform the role of contractor; except, however, that such subcontractor shall be entitled to perform only the type of work authorized by the license and shall not be entitled to perform other types of work for which a contractor's license is required, nor to award subcontracts to other subcontractors.
License fee50.00
Plus ¼ of 1% of all gross receipts in excess of $100,000.00, maximum license to be $300.00. 
(Ord. No. 1987-1, § 1, 6-22-87) 
CREDIT ASSOCIATION OR COLLECTION AGENCY (Professional rate) 
DAIRY PRODUCTS PLANT (Manufacturer rate) 
DANCING SCHOOL (Professional rate) 
DELICATESSEN (Restaurant rate) 
DENTAL OR OTHER LABORATORY (Merchant, general rate) 
DENTIST (Professional rate) 
DETECTIVE AGENCY. Persons furnishing detective, investigative and security services (Professional rate) 
DIAPER SERVICE (Merchant, general rate) 
DIRECTORY. Each person making, compiling, selling or offering any directory. (Merchant, general rate) 
DOCTOR (Professional rate) 
DRUGSTORE (Merchant, general rate) 
DRY CLEANING. Which may include shirt laundry service, but no other or further laundry service. (Merchant, general rate) 
EGG DEALER. Maintaining place of business where eggs are bought, collected, processed and shipped. (Groceries rate) 
ELECTRIC APPLIANCES (Merchant, general rate) 
ELECTRICAL SUPPLIES (Merchant, general rate) 
ELECTRICIAN. (Contractor rate. Merchant, general rate applies to any sale of goods or wares) 
EMPLOYMENT SERVICE (Professional rate) 
ENGINEERING (Professional rate) 
ENTERTAINMENT. Any type of entertainment not otherwise provided for where charges are made for admission, not for religious or charitable or school purposes, per day $50.00 plus 1/10 of 1% of gross receipts. 
EXPRESS COMPANY. A license tax of $100.00 is levied on express companies having an office in the city for the purpose of forwarding merchandise from this city to other points in the state and from point in the state to this city, or from one point to another point between them. 
EXTERMINATORS. Exterminator or any other person in the business of using disinfectants or insecticides (Merchant, general rate) 
FAIR AND/OR CARNIVALS. Per week, not prorated, $500.00. No license for street fair or street carnival shall be issued without approval of and special permit from the council upon showing that such street fair or carnival is sponsored by some responsible local organization and will be conducted in a proper manner and without violation of any city ordinance or state law. 
FARM EQUIPMENT AND IMPLEMENT DEALER (Automobile dealer rate) 
FERTILIZER DEALER (Merchant, general rate) 
FERTILIZER FACTORY (Manufacturer rate) 
FINANCE COMPANY. Each person engaged in discounting or buying conditional sales contracts, drafts, acceptances, notes or mortgages on personal property or financing personal property purchase contracts shall pay an annual license of $150.00 first $100,000.00 plus 1/10 of 1% of gross receipts over $100,000.00. 
FISH (Groceries rate) 
FLORIST (Merchant, general rate) 
FOUNDRY (Manufacturer rate) 
FOUNTAIN. Dispensing soda water or other like beverage, including ice cream (Restaurant rate) 
FROZEN CUSTARD MACHINE (Restaurant rate) 
FROZEN FOOD DISTRIBUTOR (Groceries rate) 
FRUIT DEALER (Produce rate) 
FUR STORAGE (Laundry rate) 
GASOLINE OR FUEL OIL FILLING STATION. Served by licensed wholesale gasoline or fuel oil dealer as per number of pumps as follows: 
First pump25.00
Each additional pump15.00
In addition to the above, merchant, general rate which applies to the total gross receipts from petroleum products shall be excluded. Any gasoline or fuel oil filling station dealer shall have the right in lieu of the above license to be licensed under the merchant, general rate and include in gross receipts all sales including petroleum products. 
GASOLINE OR OIL DEALER. Wholesale $150.00 for the first $100,000.00 or less of gross receipts from such business during the next preceding year and where gross receipts from any such business exceed $100,000.00 for the next preceding year shall pay an additional license in such amount as will equal 1/10 of 1% of such total gross receipts in excess of $100,000.00 from such business during the next preceding year. 
GLASS COMPANY (Merchant, general rate) 
GRAIN, FLOUR OR CORN ELEVATOR MILL (Manufacturer rate) 
GRIST MILL, HAMMER MILL (Manufacturer rate) 
GROCERIES. Delivery, wholesale200.00
(Ord. of 12-3-79, § 1) 
GROCERIES. Wholesale. Each person operating a wholesale business, or selling goods and entitled to the wholesale rate shall pay a wholesale license in lieu of the groceries rate based on gross annual receipts as follows: 
Less than $100,000.00 of gross receipts200.000
Plus 
$100,000.00 but less than $200,000.00 1/10 of 1% or .001 
$200,000.00 but less than $500,000.00 1/20 of 1% or .0005 
$500,000.00 but less than $1,000,000.00 1/40 of 1% or .00025 
Over $1,000,000.00 1/80 of 1% or .000125 
GROCERIES RATE. Each person operating a business of selling foods for which the groceries rate applies shall pay a license based on gross annual receipts as follows: 
For the first $25,000.00 or less of gross receipts100.00
Where gross receipts for any such business exceed $25,000.00 but less than 
$400,000.00 1/10 of 1% or .001 
$400,000.00 but less than $1,000,000.00 1/20 of 1% or .0005 
$1,000,000.00 and over 1/40 of 1% or .00025 
HATCHERY (Manufacturer rate) 
HOSIERY MILL (Manufacturer rate) 
HOSPITAL150.00
HOTEL. 10 rooms or less, $50.00. Each additional rooms, $5.00. This license applies only to hotel operations. Restaurant or other business requires separate license. 
ICE CREAM DISTRIBUTOR (Groceries rate) 
ICE CREAM FACTORY (Manufacturer rate) 
ICE FACTORY (Manufacturer rate) 
INFANT DIAPER SERVICE (Merchant, general rate) 
INSULATION. Each person engaged in installing insulation materials in buildings by use of power driven machines. (Merchant, general rate) 
INSURANCE: 
(1)	Each person engaged in the insurance business, except fire and marine, and fraternal benefit organizations, shall pay as a license tax $15.00 and also $1.00 on each $100.00 or major fraction thereof, of the gross premiums less the return premiums, received during the preceding year, on policies issued during such year, to citizens of this city, and in the event such person has not heretofore engaged in such business in the city, then and in that event the sum of $100.00 shall be paid at the time of taking out license and at the end of the year settlement shall be made with the city upon the same percentage basis as herein provided immediately preceding.
(2)	Each person engaged in the business of fire or marine insurance shall pay 4% of the gross premiums, less the return premiums on policies issued during the preceding year on property located in the city. Each person engaged in the business of fire or marine insurance business for the first time in the city shall pay $100.00 at the time of taking out such license and at the end of the year the person and the city shall adjust the license upon the basis of four percent of the gross premiums collected on policies issued during the preceding year in the city.
It is hereby provided that on the thirty-first day of December of each year, or within 60 days thereafter each insurance company, or person engaged in such business shall furnish the city clerk a statement, in writing, duly authorized and certified by someone authorized to make the same, showing the full and true gross amount of such premiums, less return premiums, received during the year and shall accompany such statement with the amount of the license due according to the schedule. A failure to furnish such statement shall constitute just cause to decline issuance of a license to such person. 
JUNK DEALER, AUTOMOBILE WRECKER AND/OR AUTOMOBILE JUNK DEALER. Including those handling scrap metal, bones, paper and rags100.00
LAUNDRY. Each laundry and/or other business licensed under this category engaged in business in the city whether or not maintaining a regular place of business in this city shall pay according to the merchant rate. 
LAUNDRY. Self service: 
1 to 10 machines50.00
Over 10 machines, each5.00
LAWNS, SHRUBS, OR TREE CARE SERVICES. Such category is hereby described as any person engaged in the business of the management, maintenance, care, treating, cutting, trimming, edging, watering, fertilizing, pruning, mowing, or aerating lawns, shrubs, or trees, or tree care services within the corporate limits or the police jurisdiction of the city. The annual license fee is hereby set at $50.00. Licenses will be issued by the city clerk after an application has been made, approved by the city clerk and the proper fee has been paid. 
Full time elementary, junior high school, high school, college and trade school students, and persons over the age of 65 years before the first of the year for which the license is to be issued, may be entitled to have the license fee waived. For the license fee to be waived, the following conditions must exist and be maintained through the license year: 
(1)	The person claiming the exemption must hire out or contract with the landowner on an individual basis and for no other person or entity.
(2)	The person claiming the exemption must perform all the labor and furnish all the equipment necessary to perform the necessary services.
(3)	The person claiming the exemption may not be an employee of any other person engaged in these services.
(4)	The person claiming the exemption may not utilize the services of volunteers, hire any employees, or use subcontractors to assist in the rendering of these services.
(5)	A person granted this exemption who violates any of the above will be deemed to be conducting business without a proper license.
(Ord. No. 1989-4, §§ 1, 2, 6-5-89) 
LINEN AND/OR WASHABLE CLOTHING SUPPLY OR RENTAL SERVICE (Merchant rate) 
LIQUOR. See § 5-40. 
LIVESTOCK BROKER (Merchant, general rate) 
LIVESTOCK DEALER. Buying and selling on own account. (Merchant, general rate) 
LOAN COMPANY. Individual or company making short term loans. (Finance company rate) 
LOCKSMITH25.00
(Ord. No. 1987-1, § 1, 6-22-87) 
LUNCH STAND. (Restaurant rate) (No license shall be issued under this category except upon presentation to the city clerk of a certificate from the county health officer, as required by law.) 
MACHINE SHOP OR WORK (Manufacturer rate) 
MACHINERY (Automobile rate) 
MAIL ORDER HOUSE AND/OR STORE (Merchant rate) 
MANUFACTURER. Each person engaged in a business for which the manufacturer rate applies shall pay the following license based on gross annual receipts as follows: 
Gross annual receipts of less than $50,000.00100.00
At least $50,000.00 but less than $250,000.00150.00
At least $250,000.00 but less than $1,000,000.00200.00
Where gross annual receipts are $1,000,000.00 or over, manufacturer shall pay in lieu of the above license schedule, a license based on the total undepreciated cost of buildings, machinery and equipment (excluding licensed rolling stock) in accordance with following schedule. Where the total undepreciated cost of buildings, machinery and equipment is: 
Less than $3,000,000.00250.00
At least $3,000,000.00 but less than $10,000,000.00300.00
At least $10,000,000.00 but less than $25,000,000.00350.00
At least $25,000,000.00 but less than $50,000,000.00450.00
Over $50,000,000.00500.00
MANUFACTURER OF FOOD SPECIALTY ITEM (Manufacturer rate) 
MANUFACTURING PLANT. Not otherwise specifically classified (Manufacturer rate) 
MARBLE MONUMENT OR STONE YARD (Manufacturer rate) 
MATTRESS MANUFACTURER (Manufacturer rate) 
MEAT (Grocery rate) 
MERCHANT, GENERAL. Any person operating a business, performing a service, or furnishing or selling goods, wares, merchandise or other products, for which no classification is herein otherwise provided, shall pay the merchant, general rate. 
(1)	Retail. Each person operating a business or selling goods for which merchant, general rates apply shall pay a license based on gross annual receipts as follows:
Less than $25,000.00100.00
Plus 
At least $25,000.00 but less than $1,000,000.00.002 ..... 
Plus 
$1,000,000.00 and over.001
(2)	Wholesale. Each person operating a wholesale business or selling goods and entitled to the wholesale rate shall pay a license in lieu of the merchant, general rate on gross annual receipts as follows:
Less than $40,000.00100.00
At least $40,000.00 but less than $100,000.00150.00
At least $100,000.00 but less than $120,000.00175.00
At least $120,000.00 but less than $140,000.00200.00
At least $140,000.00 but less than $160,000.00225.00
At least $160,000.00 but less than $180,000.00250.00
At least $180,000.00 but less than $200,000.00275.00
Where gross annual receipts exceed $200,000.00 for the preceding year an additional amount equal to 1/20 of 1% or .0005. 
(Ord. No. 1985-5, § 1, 10-21-85) 
MERCHANT TAILOR (Merchant, general rate) 
METAL DEALER OR METAL PROCESSOR. Each person engaged primarily in the purchase and collection of scrap metals for the purpose of processing the same into scrap material for the metals recovery industry (Junk dealer rate) 
MILK DISTRIBUTOR (Groceries rate) 
MILK PROCESSING PLANT (Manufacturer rate) 
MONUMENT. Selling or erecting same (Merchant rate) 
MORTGAGE BROKERAGE COMPANY (Professional rate) 
MOTEL: 
10 rooms or less50.00
Each additional over 105.00
MOTOR BOAT, YACHT, AND PLEASURE BOAT (Merchant, general rate) 
MOTOR CARRIER. Each as defined by section 37-3-2, Code of Alabama 1975, doing business in the city by receiving passengers or freight for transport or hire from this city to another point in the state or from another point in the state to this city100.00
MOTORCYCLE (Merchant, general rate) 
MOTORS FOR MOTORBOATS (Merchant, general rate) 
MOTOR TRUCK AND TRAILER. Any person engaged in the business of furnishing transportation of persons or property for hire for a particular person, under special contract, and doing business in the city by receiving passengers or freight for transportation for hire from this city to other points in the state, or who receives passengers or freight for transportation for hire from other point in the state to this city, shall pay the following privilege license or privilege tax: 
One truck50.00
Each additional5.00
MOVING PICTURE (Merchant, general rate) 
MULTIGRAPH OR MIMEOGRAPH PRINTING (Merchant, general rate) 
MUSIC SERVICE. Each person furnishing music or other types of entertainment to places of business for a service fee where such services are furnished by wire connections or remote control. (Professional rate) 
NEWS DEALER. Selling papers, magazines or other periodicals whether or not published within the city. (Merchant, general rate) 
NEWSPAPER (Manufacturer rate) 
NURSERY OR AGENT. Selling or delivering shrubbery or other nursery stock. (Merchant, general rate) The public welfare requiring it, no person shall be issued a license hereunder without first evidencing to the city clerk proof of compliance with all statutes, rules and regulations of the state, and of its applicable departments then in force relating to the activities sought to be engaged in by the applicant. Reference particularly, sections 2-25-1 through 2-25-42 and 2-28-1 through 2-28-12, Code of Alabama 1975. 
NURSING HOME (Hospital rate) 
OIL MILL (Manufacturer rate) 
OLD RAGS. Each person selling or renting grease rags or delivering same to be used in garages and elsewhere (Merchant, general rate) 
OPTICIAN. Or dealer in spectacles or eyeglasses exclusively (Professional rate) 
OPTOMETRIST, OCULIST OR OTHERS. Examining eyes, or prescribing or fitting eyeglasses. (Professional rate) 
PAINT SHOP (Merchant, general rate) 
PASTEURIZING PLANT (Manufacturer rate) 
PAWNSHOP (Merchant rate) Each place of business, including pistols. Any person who lends money or takes personal property as a pledge, or who buys personal property with the agreement or understanding that the same may be redeemed. A permanent record shall be kept at each place of business of each item taken to secure any loan or renewal thereof, showing the date of transaction, name and address of owner or depositor, amount of loan, description of article which shall include serial number, manufacture's name and other marks of identification, type, value and the disposition of each such article if not redeemed by the owner, the name and address of the purchaser. These records shall always be opened for inspection by any peace officer of the state, or any municipality thereof. A copy of each day's transactions, except disposition of articles, shall be filed daily with the chief of police. The failure to keep such records, to make daily reports to the chief of police or to comply with the requirements of sections 8-1-80 through 8-1-84, Code of Alabama 1975, shall subject such person to having the license revoked by the city council and to other penalties provided by the law. 
PEDDLER OR ITINERANT. (Agent rate) 
PHOTOGRAPHER (Professional rate) 
PHOTOSTATIC AND/OR PHOTOSTAT RECORDS (Merchant, general rate) 
PIANOS, ORGANS, PHONOGRAPHS OR OTHER MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS (Merchant, general rate) 
PLANING MILL (Manufacturer rate) 
PLASTIC MOLDER (Manufacturer rate) 
PLUMBER, GAS AND/OR STEAM FITTER. (Contractor rate, Merchant, general rate applies to any sale of goods or wares.) 
PLUMBER SUPPLIES. Other than licensed plumber (Merchant, general rate) 
POCKET GOLF, CARPET GOLF, OR MINIATURE GOLF COURSE, OR DRIVING RANGE (Merchant, general rate) 
POULTRY DEALER. Maintaining a regular place of business (Groceries rate) 
PRESSING WHILE YOU WAIT. (Laundry rate) 
PRINTING PLANT AND/OR JOB PRINTING SHOP (Manufacturer rate) 
PRIVATE CLUB750.00
PRODUCE. Vegetable or other farm products (Groceries rate) 
All persons operating under grower's certificate must file a copy of such grower's certificate in the office of the city clerk for each load of any nature sold in the city and must make an affidavit such produce was actually grown by such person, setting forth the specific place in which it was grown, and circumstance under which it was grown, such affidavit to be in form prepared by the city clerk; and such person shall obtain from the city clerk a permit to sell each load of such produce before selling it or any part thereof. 
PROFESSIONAL RATE. Each person operating a business or selling goods for which the professional rate applies shall pay a license based on gross annual receipts (Gross annual receipts shall include only salaries, retainers, fees, and other payments for services rendered or property sold) as follows: 
Less than $50,000.00100.00
$50,000.00 and over 1/25 of 1% or .0004 
RADIOS AND/OR TELEVISION SALES OR REPAIRS (Merchant, general rate) 
RADIO BROADCASTING STATION (Merchant rate) 
RAGS. See Old rags. 
RAILROAD. Having an office or running cars into the city for business of or transporting freight or passengers from this city to other points in the state and from other points in the state to this city, it being not the purpose to tax interstate business, each as prescribed in section 11-51-124, Code of Alabama 1975, $175.00. It is not intended hereby that any part of such tax or license is levied on transportation transacted for the United States government and all such business is hereby expressly exempt from the provisions of this category. 
REAL ESTATE AGENT (Professional rate) 
REAL ESTATE DEALER (Professional rate) 
REFRIGERATOR (ELECTRIC, GAS OR MECHANICAL) DEALER (Merchant, general rate) 
REPAIR SHOP: 
(1)	Where primary business is repairing (Merchant, general rate)
(2)	Where primary business is manufacturing (Manufacturer rate)
RESTAURANT, CAFE OR LUNCH STAND (Groceries rate) No license shall be issued under this category except upon presentation to the city clerk of a certificate from the county health officer as required by state law. 
ROLLING STORES, SELLING FROM TRUCKS OR OTHER VEHICLES (Merchant, general rate) 
RUMMAGE SALE. Per day (Note: The mayor shall be authorized to permit churches and other charitable organizations to hold rummage sales on specific occasions without paying the foregoing license.)5.00
SAND and GRAVEL. Dealer (Merchant, general rate) 
SAND and GRAVEL. Producer (Manufacturer rate) 
SAWMILL (Manufacturer rate) 
SECONDHAND DEALER. Buying, selling, exchanging secondhand goods (Merchant rate) 
SEPTIC TANK CLEANER (Merchant, general rate) 
SEWING MACHINE COMPANY, OR DEALER (Merchant, general rate) 
SHOE AND BOOT REPAIRING (Merchant, general rate) 
SHOESHINE STAND (Merchant, general rate) 
SHOOTING GALLERY AND GAME ROOM (Merchant rate) (This license issued only with the approval of the city council.) 
SHOP (Merchant, general rate) 
SHOW (See also Circus and Fair)500.00
SIGNS. Neon, electric, etc., manufacturers or dealer. (Merchant, general rate) 
SILK OR TEXTILE MILL (Manufacturer rate) 
SKATING RINK (Merchant, general rate) 
SLAUGHTERHOUSE (Manufacturer rate) 
STAMP OR PREMIUM STORE OR AGENT: 
(1)	Premium redemption store: Each person engaging in or operating a premium redemption store where trading stamps are redeemable for premiums or things of value shall be subject to the merchants general rates on the annual gross retail value of premiums delivered in redemption of such stamps during the preceding year.
(2)	Sales of stamps: Each person engaged in or carrying on the business of issuing, lending, licensing, or selling to merchants or vendors trading stamps which are redeemable for premiums on things of value shall pay a license on the basis of the merchant, general rate on the annual gross receipts for the preceding year.
STORAGE BATTERIES, DEALER (Merchant, general rate) 
STORMWINDOWS AND DOORS, SELLING, OR ERECTING (Merchant, general rate) 
STOVES (Merchant, general rate) 
TAX CONSULTANT. Persons preparing income tax and/or other tax papers. (Professional rate) 
TAXICAB. Each person operating taxicabs in the city shall comply with all requirements set out in this chapter and other ordinances regulating the operation of taxicabs, and shall pay a license of $50.00 for each taxicab. 
TAXIDERMIST. Person engaged in the business or occupation of Taxidermist. License fee, per annum15.00
(Ord. No. 1992-1, § 1, 2-3-92) 
TELEGRAPH COMPANY. Each person engaged in the business of telegraphy in the city in receiving telegraphic messages at the city, and transmitting same to points or stations in the state and receiving messages in the city from points or stations in the state shall pay to the city a license or privilege tax of75.00
(Maximum fee, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-127) 
TIN SHOP AND/OR SHEET METAL SHOP (Merchant, general rate) 
TOURIST CAMP OR CABINS (Motel rate) 
TOURIST HOME (Motel rate) 
TRAILER COURT, PARK OR CAMP. Each person engaged in maintaining or operating a lot or place other than a storage in a garage, where a charge is made for a storage or parking of vehicles, commonly known as house trailers for long or short periods of time, shall pay an annual license as follows: 
For the first 10 prepared trailer spaces50.00
Each additional space5.00
TRAILERS. Selling and/or dealing in house trailers. (Automobile rate) 
TRANSFER. Motor vehicle, local for carrying freight100.00
TRANSIENT MERCHANT. Described as any person involved in the selling of merchandise, appliances, furniture, dry goods or clothing, performing a service, furnishing goods or products for which there is no fixed place of business, or operating out of a truck, car, bus, or any type of vehicle or where the business is being transacted on a public or private parking lot from which such person is doing business and is not engaged in the regular business of working accounts in the city. This license classification is not meant to include a type of business where state and county licenses have been obtained and a monthly or systematic working of accounts, other businesses, have been established in the city. This classification is meant to include merchants who for whatever reason are selling at a location within the corporate limits or the police jurisdiction of the city and who are not operating a business that would be considered in the aforementioned types of business that are excluded from this license. The fee is not prorated, but is on per annum basis only. The license shall be in the amount of $500.00 plus licensee must furnish a signed permit from the property owner giving them permission to sell on licensee's property. 
(Ord. No. 1984-5, § 1, 12-17-84) 
TYPEWRITER MACHINES, ADDING MACHINES. Sales or repair. (Merchant, general rate) 
VENDING MACHINES. Automatic or self-service machines: 
For each machine vending gum, postage stamps, matches or merchandise or articles of any kind, or on which a person may be weighed, where machines are operated by coins5.00
Food or drinks, each5.00
Cigarettes, each5.00
(Ord. No. 1987-3, § 1, 12-28-87) 
UNDERTAKER OR EMBALMER (Merchant, general rate) 
UNLOADING PRIVILEGES. Any person who unloads, delivers, distributes or disposes of any goods, ware, merchandise or produce was transported from a point without the city and is not covered by any other license herein25.00
UPHOLSTER (Merchant, general rate) 
WALLPAPER; PICTURE FRAMES OR WINDOW GLASS (Merchant, general rate) 
WAREHOUSE. Per year50.00
WATCH AND CLOCK REPAIRING (Merchant, general rate) 
WELDING PRODUCTS. Each person selling welding products such as oxygen and/or acetylene (Merchant, general rate) 
WELDING SHOP (Merchant, general rate) 
WINE. See § 5-40. 
WOOD. Dealer in and hauling and delivering wood (Merchant, general rate) 
WEATHER STRIPPER (Contractor rate) 
WHISKEY350.00
WINDOW WASHER OR CLEANER (Merchant, general rate) 
(Ord. of 12-4-78, § 19)
 
Sec. 5-18. Reserved.
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 1996-4, adopted Oct. 21, 1996, repealed former § 5-18, which pertained to peddlers, hawkers, and solicitors. 
 
Sec. 5-19. Placing merchandise on sidewalk.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or put any item of merchandise, any vending machine, any scale, display stand or any other object on the city sidewalks in the business district of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-5-60(1), § 1)
Cross reference(s)—Obstructions on streets, § 13-5. 
 
Sec. 5-20. Billiard rooms to be on ground floor.
(a)	The following terms as herein used shall have the respective meanings as herein ascribed: 
(1)	The terms "billiards" and "billiard room" shall have the meanings given in section 34-6-1, Code of Alabama 1975. 
(2)	The term "ground floor" shall mean the first floor of any building or structure, the floor space of which is on the same level or approximately on the same level as the public street upon which it abuts. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, operate or maintain any billiard room in the city or the police jurisdiction thereof in any place, room or enclosure, other than in a space located therein on the ground floor. 
(Ord. of 11-3-47, §§ 1, 2)
 
Sec. 5-21. Municipal sales and use tax exemption.
(a)	In conformity with the provisions Act 2006-574 enacted by the Alabama Legislature during the 2006 Regular Session, providing for a state sales tax holiday, the City of Opp, Alabama, exempts "covered items" from municipal sales and use tax during the same period, beginning at 12:01 a.m. on the first Friday in August 2006 (August 4, 2006) and ending at 12:00 midnight the following Sunday (August 6, 2006). 
(b)	This section shall be subject to all terms, conditions, definitions, time periods, and rules as provided by Act 2006-574, except that the time period shall only be as specified in subsection (a) above and not for all years thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, §§ 1, 2, 6-5-06)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2006-02, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 5, 2006, did not specifically amend the Code; therefore, said provisions have been included as § 5-21, at the editor's discretion. 
 
Secs. 5-22—5-29. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. PRIVILEGE, LICENSE AND EXCISE TAXES 
 
Sec. 5-30. Privilege or license tax—Levy in city.
There is hereby levied, in addition to all other taxes of every kind now imposed by law, and shall be collected as herein provided, a privilege or license tax against the person on account of the business activities and in the amount to be determined by the application of rates against gross sales, or gross receipts, as the case may be, as follows: 
(1)	Upon every person, firm, or corporation, (including the state, the University of Alabama, Auburn University and all other institutions of higher learning in the state, whether such institutions be denominational, state, county or municipal institutions, and any association or other agency or instrumentality of such institutions) engaged or continuing within the city in the business of selling at retail any tangible personal property whatsoever, including merchandise and commodities of every kind and character, (not including, however, bonds or other evidences of debts or stocks, nor sale or sales of material and supplies to any person for use in fulfilling a contract for the painting, repair, or reconditioning of vessels, barges, ships and other watercraft and commercial fishing vessels of over five (5) tons load displacement as registered with the U.S. Coast Guard and licensed by the state department of conservation and natural resources), an amount equal to one (1) percent of the gross proceeds of sales of the business except where a different amount is expressly provided herein. Provided, however, that any person engaging or continuing in business as a retailer and wholesaler or jobber shall pay the tax required on the gross proceeds of retail sales of such business at the rates specified, when his books are kept so as to show separately the gross proceeds of sales of each business, and when his books are not so kept he shall pay the tax as retailer on the gross sales of the business. 
(2)	Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged or continuing within the city, in the business of conducting, or operating, places of amusement or entertainment, billiard and pool rooms, bowling alleys, amusement devices, musical devices, theaters, opera houses, moving picture shows, vaudevilles, amusement parks, athletic contests, including wrestling matches, prize fights, boxing and wrestling exhibitions, football and baseball games, (including athletic contests, conducted by or under the auspices of any educational institution within the city, or any athletic association thereof, or other association whether such institution or association be a denominational, a state, or county, or a municipal institution or association or a state, county, or city school, or other institution, association or school), skating rinks, race tracks, golf courses, or any other place at which any exhibition, display, amusement or entertainment is offered to the public or place or places where an admission fee is charged, including public bathing places, public dance halls of every kind and description within the city, an amount equal to one (1) percent of the gross receipts of any such business. Provided, however, not withstanding any language to the contrary in the prior portion of this subsection, the tax provisions so specified shall not apply to any athletic event conducted by a public or private primary or secondary school. The tax amount which would have been collected pursuant to this subsection shall continue to be collected by said public or private primary or secondary school but shall be retained by the school which collected it and shall be used by said school for school purposes. 
(3)	Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged or continuing within the city in the business of selling at retail machines used in mining, quarrying, compounding, processing, and manufacturing of tangible personal property, an amount equal to one-half (½) of one (1) percent of the gross proceeds of the sale of such machines; provided, that the term "machines," as herein used, shall include machinery which is used for mining, quarrying, compounding, processing, or manufacturing tangible personal property, and the parts of such machines, attachments and replacements therefore which are made or manufactured for use on or in the operation of such machines and which are necessary to the operation of such machines and are customarily so used. 
(4)	Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged or continuing within the city in the business of selling at retail any automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semi-trailer, house trailer or mobile home set-up materials and supplies including but not limited to steps, blocks, anchoring, cable pipes and any other materials pertaining thereto an amount equal to one-fourth (¼) of one (1) percent of the gross proceeds of sale of said automotive vehicle, truck trailer, semi-trailer, house trailer or mobile home set-up materials and supplies provided, however, where a person subject to the tax provided for in this subsection withdraws from his stock in trade any automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer for use by him or by his employee or agent in the operation of such business, there shall be paid, in lieu of the tax levied herein, a fee of five dollars ($5.00) per year or part thereof during which such automotive vehicle, truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer shall remain the property of such person. Each such year or part thereof shall begin with the day or anniversary date, as the case may be, of such withdrawal and shall run for the twelve (12) succeeding months or part thereof during which such automotive vehicle, truck trailer, or house trailer shall remain the property of such person. 
Where any used automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer is taken in trade or in a series of trades, as a credit or part payment on the sale of a new or used vehicle, the tax levied herein shall be paid on the net difference, that is, the price of the new or used vehicle sold less the credit for the used vehicle taken in trade. 
(5)	Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged or continuing within the city in the business of selling at retail any machine, machinery or equipment which is used in planting, cultivating and harvesting farm products, or used in connection with the production of agricultural produce or products, livestock or poultry on farms, and the parts of such machines, machinery or equipment, attachments and replacements therefore which are made or manufactured for use on or in the operation of such machine, machinery or equipment, and which are necessary to and customarily used in the operation of such machine, machinery or equipment, an amount equal to one-fourth (¼) of one (1) percent of the gross proceeds of the sale thereof. Provided, however, the one-fourth (¼) of one (1) percent rate herein prescribed with respect to parts, attachments, and replacements shall not apply to any automotive vehicle or trailer designed primarily for public highway use, except farm trailers used primarily in the production and harvesting of agricultural commodities. 
Where any used machine, machinery or equipment which is used in planting, cultivating, and harvesting farm products, or used in connection with the production of agricultural produce or products, livestock and poultry on farms is taken in trade or in a series of trades as a credit or part payment on a sale of a new or used machine, machinery or equipment, the tax levied herein shall be paid on the net difference, that is, the price of the new or used machine, machinery or equipment sold, less the credit for the used machine, machinery or equipment taken in trade. 
(6)	Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged or continuing within the city in the business of selling through coin-operated dispensing machines, food and food products for human consumption, not including beverages other than coffee, milk, milk products and substitutes therefore, there is hereby levied a tax equal to one (1) percent of the retail selling price of such food, food products and beverages sold through such machines. 
(Ord. No. 1977-1, § 1, 4-4-77; Ord. No. 1986-2, § 1, 5-5-86; Ord. No. 2017-05, § 1, 6-8-17)
 
Sec. 5-31. Same—Levy in police jurisdiction.
Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged in the doing of an act, or who shall do an act, or continuing in the doing of an act, or engaged in the operation of any business, or who shall engage in the operation of any business, within the police jurisdiction of the city but beyond the corporate limits of said city for which or upon which a privilege or license tax is in this article levied or required within the corporate limits of the city, there is hereby levied, in addition to all other taxes of every kind now imposed by law or by municipal ordinance, to be collected as herein provided for the privilege or license taxes herein levied within the corporate limits of the city a privilege or license tax equal to one-half (½) of that provided, levied or required in this article for the doing of such act, or the engaging or continuing therein, or the engaging or continuing in the operation of such business within the corporate limits of the city. Provided further, that except for the amount of the privilege or license tax herein levied within the police jurisdiction of said city but without the corporate limits thereof, all the provisions of this article extend and apply to all the area within the police jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1977-1, § 2, 4-4-77; Ord. No. 1986-2, § 2, 5-5-86; Ord. No. 2017-05, § 2, 6-8-17)
 
Sec. 5-32. Same—State sales tax statutes applicable.
This article and the taxes levied herein shall be subject to all definitions, exceptions, exemptions, proceedings, requirements, provisions, rules and regulations promulgated under the Alabama Administrative Procedure Act, direct pay permit and drive-out certificate procedures, statute of limitation, discounts, penalties, fines, punishments, and deductions that are applicable to the taxes levied by the state sales tax statutes, except where inapplicable or where herein otherwise provided, including all provisions of the state sales tax statutes for enforcement and collection of taxes. 
(Ord. No. 1977-1, § 3, 4-4-77; Ord. No. 2017-05, § 3, 6-8-17)
State law reference(s)—For such statutes, see Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-23-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 5-33. Excise tax.
(a)	An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city, of tangible personal property (not including materials and supplies bought for use in fulfilling a contract for the painting, repairing, or reconditioning of vessels, barges, ships and other watercraft and commercial fishing vessels of over five (5) tons load displacement as registered with the U.S. Coast Guard and licensed by the state department of conservation and natural resources) purchased at retail on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived for storage, use or other consumption in the city, except as provided in subsections (b), (c), and (d), at the rate of one (1) percent of the sales price of such property within the corporate limits of said city. 
(b)	An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city, of any machines used in mining, quarrying, compounding, processing, and manufacturing of tangible personal property purchased at retail on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived at the rate of one-half (½) of one (1) percent of the sales price of any such machine; provided, that the term "machine" as herein used, shall include machinery which is used for mining, quarrying, compounding, processing, or manufacturing tangible personal property, and the parts of such machines, attachments and replacements therefore, which are made or manufactured for use on or in the operation of such machines and which are necessary to the operation of such machines and are customarily so used. 
(c)	An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city on any automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semi-trailer, house trailer or mobile home set-up materials and supplies including but not limited to steps, blocks, anchoring, cable pipes and any other materials pertaining thereto purchased at retail on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived for storage, use or other consumption in the city at the rate of one-fourth (¼) of one (1) percent of the sales price of such automotive vehicle, truck trailer, semi-trailer, house trailer or mobile home set-up materials and supplies within the corporate limits of said city. Where any used automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer is taken in trade or in a series of trades, as a credit or part payment on the sale of a new or used vehicle, the tax levied herein shall be paid on the net difference, that is, the price of the new or used vehicle sold less the credit for the used vehicle taken in trade. 
(d)	An excise tax is hereby levied and imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of any machine, machinery or equipment which is used in planting, cultivating and harvesting farm products, or used in connection with the production of agricultural produce or products, livestock or poultry on farms, and the parts of such machines, machinery or equipment, attachments and replacements therefore which are made or manufactured for use on or in the operation of such machine, machinery or equipment, and which are necessary to and customarily used in the operation of such machine, machinery or equipment, which is purchased at retail after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, for the storage, use or other consumption in the city at the rate of one-fourth (¼) of one (1) percent of the sales price of such property within the corporate limits of said city, regardless of whether the retailer is or is not engaged in the business in this city. Provided, however, the one-fourth (¼) of one (1) percent rate herein prescribed with respect to parts, attachments, and replacements shall not apply to any automotive vehicle or trailer designed primarily for public highway use, except farm trailers used primarily in the production and harvesting of agricultural commodities. Where any used machine, machinery or equipment which is used in planting, cultivating, and harvesting farm products, or used in connection with the production of agricultural produce or products, livestock and poultry on farms is taken in trade or in a series of trades as a credit or part payment on a sale of a new or used machine, machinery or equipment, the tax levied herein shall be paid on the net difference, that is, the price of the new or used machine, machinery or equipment sold, less the credit for the used machine, machinery or equipment taken in trade. 
(e)	An excise tax is hereby imposed on tangible personal property at one-half (½) the rates specified in subsections (a), (b), (c), and (d) of this section on the storage, use or other consumption of such tangible personal property outside the corporate limits of the city, but within the police jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1977-1, § 4, 4-4-77; Ord. No. 1986-2, § 3, 5-5-86; Ord. No. 2017-05, § 4, 6-8-17)
 
Sec. 5-34. Same—State sales tax statutes applicable.
This article and the taxes levied herein shall be subject to all definitions, exceptions, exemptions, proceedings, requirements, provisions, rules and regulations promulgated under the Alabama Administrative Procedure Act, direct pay permit and drive-out certificate procedures, statute of limitation, discounts, penalties, fines, punishments, and deductions that are applicable to the taxes levied by the state use tax statutes, except where inapplicable or where herein otherwise provided, including all provisions of the state use tax statutes for enforcement and collection of taxes. 
(Ord. No. 1977-1, § 5, 4-4-77; Ord. No. 2017-05, § 5, 6-8-17)
State law reference(s)—For such statutes, see Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-23-60 et seq. 
 
Sec. 5-35. Use of proceeds.
The proceeds from the tax herein levied remaining after payment of the costs of collecting said tax, including all charges of the administration for such collection and paid over to and received by the city shall be distributed to the city's general fund for the use by the city for any lawful purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05, § 6, 6-8-17)
 
Sec. 5-36. Article cumulative.
This article shall not be construed to repeal any of the provisions of the general license code of the city, embodied in article I of this chapter, but shall be held to be cumulative, and the amounts of the taxes herein levied shall be in addition to the amounts of all other license taxes imposed by the city by its general license code. 
(Ord. No. 1977-1, § 6, 4-4-77)
 
Secs. 5-37—5-39. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
 
Sec. 5-40. License fees.
Alcoholic beverage license taxes shall be as follows: 
(1)	Beer, retail:
On-premises$100.00
Off-premises75.00
(2)	Beer, wholesale$275.00
Wholesale beer dealers and distributors shall not sell to any retail outlet that does not have a current city beer, whiskey and wine license. 
(3)	Liquor and/or wine:
Liquor and wine club$750.00
Liquor and wine lounge500.00
Liquor and wine restaurant350.00
Liquor and wine special event100.00
Liquor and wine special, retail 
30 days or less100.00
Over 30 days250.00
Liquor, wholesale250.00
Wholesale, wine275.00
Wine, manufacture250.00
Wine, importer250.00
Wine or beer or both, warehouse100.00
Wine (retail) off-premises75.00
Wine (retail) on-premises or off-premises75.00
(Ord. of 9-15-80, § 1)
State law reference(s)—Levy of license taxes or fees authorized, Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-22. 
 
Sec. 5-41. Hours of operation.
(a)	Every business house in the city and its police jurisdiction licensed to sell alcoholic beverages shall close its doors and shall cease to do business at or before 2:00 a.m. and shall not carry on any business within the premises between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m., Monday through Friday each week. 
(b)	Every business house in the city and its police jurisdiction licensed to sell alcoholic beverages shall close its doors and shall cease to do business at or before 12:00 midnight on Saturday nights. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for a private club to dispense, sell, furnish, or serve any alcoholic beverage to any person between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on any Sunday. 
(d)	The provisions of subsections (a) and (b) shall not apply to business houses authorized to sell alcoholic beverages to be consumed off the premises only. 
(e)	Upon conviction for violation of the terms of this section the violator shall be punished as provided in section 1-8, and in addition, for the first offense such club's privilege license shall be suspended for a period of sixty (60) days; and upon conviction of a second offense such license shall be suspended for a period of six (6) months; and upon conviction of a third offense such license shall be revoked. 
(Ord. of 6-4-62, §§ 2—4; Ord. of 2-16-76(1), §§ 3, 4)
State law reference(s)—Hours of sale by wholesaler, Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-25(a)(1); sale on Sunday after 2:00 a.m., Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-25(a)(20), (21). 
 
Sec. 5-42. Revocation of license for state law violation.
(a)	The violation of any statute of the state relative to the conduct and operation of establishments holding license to sell alcoholic beverages, or the violation of any relative rule or regulation promulgated by the alcoholic beverage control board, shall be grounds for the revocation of the privilege license granted by the city to sell alcoholic beverage. 
(b)	Any holder of a city privilege license to sell alcoholic beverages found guilty of the violation of any statute, rule or regulation of the state relative to the conduct and operation of establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages shall have such city privilege license revoked by the city council and no license to sell alcoholic beverages shall be issued to any such person for a period of not less than six (6) months. 
(Ord. of 4-7-58, §§ 1, 2)
 
Secs. 5-43—5-49. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. LODGING TAX
 
Sec. 5-50. Levy of tax in city.
For the privilege of engaging or continuing within the city in the business activities hereinafter referred to, there is hereby levied, in addition to all other taxes of every kind now imposed by law, and shall be collected as herein provided, a privilege or license tax against the person on account of the business activities and in the amounts to be determined by the application of rates against gross receipts as follows: There is hereby levied and imposed, in addition to all other taxes of every kind now imposed by law, a privilege or license tax upon every person engaging in the business of renting or furnishing any room, lodging, or accommodation to transients in any hotel, motel, inn, tourist camp, tourist cabin or any other place in which rooms, lodgings, or accommodations are regularly furnished to transients for a consideration, in an amount to be determined by the application of the rate of one (1) percent of the charge for such room, rooms, lodgings, or accommodations, including the charge for use or rental of personal property and services furnished in such room. The tax shall not apply to rooms, lodgings or accommodations supplied for a period of thirty (30) continuous days or more in any place. 
(Ord. No. 1983-5, § 1, 12-19-83)
 
Sec. 5-51. Levy of tax in police jurisdiction.
For the privilege of engaging or continuing in the business activities hereinafter referred to within the police jurisdiction of the city outside of its corporate limits, there is hereby levied, in addition to all taxes of every kind now imposed by law, and shall be collected as herein provided, a privilege or license tax against the persons on account of the business activities and in the amounts to be determined by the application of rates against gross receipts as follows: There is hereby levied and imposed, in addition to all other taxes of every kind now imposed by law, a privilege or license tax upon every person engaging in the business of renting or furnishing any room, lodging, or accommodation to transients in any hotel, motel, inn, tourist camp, tourist cabin, or any other place in which rooms, lodgings, or accommodations are regularly furnished to transients for a consideration, in an amount to be determined by the application of the rate of one-half of one (1) percent of the charge for such room, rooms, lodgings, or accommodations, including the charge for use or rental of personal property and services furnished in such room; provided, however, there is exempted from the tax levied herein any rentals or services taxed under the provisions of section 5-17, the city privilege or license tax. The tax shall not apply to rooms, lodgings, or accommodations supplied for a period of thirty (30) continuous days or more in any place. 
(Ord. No. 1983-5, § 2, 12-19-83)
 
Sec. 5-52. State lodgings tax statutes applicable.
This article and the taxes herein levied shall be subject to all definitions, exceptions, exemptions, proceedings, requirements, rules, regulations, provisions, penalties, fines, punishments, and deductions that are applicable to the taxes levied by the state lodgings tax statutes, except where inapplicable or where herein otherwise provided, including all provisions of the state lodgings tax statutes for enforcement and collection of taxes. 
(Ord. No. 1983-5, § 3, 12-19-83)
State law reference(s)—For such statutes, see Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-26-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 5-53. Adding amount of tax to price.
Any person on whom the taxes levied by this article are imposed shall add the tax herein levied to the receipts from rental of rooms, lodgings or accommodations and collect same from the occupants of such rooms. 
(Ord. No. 1983-5, § 4, 12-19-83)
 
Sec. 5-54. Article cumulative.
This article shall not be construed to repeal any of the provisions of article I of this chapter, the general license code of the city, but shall be held to be cumulative, and the amounts of the taxes herein levied shall be in addition to the amounts of all other license taxes imposed by the city by its general license code. 
(Ord. No. 1983-5, § 5, 12-19-83)
 
Secs. 5-55—5-59. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE V. TOBACCO TAX 
 
Sec. 5-60. Definitions.
Unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the following terms used in this article shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Generally. Any words or phrases used in this article are not herein defined which are defined in Code of Alabama 1975, § 40-25-2, shall have the meanings ascribed to them by such section of the Code of Alabama. 
Container. The original box from which cigars are customarily sold at retail, and the individual package or can in which cigarettes and smoking tobacco are customarily sold at retail. 
Dealer. Any wholesale dealer, retail dealer, or storer as herein defined. 
Retail dealer. Any person, other than a wholesale dealer, who sells or delivers tobacco products within the city or its police jurisdiction. 
Retail price. The retail selling price of the tobacco products before adding the amount of the tax assessed herein or any other tobacco tax imposed under the laws of the state. 
Sold, Sale. Any transfer of title or possession, or both, exchange or barter, conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any means whatsoever for a consideration or any agreement therefor, including rewards, prizes or premiums of tobacco products given as a result of operation on punch boards, shooting galleries or other activities. 
Stamp. The stamp by the use of which the taxes levied under this article are paid. 
Store, stored. The storage or warehousing of tobacco products in any manner, or the withdrawal or use of the same for any purpose, other than for resale or reshipment outside the city or its police jurisdiction. 
Storer. A person who stored tobacco products in the city or in its police jurisdiction. 
Tobacco products. Cigarettes, cigars, cheroots, stogies, smoking tobacco, smokeless tobacco, chewing tobacco, snuff or any form of tobacco or tobacco products designed, packaged or intended for human ingestion, consumption or inhalation or any substitute thereof. Wholesale dealer. A person who sells or delivers within the city or its police jurisdiction, at wholesale only, tobacco products to retail dealers for the purpose of resale only. 
(Ord. of 6-18-51, § 1; Ord. No. 2003-07, 9-2-03)
 
Sec. 5-61. Levy of tax in city.
In addition to all taxes now imposed by law, every person who is engaged in the business of selling, storing or delivering tobacco products within the corporate limits of the city shall pay a license tax to the city and a license tax is hereby fixed and levied for engaging in such business within the corporate limits of the city, which license tax shall be in the following amounts (which amounts shall be in addition to all amounts of any license taxes levied with respect to such business in the general license code of the city): 
(1)	An amount equal to eight cents ($0.08) for each twenty (20) cigarettes or fraction of such number, contained in each package sold within the corporate limits of the city; 
(2)	An amount equal to two-fifths of one cent ($0.004) for each cigar sold within the corporate limits; and 
(3)	An amount equal to one cent ($0.02) for each ounce, or fraction thereof, contained in each individual package or can of smoking tobacco which is sold within the corporate limits; and 
(4)	An amount equal to eight cents $0.08) for each package, can, box, tumbler or other container of smokeless tobacco, chewing tobacco, snuff or any substitute thereof. 
(Ord. of 6-18-51, § 2; Ord. of 11-23-70, § 1; Ord. No. 2003-07, 9-2-03)
 
Sec. 5-62. Levy of tax in police jurisdiction.
In addition to all taxes now imposed by law, every person who is engaged in the business of selling, storing or delivering tobacco products within the police jurisdiction of the city shall pay a license tax to the city and a license tax is hereby fixed and levied for engaging in such business within the police jurisdiction of the city, which license tax shall be in the following amounts (which amounts shall be in addition to all amounts of any license taxes levied with respect to such business in the general license code of the city): 
(1)	An amount equal to four cents ($0.04) for each twenty (20) cigarettes or fraction of such number, contained in each package sold within the police jurisdiction of the city; 
(2)	An amount equal to two-fifths of one cent ($0.002) for each cigar sold within the police jurisdiction; and 
(3)	An amount equal to one cent ($0.01) for each ounce, or fraction thereof, contained in each individual package or can of smoking tobacco sold within the police jurisdiction; and 
(4)	An amount equal to four cents ($0.04) for each package, can, box, tumbler or other container of smokeless tobacco, chewing tobacco, snuff or any substitute thereof sold within the police jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 6-18-51, § 3; Ord. No. 2003-07, 9-2-03)
 
Sec. 5-63. Payment of tax.
The license tax imposed by this article shall be paid by affixing stamps in the manner and at the times herein set forth. 
(Ord. of 6-18-51, § 4)
 
Sec. 5-64. Stamp—Purchase.
The city clerk shall keep on hand for sale an adequate quantity of stamps to be affixed to each container of tobacco products in denominations as required under this article. Each such stamp shall have inscribed thereon the words "City of Opp Tobacco Tax," but such words need not be arranged in the foregoing order and may be abbreviated. Such stamps may be sold to wholesale dealers only by the city clerk at a price equal to ninety (90) percent of the full amount thereof, the remaining ten (10) percent of such full amount representing compensation to the wholesale dealer for the labor of affixing such stamps to the containers of the tobacco products. All other persons, except such wholesale dealers, must pay the full amount of the stamps, but no person shall be entitled to purchase any such number of stamps as shall cause the purchase price to include a fraction of a cent. 
(Ord. of 6-18-51, § 5)
 
Sec. 5-65. Same—Affixing.
Before any tobacco products shall be sold, stored or delivered within the corporate limits of the city or its police jurisdiction by any dealer, such dealer shall affix to each container of tobacco products a stamp or stamps obtained from the city clerk in the amounts set out in this article in payment of the license taxes imposed by this article. Every dealer shall, within six (6) hours after receipt of any tobacco products within the city or its police jurisdiction, unless sooner offered for sale, cause stamps to the requisite amount of the tax to be affixed as herein provided and shall cause the same to be cancelled by writing or stamping with waterproof ink across the face of each stamp such registered number as shall be furnished to such dealer by the city clerk. After such stamping has been begun it shall be continued with reasonable diligence by such dealer until all unstamped containers shall have been stamped, and the stamps cancelled as herein provided, but no stamp required to be affixed to any container shall, after the same has been affixed as herein provided, be again used in payment of any part of the tax levied under this article. Stamps in denominations equal to the amount of the tax shall be affixed to the container from or in which the tobacco products with respect to which the stamps are affixed are normally sold at retail; and shall be so affixed in such manner that their removal will require continued application of water or steam. In the case of cigars, sales of which are normally made from the original container, the stamps shall be affixed to the container in such a way that the stamps shall be torn in two or mutilated when the container is opened for the sale of the cigars. In the case of cigarettes and smoking tobacco, which are normally sold at retail in individual packages, the stamps shall be affixed to each individual package in such a way that such stamps shall be torn in two or mutilated when such package is opened. 
(Ord. of 6-18-51, § 6)
 
Sec. 5-66. Records; reports.
(a)	Every wholesale dealer shall, at the time of selling or delivering tobacco products into the city or its police jurisdiction, make a true duplicate invoice of the same, which shall show full and complete details of the sale or delivery of such tobacco products and the prices thereof. Every wholesale dealer and every retail dealer shall keep a record of the purchase, sale, exchange or receipt of tobacco products. All such invoices and cancelled checks and other memoranda pertaining to any such purchase, sale, exchange or receipt shall be retained for a period of three (3) years and shall be subject to inspection of the city clerk or duly authorized deputy, who shall have the power and authority to enter upon the premises of any dealer at all reasonable times for the purpose of examining such invoices, records, cancelled checks and other memoranda. 
(b)	Any person who purchases or receives in any manner whatsoever tobacco products which do not have stamps affixed in the manner required by this article shall, within three (3) days after receipt of such tobacco products, report the receipt or purchase, as the case may be, of such tobacco products to the city clerk, giving the date of purchase or receipt, the name of the person or firm from whom purchased or received, and a list describing the tobacco products so purchased or received and the purchase price thereof. Such report must be made by certified or registered mail or in person. 
(Ord. of 6-18-51, § 7)
 
Sec. 5-67. Illegal acts.
Among others, the following acts and omissions shall be unlawful: 
(1)	For any person who is required by this article to affix stamps to any container of tobacco products to fail to affix such stamps or to fail to cancel such stamps in the manner and within the time required by this article. 
(2)	For any person to sell, offer for sale, store or deliver within the city or its police jurisdiction any tobacco products where stamps have not been affixed and cancelled as provided in this article. 
(3)	For any person to have in such person's possession or under such person's control any tobacco products with respect to which stamps have not been affixed in the manner required by this article for more than six (6) hours after receipt of such tobacco products on the premises of such person. The possession of each container of tobacco products not having proper stamps affixed as required by this article shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(4)	It shall be unlawful to manufacture, buy, sell, offer for sale, or possess, or attempt so to do, any reproduction or counterfeit of the stamps provided for in this article, or to possess tools, implements, instruments or materials of any kind necessary or appropriate to reproduce or counterfeit such stamps, or to alter or cause to be altered any stamps herein provided for. 
(5)	It shall be unlawful to remove from a container or otherwise prepare any stamps with intent to use or cause the same to be used, after it has already been used, or to buy, sell, offer for sale or give away any washed, removed, altered or restored stamp to any person, or to have in possession any such washed or removed or restored or altered stamp, or, for the purpose of indicating payment of any tax hereunder, to reuse any stamp which has theretofore been used for the payment of any tax provided in this article, or to sell any stamp provided for herein, excepting, however, sales made by the city clerk. 
(6)	It shall be unlawful to reuse or refill with tobacco products any container from which tobacco products have been removed and with respect to which the tax has theretofore been paid. 
(7)	It shall be unlawful for any person who is in this article required to keep records to fail or omit to keep the same in the manner herein provided, or to refuse to permit the city clerk or duly authorized deputy to inspect the same at any reasonable hour, or to interfere with or obstruct the city clerk or duly authorized deputy in the making of any such inspection. 
(8)	It shall be unlawful for any person who is herein required to file statements with the city clerk to fail or omit to make or file any statement herein provided within the time herein specified, or to make any false statement therein, and such offense shall be a continuing offense against the city and each day during which such person shall sell, store or deliver tobacco products in the city or its police jurisdiction during such default shall constitute a separate offense. 
(9)	It shall be unlawful for any person who is required to pay the license tax herein provided for to fail or omit to pay the same within the time herein specified, and such offense shall be a continuing offense against the city and each day during which such person shall sell, store or deliver tobacco products in the city or its police jurisdiction during such default shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 6-18-51, § 8)
 
Sec. 5-68. Construction.
(a)	This article shall not be construed to tax interstate commerce or any business of the United States government or any branch or agency thereof. 
(b)	This article shall not be construed to apply to tobacco products stores for the purpose of resale or reshipment outside the city and its police jurisdiction and which are actually so resold or reshipped. 
(c)	This article shall not be construed to repeal any of the provisions of article I of this chapter, the general license code of the city, but shall be held to be cumulative. 
(d)	Whenever the requisite amount of stamps has been affixed to the containers of tobacco products, as required herein, this article shall not be construed to require additional stamps to be affixed thereto in case of subsequent sales, deliveries or storage; provided, that where such tobacco products have been properly stamped for sale, delivery or storage within the police jurisdiction, then before the same may be sold, delivered or stored in the corporate limits of the city there must be properly affixed to such tobacco products and properly cancelled an equal amount of stamps to those already affixed. 
(Ord. of 6-18-51, § 9)
 
Sec. 5-69. Time of payment of tax.
The license tax imposed by this article shall be paid from time to time as stamps are purchased from the city clerk and affixed as provided herein. 
(Ord. of 6-18-51, § 10)
 
Secs. 5-70—5-79. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VI. TAXICABS
 
Sec. 5-80. Definition.
The term "taxicab," as herein used, shall embrace and include all automobiles and other vehicles of like construction and operation, employed in the carriage of passengers for hire on the public streets and highways within the city, but shall not include any common carrier of passengers coming under the regulation and supervision of the state public service commission. 
(Ord. of 10-1-45, § 2)
 
Sec. 5-81. Driver permit—Required.
Each person desiring to drive a taxicab in the city shall procure a permit from the city clerk before doing so. 
(Ord. of 10-1-45, § 9)
 
Sec. 5-82. Same—Application; qualifications; period.
(a)	Any person desiring to secure a permit as a driver of a taxicab shall make application in writing therefor to the city clerk upon a form to be furnished by the city clerk, which shall be in such form that the applicant shall give all of the information required in this article and the same shall be sworn to by the applicant. The application shall be endorsed by three (3) reputable and responsible citizens of the city, who shall certify that the applicant is a person of good habits, honest, sober, and not of a reckless disposition. 
(b)	The applicant shall have the free use of both hands and feet and shall not be less than eighteen (18) years of age; and shall have had at least two (2) years' experience in operating automobiles. 
(c)	The applicant shall state experience in operating an automobile and record of accidents suffered, if any. 
(d)	The applicant shall be familiar with the ordinances of the city governing the use and operation of motor vehicles, and the use of public streets. 
(e)	The application for a permit shall be accompanied by a fee of one dollar ($1.00) and the photograph of applicant as hereinafter provided. 
(f)	If such applicant is granted a permit as a driver of a taxicab for hire, such person should be authorized for that permit year, unless the permit has been revoked by provisions of this article, or some other ordinance of the city. Each year the applicant may have the permit renewed upon the payment of one dollar ($1.00) for the current license year, unless the permit has been revoked under the provisions of this article, or some other ordinance of the city. 
(g)	Each applicant for a permit to drive a taxicab within the city shall accompany the application with a recent photograph of such person's self approximately two (2) inches by three (3) inches in size, and upon issuance of the permit shall attach the photograph to the permit and keep the same at all times securely fastened on the rear of the front seat of the vehicle. 
(Ord. of 10-1-45, §§ 10(a)—(d), (f), 11, 12)
 
Sec. 5-83. Same—Examination of applicant.
The city clerk shall examine into the qualifications and fitness of any person who may desire to drive a taxicab in the city, so that the safety and comfort of the general public shall not be endangered by the operation of such taxicab. In examining persons who may apply for examination, as to their capacity to drive taxicabs within the city, the city clerk shall enforce the rules and regulations contained in this article. 
(Ord. of 10-1-45, § 10)
 
Sec. 5-84. Same—Conditions to issuance; appeal.
(a)	The city clerk shall not grant an applicant a permit unless such clerk decides that the applicant is a fit person to be granted a license under the provisions of this article, but should the city clerk decide that the applicant should not be granted a permit under the provisions of this article, the applicant may appeal to the city council. Upon hearing the appeal, the city council may direct the city clerk to issue a permit to the applicant, or dismiss the applicant's appeal. 
(b)	A permit shall not be issued to any person to operate a taxicab unless such person is recommended in writing by three (3) reputable and responsible citizens of the city. 
(Ord. of 10-1-45, § 10(e), (i))
 
Sec. 5-85. Same—Driving without; misuse of permit.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or hold such person's self out as a driver of any taxicab, without having a permit as such driver, or to borrow or lend such permit, or to use such permit of another. 
(Ord. of 10-1-45, § 13)
 
Sec. 5-86. Insurance—Required.
Each person desiring to engage in the city in the business of operating a taxicab for hire shall be required, before doing or commencing any such business, and before the issuance of any license therefor, to post and file with the city clerk a policy of liability insurance in the usual form of such liability policies and containing the usual clauses provided for by the laws of the state for public carriers. Such policy shall be in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for both property damage and each actionable case of personal injury; except that a provision may be included limiting the total personal injury liability for any one accident or act of negligence to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). A separate policy shall be required for each and every taxicab, except that a blanket policy may be posted and filed by any person operating more than one taxicab, provided that such blanket policy covers separately each taxicab so operated, in the amounts as above required. Such policies shall at all times during the operation of a taxicab insured thereby, be kept in full force and effect and any cancellation of same prior to the posting and filing of a new or renewed policy shall result in immediate revocation of the license to operate the taxicab or taxicabs affected. 
(Ord. of 10-1-45, § 1)
 
Sec. 5-87. Same—Approval and maintenance.
It shall be unlawful for any person, and the agent, servant, or employee of any person, to operate a taxicab within the city, without first having filed and obtained the approval of such liability policy as hereinabove prescribed, and without maintaining such policy as herein prescribed. 
(Ord. of 10-1-45, § 3)
 
Sec. 5-88. Records.
(a)	The city clerk shall keep a record of the name, age, address, and occupation of all persons licensed as taxicab drivers, and if any driver of a taxicab shall change such person's residence at any time before the expiration of permit, such shall notify the city clerk of such act. 
(b)	The city clerk shall keep a record of the name, address and occupation of the person who recommends the applicant for a permit, and also the sureties on the applicant's bond. 
(Ord. of 10-1-45, § 10(g), (h))
 
Sec. 5-89. Minimum age of driver; physical capabilities.
No person shall drive or operate a taxicab who is less than eighteen (18) years of age, or incapacitated from using both feet and both hands to operate the vehicle. 
(Ord. of 10-1-45, § 6)
 
Sec. 5-90. Passenger capacity.
It shall be unlawful to carry or transport for hire in any taxicab operating for hire within the city or the police jurisdiction thereof, a number of persons in excess of the rated capacity of such vehicle. The capacity of such vehicle shall be measured by the passenger capacity as fixed in the application for a city license for such vehicle. 
(Ord. of 10-1-45, § 17)
 
Sec. 5-91. Stopping at accident scene; reporting.
In case of accident or injury, in which a taxicab is a participant, the driver shall stop at once and ascertain the extent of the injury and render assistance, and shall give such driver's name and address and license number, and report the accident to the chief of police. 
(Ord. of 10-1-45, § 7)
 
Sec. 5-92. Selling alcoholic beverage; transporting person for immoral purpose.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab who has heretofore been, or who may hereafter be, convicted of violating any ordinance of the city, or the law of the state, in regard to selling any alcoholic beverage or transporting a person for immoral purposes. 
(Ord. of 10-1-45, § 8)
 
Sec. 5-93. Violations.
Any driver or owner of any taxicab who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or who shall neglect to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall for each offense, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-8, and in addition to such punishment, the permit may be suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. of 10-1-45, §§ 4, 18)
 
Secs. 5-94—5-100. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VII. RENTAL TAX
 
Sec. 5-101. Levied.
There is hereby levied, in addition to all other taxes of every kind now imposed by law, and shall be collected as herein provided, a privilege or license tax on each person engaging or continuing within the city in the business of leasing or renting tangible personal property at the rate of three (3) percent of the gross proceeds derived by the lessor from lease or rental of tangible personal property; provided, that the said privilege or license tax on each person engaging or continuing within the city in the business of leasing or renting any automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer shall be at the rate of one and one-half (1.5) percent of the gross proceeds derived by the lessor from the lease or rental of such automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer; provided further, that the tax levied in this article shall not apply to any leasing or rental, as lessor, by the state, or any municipality or county in the state, or any public corporation organized under the laws of the state, including without limiting the generality of the foregoing any corporation organized under the provisions of Code of Alabama 1975, sections 11-54-80 through 11-54-101; provided further, that the privilege or license tax on each person or firm engaging or continuing within the city in the business of the leasing and rental of linens and garments shall be at the rate of three (3) percent of the gross proceeds derived by the lessor from the lease or rental of such linens and garments. 
(Ord. No. 2000-1, § 1, 3-6-00)
 
Sec. 5-102. Provisions of state rental tax statutes applicable to this article and taxes herein levied.
The taxes levied by section 5-101 of this article shall be subject to all definitions, exceptions, exemptions, proceedings, requirements, rules, regulations, provisions, discounts, penalties, fines, punishments, and deductions as are provided by Code of Alabama 1975, sections 40-2A-7 and 40-12-200 to 40-12-224, inclusive. 
(Ord. No. 2000-1, § 2, 3-6-00)
 
Sec. 5-103. Tax levied in police jurisdiction.
Every person who is subject to the provisions of this article leasing tangible personal property within the police jurisdiction of the city shall remit one half of the rental or license tax under the preceding section for the leasing or renting of property covered under the terms and provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2000-1, § 3, 3-6-00)
 
Secs. 5-104—5-120. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VIII. SCHOOL SALES TAX 
 
Sec. 5-121. Definitions.
All words, terms, and phrases as defined in Code of Alabama 1975, §§ 40-23-1 et seq. and 11-51-1 et seq., as amended, providing for the levy of a state sales tax shall wherever used in this ordinance, have the same meanings respectively ascribed to them in said sections, except where the context herein clearly indicates a different meaning. In addition, the following words, terms and phrases where used in this article shall have the following respective meanings except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Month means the calendar month. 
State sales tax means the tax imposed by the sales tax statutes. 
State sales tax statutes means Code of Alabama § 40-23-1 et seq., as amended. 
The City of Opp, Alabama or City of Opp or Opp means the City of Opp, Alabama and everything within its corporate municipal limits. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02, § 1, 6-18-07)
 
Sec. 5-122. Authority and construction.
This article is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Code of Alabama 1975, § 11-51-200, as amended, and shall not be held or construed to cancel or repeal any provision of any other ordinance of, or local act pertaining to the City of Opp, Alabama, under which a sales or gross receipts tax is levied, but shall be cumulative therewith. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02, § 2, 6-18-07)
 
Sec. 5-123. Sales tax levied.
There is levied, in addition to all other taxes of every kind now imposed by law, and shall be collected as herein provided, a privilege or license tax against the person on account of the business activities and in the amount to be determined by the application of rates against gross sales, or gross receipts, as the case may be, as follows: 
(1)	Upon every person, firm, or corporation, (excluding the State of Alabama Alcoholic Beverage Control Board in the sale of alcoholic beverages of all kinds, but including all other institutions of higher learning in the state, whether the institutions be denominational, state, county, or municipal institutions, any association or other agency or instrumentality of the institutions) engaged or continuing within the City of Opp, in the business of selling at retail any tangible personal property whatsoever, including merchandise and commodities of every kind and character, (not including, however, bonds or other evidences of debts or stocks, nor sales of material and supplies to any person for use in fulfilling a contract for the painting, repair, or reconditioning of vessels, barges, ships, other watercraft, and commercial fishing vessels of over five (5) tons load displacement as registered with the U.S. Coast Guard and licensed by the State of Alabama Department of Conservation and Natural Resources), an amount equal to one (1) percent of the gross proceeds of sales of the business except where a different amount is expressly provided herein. Provided, however, that any person engaging or continuing in business as a retailer and wholesaler or jobber shall pay the tax required on the gross proceeds of retail sales of the business at the rates specified, when his or her books are kept so as to show separately the gross proceeds of sales of each business, and when his or her books are not kept he or she shall pay the tax as a retailer, on the gross sales of the business. 
Where any used part including tires of an automotive vehicle or a truck trailer, semitrailer, or house trailer is taken in trade, or in a series of trades, as a credit or part payment on the sale of a new or rebuilt part or tire, the tax levied herein shall be paid on the net difference, that is, the price of the new or used part or tire sold less the credit for the used part or tire taken in trade, provided, however, this provision shall not be construed to include batteries. 
(2)	Upon every person, firm, or corporation engaged or continuing within the City of Opp, in the business of conducting or operating places of amusement or entertainment, billiard and pool rooms, bowling alleys, amusement devices, musical devices, theaters, opera houses, moving picture shows, vaudevilles, amusement parks, athletic contests, including wrestling matches, prize fights, boxing and wrestling exhibitions, football and baseball games, (including athletic contests, conducted by or under the auspices of any educational institution within this state, or any athletic association thereof, or other association whether the institution or association be a denominational, a state, or county, or a municipal institution, or association or a state, county, or city school, or other institution, association or school), skating rinks, race tracks, golf courses, or any other place at which any exhibition, display, amusement, or entertainment is offered to the public or place or places where an admission fee is charged, including public bathing places, public dance halls of every kind and description within the county, an amount equal to one (1) percent of the gross receipts of any such business. Provided, however, notwithstanding any language to the contrary in the prior portion of this subdivision, the tax provisions so specified shall not apply to any athletic event conducted by a public primary or secondary school or any football playoff conducted by or under the auspices of the Alabama High School Athletic Association. The tax amount which would have been collected pursuant to this subdivision shall continue to be collected by the public primary or secondary school but shall be retained by the school which collected it and shall be used by the school for school purposes. 
(3)	Upon every person, firm, or corporation engaged or continuing within the City of Opp, in the business of selling at retail machines used in mining, quarrying, compounding, processing, and manufacturing of tangible personal property an amount equal to one-half (½) of one (1) percent of the gross proceeds of the sale of the machines. The term "machine," as herein used, shall include machinery which is used for mining, quarrying, compounding, processing, or manufacturing tangible personal property, and the parts of the machines, attachments, and replacements therefor, which are made or manufactured for use on or in the operation of the machines and which are necessary to the operation of the machines and are customarily so used. 
(4)	Upon every person, firm, or corporation engaged or continuing within the City of Opp, in the business of selling at retail any automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semitrailer, or house trailer, or mobile home set-up materials and supplies including but not limited to steps, blocks, anchoring, cable pipes, and any other materials pertaining thereto an amount equal to one-fourth (¼) of one (1) percent of the gross proceeds of sale of the automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semitrailer, or house trailer, or mobile home set-up materials and supplies provided, however, where a person subject to the tax provided for in this subdivision withdraws from his or her stock in trade any automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semitrailer, or house trailer for use by him or her or by his or her employee or agent in the operation of the business, there shall be paid, in lieu of the tax levied herein, a fee of five dollars ($5.00) per year or part thereof during which the automotive vehicle, truck trailer, semitrailer, or house trailer shall remain the property of the person. Each year or part thereof shall begin with the day or anniversary date, as the case may be of such withdrawal and shall run for the twelve (12) succeeding months or part thereof during which the automotive vehicle, truck trailer, semitrailer, or house trailer shall remain the property of the person. 
Where any used automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semitrailer, or house trailer is taken in trade or in a series of trades, as a credit or part payment on the sale of a new or used vehicle, the tax levied herein shall be paid on the net difference, that is, the price of the new or used vehicle sold less the credit for the used vehicle taken in trade. 
Sales of automobiles, motorcycles, trucks, truck trailers, or semitrailers that will be registered or titled outside Alabama, that are exported or removed from Alabama within seventy-two (72) hours by the purchaser or his or her agent for first use outside Alabama are not subject to this sales tax. Sales of other vehicles such as mobile homes, motor bikes, all terrain vehicles, and boats do not qualify for the export exemption provision and are taxable unless the dealer can provide factual evidence that the vehicle was delivered outside of Alabama or to a common carrier for transportation outside Alabama. In order for the sale to be exempt from this tax, the information relative to the exempt sale shall be documented on forms approved by the Alabama Department of Revenue. 
(5)	Upon every person, firm, or corporation engaged or continuing within the City of Opp, in the business of selling through coin-operated dispensing machines, food and food products for human consumption, not including beverages other than coffee, milk, milk products, and substitutes therefor, there is levied a tax equal to one (1) percent of the cost of the food, food products, and beverages sold through the machines, which cost for the purpose of this subdivision shall be the gross proceeds of sales of the business. 
(6)	Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged or continuing within the City of Opp, in the business of selling at retail any machine, machinery or equipment which is used in planting, cultivating and harvesting farm products, or used in connection with the production of agricultural produce or products, livestock or poultry on farms, and the parts of such machines, machinery or equipment, attachments and replacements therefor which are made or manufactured for use on or in the operation of such machine, machinery or equipment, and which are necessary to and customarily used in the operation of such machine, machinery or equipment, an amount equal to one-fourth (¼) of one (1) percent of the gross proceeds of the sale thereof; provided, that the one-fourth (¼) of one (1) percent rate herein prescribed with respect to parts, attachments and replacements shall not apply to any automotive vehicle or trailer designed primarily for public highway use, except farm trailers used primarily in the production and harvesting of agricultural commodities. 
Where any used machine, machinery or equipment which is used in planting, cultivating and harvesting farm products, or used in connection with the production of agricultural produce or products, livestock and poultry on farms is taken in trade or in a series of trades as a credit or part payment on a sale of a new or used machine, machinery or equipment, the tax levied herein shall be paid on the net difference, that is, the price of the new or used machine, machinery or equipment sold, less the credit for the used machine, machinery or equipment taken in trade. 
(7)	Upon every person, firm, or corporation purchasing within the City of Opp, other than at wholesale, any manufactured home as defined in Code of Alabama, § 40-12-255n, any automotive vehicle, motorboat, truck trailer, trailer, semitrailer, or travel trailer required to be registered or licensed with the judge of probate of any county in this state from any person, firm or corporation that is not a licensed dealer engaged in selling manufactured homes, automotive vehicles, motorboats, truck trailers, trailers, semitrailers, or travel trailers in an amount equal to one-fourth (¼) of one (1) percent of the purchase price. 
Where any used manufactured home, automotive vehicle, motorboat, truck trailer, trailer, semitrailer, or house trailer is taken in trade or in a series of trades as a credit or part payment on the sale of a new or used manufactured home, automotive vehicle, motorboat, truck trailer, trailer, semitrailer, or house trailer the tax levied in this article shall be paid on the net difference, that is, the price of the new or used manufactured home, automotive vehicle, motorboat, truck trailer, trailer, semitrailer, or house trailer sold less the credit for the used manufactured home, automotive vehicle, motorboat, truck trailer, trailer, semitrailer, or house trailer taken in trade. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02, § 3, 6-18-07)
 
Sec. 5-124. Certain sales exempt.
There are exempted from the provisions of this article and from the computation of the amount of the tax imposed thereby the gross receipts of any business and the gross proceeds of all sales which are presently exempted under the state sales tax statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02, § 4, 6-18-07)
 
Sec. 5-125. Payment of taxes; reports.
(a)	All taxes levied by subsections 5-123(1)—(6) of this article shall be paid to and collected by the City of Opp or its designee at the same time and in the same manner as state sales taxes are collected. On or prior to the date the tax is due, each person subject to the tax shall file with the City of Opp or its designee a report in the form prescribed by the City of Opp or its designee. The report shall set forth, with respect to all sales and business transactions that are required to be used as a measure of the tax levied, a correct statement of the gross proceeds of all the sales and gross receipts of all business transactions. The report shall also include items of information pertinent to the tax as the City of Opp or its designee may require. Any person subject to the tax levied by this article may defer reporting credit sales until after their collection, and in the event the person defers reporting them, the person shall thereafter include in each monthly report all credit collections made during the preceding month, and shall pay the tax due at the time of filing the report. 
(b)	Taxes levied by subsection 5-123(7) shall be paid to and collected by the Probate Judge of Covington County in accordance with the procedures prescribed by Code of Alabama 1975, §§ 40-23-104 and 40-23-107, as amended. The probate judge shall remit the revenue collected hereunder to the City of Opp for distribution pursuant to the provisions of section 5-130 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02, § 5, 6-18-07)
 
Sec. 5-126. Collection.
Each person engaging or continuing in a business subject to the tax levied by subsections 5-123(1)—(6) of this article, shall add to the sales price and collect from the purchaser the amount due by the taxpayer because of the sale. It shall be unlawful for any person subject to the tax to fail or refuse to add to the sales price and to collect from the purchaser the amount required to be added to the sales price. It shall be unlawful for any person subject to the tax levied by subsections 5-123(1)—(6) of this article to refund or offer to refund all or any portion of the amount collected, to absorb all or any portion of the amount to be collected, or advertise directly or indirectly the refund or absorption of all or any portion of the tax. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02, § 6, 6-18-07)
 
Sec. 5-127. Enforcement.
The tax levied by this article shall constitute a debt due the City of Opp. The tax, together with any interest and penalties, shall constitute and be secured by a lien upon the property of any person from whom the tax is due or who is required to collect the tax. The City of Opp or its designee shall collect the tax, enforce this article, and have and exercise the same rights, remedies, powers and authority, including the right to adopt and implement the same procedures, as would be available to the Alabama Department of Revenue if the tax levied by this article was being administered, enforced and collected by the Alabama Department of Revenue. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02, § 7, 6-18-07)
 
Sec. 5-128. Powers, duties and obligations regarding tax.
All provisions of the state sales tax statutes with respect to the payment, assessment, and collection of the state sales tax, making of reports, keeping and preserving records, penalties for failure to pay the tax, promulgating rules and regulations with respect to the state sales tax, and the administration and enforcement of the state sales tax statutes which are not inconsistent with this article shall apply to the tax levied under this article. The City of Opp or its designee shall have and exercise the same powers, duties, and obligations with respect to the tax levied under this article that are imposed on the state commissioner of revenue and the Alabama Department of Revenue by the state sales tax statutes. All provisions of the state sales tax statutes that are made applicable by this article to the tax levied under this article, and to the administration and enforcement of this article, are incorporated by reference and made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02, § 8, 6-18-07)
 
Sec. 5-129. Collection fees.
The City of Opp or its designee may charge as its fee for the cost of collection of the taxes levied under subsections 5-123(1)—(6) of this article no more than five (5) percent of the total amount of the tax proceeds collected under this article or the city's actual cost for collection, whichever is less. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02, § 9, 6-18-07)
 
Sec. 5-130. Distribution of taxes.
The tax proceeds, including those collected by the probate judge, shall then be distributed on a monthly basis to the Opp city schools and shall be deposited in an account earmarked for the construction of a new elementary school. The Opp City Schools Board of Education is further authorized to pledge the revenue deposited to such account, along with any interest income thereon to pay a bond issue for the construction of a new school. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02, § 10, 6-18-07)
 
Secs. 5-131—5-150. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IX. SCHEDULE OF LICENSES AND FEES 
 
Sec. 5-151. Levy of tax.
Pursuant to the Code of Alabama, the following is hereby declared to be and is adopted as the business license code and schedule of licenses for the municipality for the year beginning January 1, 2007, and for each subsequent year thereafter. There is hereby levied and assessed a business license fee for the privilege of doing any kind of business, trade, profession or other activity in the municipality, or the police jurisdiction, by whatever name called. 
(Ord. No. 2007-06, § 1, 12-17-07)
 
Sec. 5-152. Definitions.
Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the following terms shall have the following meaning as set forth below: 
Business means any commercial or industrial activity or any enterprise, trade, profession, occupation, or livelihood, including the lease or rental of residential or nonresidential real estate, whether or not carried on for gain or profit, and whether or not engaged in as a principal or as an independent contractor, which is engaged in, or caused to be engaged in, within a municipality. 
Business license means an annual license issued by the municipality for the privilege of doing any kind of business, trade, profession, or any other activity in the municipality, by whatever name called, which document is required to be conspicuously posted or displayed except to the extent the taxpayer's business license tax or other financial information is listed thereon. 
Business license remittance form means any business license return, renewal reminder notice, or other writing on which the taxpayer calculates the business license tax liability for all or part of the license year and remits the amount so calculated with the form. 
Department or department of revenue means the Alabama Department of Revenue, as created under [Code of Alabama,] § 40-2-1 et seq. 
Designee means an agent or employee of the municipality authorized to administer or collect, or both the municipality's business license taxes, which may include another taxing jurisdiction, the department of revenue, or a "private auditing or collecting firm" as defined in Code of Alabama, § 40-2A-3. 
Gross receipts means the measure of any and all receipts of a business from whatever source derived, to the maximum extent permitted by applicable laws and constitutional provisions, to be used in calculating the amount due for a business license. Provided, however, that: 
(1)	Gross receipts shall not include any of the following taxes collected by the business on behalf of any taxing jurisdiction or the federal government. All taxes which are imposed on the ultimate consumer, collected by the taxpayer and remitted by or on behalf of the taxpayer to the taxing authority, whether state, local or federal, including utility gross receipts levied pursuant to Article 3, Chapter 21, Title 40; license taxes levied pursuant to Article 2, Chapter 21, Title 40; or reimbursements to professional employer organizations of federal, state or local payroll taxes or unemployment insurance contributions; but no other deductions or exclusions from gross receipts shall be allowed except as provided in this article. 
(2)	A different basis for calculating the business license may be used by the municipality with respect to certain categories of taxpayers as prescribed in [Code of Alabama,] § 11-51-90B. 
(3)	For a utility or other entity described in [Code of Alabama,] § 11-51-129, gross receipts shall be limited to the gross receipts derived from the retail furnishing of utility services within the municipality during the preceding year that are taxed under Article 3 of Chapter 21 of Title 40, except that nothing herein shall affect any existing contract or agreement between a municipality and a utility or other entity. The gross receipts derived from the furnishing of utility services shall not be subject to further business license taxation by the municipality. 
(4)	Gross receipts shall not include dividends or other distributions received by a corporation, or proceeds from borrowing, the sale of a capital asset, the repayment of the principal portion of a loan, the issuance of stock or other equity investments, or capital contributions, or the undistributed earnings of subsidiary entities. 
License form means any business license application form, renewal reminder notice, business license remittance form, or business license return by whatever name called. 
License officer or municipal license officer means the municipal employee charged by the municipality with the primary responsibility of administering the municipality's business license tax ordinance and related matters thereto. 
License year means the calendar year. 
Municipality means any town or city in this state that levies a business license tax from time to time. The term shall also include the town's or city's police jurisdiction, where the business license tax is levied in the police jurisdiction. 
Person means any individual, association, estate, trust, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other entity of any kind, except for any nonprofit corporation formed under the laws of Alabama which is operated to enable municipalities that become members of such nonprofit corporation to finance or refinance capital projects and related undertakings, on a cooperative basis, and whose board of directors or other governing body consists primarily of elected officials of the municipality. 
Taxing jurisdiction means any municipality that levies a business license tax, whether or not a business license tax is levied within its police jurisdiction, or the department of revenue acting as agent on behalf of a municipality pursuant to [Code of Alabama,] § 11-51-180 et seq., as the context requires. 
Taxpayer means any person subject to or liable under this chapter for any business license tax; any person required to file a return with respect to, or pay or remit the business license tax levied under this chapter or to report any information or value to the taxing jurisdiction; or any person required to obtain, or who holds any interest in, any business license issued by the taxing jurisdiction; or any person that may be affected by any act or refusal to act by the taxing jurisdiction under this chapter, or to keep any required by this chapter. 
U.S.C. means the applicable title and section of the United States Code, as amended from time to time. 
Other terms means other capitalized or specialized terms used in this ordinance, and not defined above, shall have the same meanings ascribed to them in Code of Alabama, § 40-2A-3, unless the context therein otherwise specifies. 
(Ord. No. 2007-06, § 2, 12-17-07)
 
Sec. 5-153. License term; minimums.
The license term and the minimum amount for a business license are as follows: 
(1)	Full year. Every person who commences business before the first day of July shall be subject to and shall pay the annual license for such business in full. Unless otherwise specified in the enclosed schedules, the minimum annual license shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(2)	Half year. Every person who commences business on or after July 1st, shall be subject to and shall pay one-half (½) the annual license for such business for that calendar year. 
(3)	Issue fee. For each license issued there shall be an issue fee collected of ten dollars ($10.00) and said issue fee shall be collected in the same manner as the license tax. 
(4)	Annual renewal. Except as provided in subsections a. or b., the business license shall be renewed annually on or before the 31st day of January each year. 
a.	If the due date for payment of any business license falls on a weekend or a holiday recognized by the municipality from time to time, the due date shall automatically be extended until the next business day. 
b.	Insurance company annual license renewals shall be renewed in accordance with Code of Alabama, § 11-51-122, which states that each year, each insurance company shall furnish the municipality a statement in writing duly certified showing the full and true amount of gross premiums received during the preceding year and shall accompany such statement with the amount of license tax due according to the licensing schedule. Failure to furnish such statement or to pay such sum shall subject the company and its agents to those penalties as prescribed for doing business without a license as provided for in the municipal code. 
c.	On or before December 31 of each year, a renewal reminder shall be mailed to each licensee that purchased a business license during the current year. Said renewal notice shall be mailed via regular U.S. mail to the licensee's last known address of record with the municipality. Licensees are required to furnish the municipality any address changes for their business prior to December 1st in order for them to receive their notice. 
d.	Business license renewal payments received by the municipality shall be applied to the current renewal only when any and other debts the licensee owes to the municipality are first paid in full. No business license shall be issued if the current renewal payment does not meet said prior obligations and the current renewal. Failure to pay such sums shall subject the licensee and its agents to those penalties as prescribed for doing business without a license provided for in the Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2007-06, § 3, 12-17-07)
 
Sec. 5-154. License shall be location specific.
(a)	For each place at which any business is carried on, a separate license shall be paid, and any person desiring to engage in any business for which a license is required shall designate the place at which business is carried on, and the license to be issued shall designate such place, and such license shall authorize the carrying on of such business only at the place designated. 
(b)	Every person dealing in two (2) or more of the articles, or engaging in two (2) or more of the businesses, vocations, occupations or professions scheduled herein, shall take out and pay for a license for each line of business. 
(c)	A taxpayer subject to the license authorized by this ordinance that is engaged in business in other municipalities, may account for its gross receipts so that the part of its gross receipts attributable to its branch offices will not be subject to the business license imposed by this article. To establish a bona fide branch office, the taxpayer must demonstrate proof of all following criteria: 
(1)	The taxpayer must demonstrate the continuing existence of an actual facility located outside the police jurisdiction in which its principal business office is located, such as a retail store, outlet, business office, showroom, or warehouse, to which employees and/or independent contractors are assigned or located during regular normal working hours. 
(2)	The taxpayer must maintain books and records, which reasonably indicate a segregation or allocation of the taxpayer's gross receipts to the particular facility of facilities. 
(3)	The taxpayer must provide proof that separate telephone listings, signs, and other indications of its separate activity are in existence. 
(4)	Billing and/or collection activities relating to the business conducted at the branch office or offices are performed by an employee or other representative, of the taxpayer who has such responsibility for the branch office. 
(5)	All business claimed by a branch office or offices must be conducted by and through said office or offices. 
(6)	The taxpayer must supply proof that all applicable business licenses with respect to the branch office or offices have been issued. 
(d)	Nothing herein shall be construed as exempting businesses from payment of a license on the basis of a lack of physical location. 
(Ord. No. 2007-06, § 4, 12-17-07)
 
Sec. 5-155. Restriction on transfer of license.
No license shall be transferred except with the consent of the council or other governing body of the municipality or of the director of finance or other chief revenue officer or his or her designee, and no license shall be transferred to reflect a physical change of address of the taxpayer within the municipality more than once during a license year and never from one taxpayer to another. Provided that a mere change in the name or ownership of a taxpayer that is a corporation, partnership, limited liability company or other form of legal entity now or hereafter recognized by the laws of Alabama shall not constitute a transfer for purposes of this chapter, unless (1) the change requires the taxpayer to obtain a new federal employer identification number or Department of Revenue taxpayer identification number or (2), in the discretion of the municipality, the subject license is one for the sale of alcoholic beverages. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a municipality from requiring a new business license application and approval for an alcoholic beverage license. 
(Ord. No. 2007-06, § 5, 12-17-07)
 
Sec. 5-156. Unlawful to do business without a license.
It shall be unlawful for any person, taxpayer, or agent of a person or taxpayer to engage in businesses or vocations in the municipality for which a license is required without first having procured a license. A violation of this section of the article passed hereunder fixing a license shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and if a willful violation, by imprisonment, not to exceed six (6) months, or both, at the discretion of the court trying the same. Each day shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2007-06, § 6, 12-17-07)
 
Sec. 5-157. License must be posted.
Every license shall be posted in a conspicuous place, where said business, trade or occupation is carried on, and the holder of the license shall immediately show same to the designee of the municipality upon being requested so to do. 
(Ord. No. 2007-06, § 7, 12-17-07)
 
Sec. 5-158. Duty to file report.
(a)	It shall be the duty of every person subject to such license tax to render to the municipality on such forms as may be required, a sworn statement showing the total business done, amount of sales, gross receipts and gross sales, stock, value of furniture and other equipment, capital invested, number of helpers or employees, amount of space occupied, or other factor described in the schedule, one (1) or several, as the case may require, for the ascertainment of the classification of such person for license taxation purposes and the correct amount of license tax to which he is subject. 
(b)	If the municipality determines that the amount of business license tax reported on or remitted with any business license remittance form is incorrect, if no business license remittance form is filed within the time prescribed, or if the information provided on the form is insufficient to allow the taxing jurisdiction to determine the proper amount of business license tax due, the municipality shall calculate the correct amount of the tax based on the most accurate and complete information reasonably obtainable and enter a preliminary assessment for the correct amount of business license tax, including any applicable penalty and interest. 
(c)	The municipality shall promptly mail a copy of any preliminary assessment to the taxpayer's last known address by either first class U.S. mail or certified U.S. mail with return receipt requested, or, in the sole discretion of the municipality, deliver the preliminary assessment to the taxpayer by personal delivery. 
(d)	If the amount of business license tax remitted by the taxpayer is undisputed by the municipality, or if the taxpayer consents to the amount of any deficiency or preliminary assessment in writing, the municipality shall enter a final assessment for the amount of the tax due, plus any applicable penalty and interest. 
(e) (1) If a taxpayer disagrees with a preliminary assessment as entered by the taxing jurisdiction, the taxpayer shall file a petition for review with the municipal license officer within thirty (30) days from the date of entry of the preliminary assessment setting out the specific objections to the preliminary assessment. If a petition for review is timely filed, the license officer of the municipality shall schedule a conference with the taxpayer for the purpose of allowing the taxpayer or its representatives and the representatives of the municipality to present their respective positions, discuss any omissions or errors, and to attempt to agree upon any changes or modifications to their respective positions. 
(2)	If a petition for review is not timely filed, or is timely filed, and upon further review the license officer determines that the preliminary assessment is due to be upheld in whole or in part, the municipality may make the assessment final in the amount of business license tax due as computed by the license officer, with applicable interest and penalty computed to the date of entry of the final assessment. The license officer shall, whenever practicable, complete his or her review of the taxpayer's petition for review and applicable law within ninety (90) days following the later of the date of filing of the petition or the conference, if any. 
(3)	A copy of the final assessment shall promptly be mailed to the taxpayer's last known address (i) by either first class U.S. mail or certified U.S. mail with return receipt requested in the case of assessments of business license tax of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or less, or (ii) by certified U.S. mail with return receipt requested in the case of assessments of business license tax of more then five hundred dollars ($500.00). In either case, at the option of the taxing jurisdiction a copy of the final assessment may be delivered to the taxpayer by personal delivery. The final assessment shall include a statement informing the taxpayer of his or her right to appeal the final assessment to circuit court within thirty (30) days from the date of the entry of the final assessment. 
(Ord. No. 2007-06, § 8, 12-17-07)
 
Sec. 5-159. Duty to permit inspection and produce records.
Upon demand by the designee of the municipality, it shall be the duty of all licensees to: 
(1)	Permit the designee of the municipality to enter the business and to inspect all portions of his place or places of business for the purposes of enabling said municipal designee to gain such information as may be necessary or convenient for determining the proper license classification, and determining the correct amount of license tax; 
(2)	To furnish information during reasonable business hours, at the licensee's place of business, in the municipality or the police jurisdiction, all books of account, invoices, papers, reports and memoranda containing entries showing amount of purchases, sales receipts, inventory and other information from which the correct license tax classification of such person may be ascertained and the correct amount of license tax to which he is subject may be determined, including exhibition of bank deposit books, bank statements, copies of sales tax returns to the State of Alabama, copies of Alabama income tax returns and federal income tax returns. 
(Ord. No. 2007-06, § 9, 12-17-07)
 
Sec. 5-160. Unlawful to obstruct.
It shall be unlawful for any person, or for any agent, servant or employee of such person, to fail or refuse to perform any duty imposed by this article; nor shall any person, agent, servant or employee of such person obstruct or interfere with the designee of the municipality in carrying out the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-06, § 10, 12-17-07)
 
Sec. 5-161. Privacy.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person connected with the administration of this ordinance to divulge any information obtained by him/her in the course of inspection and examination of the books, papers, reports and memoranda of the taxpayer made pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance, except to the mayor, the municipal attorney or others authorized by law to receive such information described herein. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to print, publish, or divulge, without the written permission or approval of the taxpayer, the license form of any taxpayer or any part of the license form, or any information secured in arriving at the amount of tax or value reported, for any purpose other than the proper administration of any matter administered by the taxing jurisdiction, or upon order of any court, or as otherwise allowed in this article. 
(c)	Nothing herein shall prohibit the disclosure of the fact that a taxpayer has or has not purchased a business license. Statistical information pertaining to taxes may be disclosed to the municipality council upon their written request through the mayor's office. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2007-06, § 11, 12-17-07)
 
Sec. 5-162. Failure to file assessment.
(a)	In any case where a person subject to paying a license tax as provided herein fails to do so, the municipal designee shall be authorized to assess and determine the amount of license taxes due using the best information available either by return filed or by other means. 
(b)	The taxpayer shall be notified by registered or certified mail, or by personal service, of the amount of any such assessment, and of his right to appear before the municipal governing body on a day named not less than twenty (20) days from the date of notice and to show cause why such assessment shall not be made final. Such appearance may be made by agent or attorney. 
(c)	If no showing is made on or before the date fixed in such notice, or if such showing is not sufficient in the judgment of the municipality, such assessment shall be made final in the amount originally fixed, or in such other amount as is determined by the municipality to be correct. If upon such hearing the municipal designee finds a different amount due than that originally assessed, he/she shall make the assessment final in the correct amount, and in all cases shall notify the taxpayer of the assessment as finally fixed. 
(d)	A notice by the United States mail, addressed to the taxpayer's last known place of business, shall be sufficient. Any assessment made by the designee of the municipality shall be prima facie correct upon any appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2007-06, § 12, 12-17-07)
 
Sec. 5-163. Lien for non-payment of license tax.
On all property, both real and personal, used in the business, the municipality shall have a lien for such license, which lien shall attach as of the date when the license is due, as allowed by Code of Alabama 1975, § 11-51-44. 
(Ord. No. 2007-06, § 13, 12-17-07)
 
Sec. 5-164. Criminal penalties.
Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be fined in an amount not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and may also be sentenced to imprisonment for a period of not exceeding six (6) months, in the discretion of the court trying the case, and violations on separate days shall each constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2007-06, § 14, 12-17-07)
 
Sec. 5-165. Civil penalties.
In addition to the remedies provided by Code of Alabama 1975, § 11-51-150 et seq., the continued or recurrent performance of any act or acts within the corporate limits or within its police jurisdiction for which a license may be revoked or suspended under this article is hereby declared to be detrimental to the health, safety, comfort and convenience of the public and is a nuisance. The municipality, as an additional or alternative remedy, may institute injunctive proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction to abate the same. 
(Ord. No. 2007-06, § 15, 12-17-07)
 
Sec. 5-166. Penalties and interest.
(a)	All licenses not paid within thirty (30) days from the date they fall due shall be increased by fifteen (15) percent for the first thirty (30) days they shall be delinquent and shall be measured by an additional fifteen (15) percent for a delinquency of sixty (60) or more days, but this provision shall not be deemed to authorize the delay of thirty (30) days in the payment of the license due, which may be enforced at once. 
(b)	In the case of persons who began business on or after the first day of the calendar year, the license for such "new business" shall be increased by fifteen (15) percent for the first fifteen (15) days they shall be delinquent, and shall be measured by an additional fifteen (15) percent for a delinquency of forty-five (45) days or more. 
(c)	All delinquent accounts (both license taxes and penalties) shall also be charged simple interest at the rate of one (1) percent per month. 
(Ord. No. 2007-06, § 16, 12-17-07)
 
Sec. 5-167. Prosecutions unaffected.
The adoption of this article shall not in any manner affect any prosecution of any act illegally done contrary to the provisions of any ordinance now or heretofore in existence, and every such prosecution, whether begun before or after the enactment of this article shall be governed by the law under which the offense was committed; nor shall a prosecution, or the right to prosecute, for the recovery of any penalty or the enforcement of any forfeiture be in any manner affected by the adoption of this ordinance; nor shall any civil action or cause of action existing prior to or at the time of the adoption of this article be affected in any manner by its adoption. 
(Ord. No. 2007-06, § 17, 12-17-07)
 
Sec. 5-168. Procedure for denial of new applications.
(a)	The municipal designee shall have the authority to investigate all applications and may refer any application to the municipal governing body for a determination of whether such license should or should not be issued. 
If the municipal governing body denies the issuance of any license referred to it, the municipal clerk shall promptly notify the applicant of the municipal governing body's decision. 
(b)	If said applicant desires to appear before the municipal governing body to show cause why said license should be issued, he shall file a written notice with the municipal clerk, said notice to be filed within two (2) weeks from the date of mailing by the municipal clerk of the notice of the denial of such license by the municipal governing body. 
(c)	Upon receipt of said notice the municipal clerk shall promptly schedule a hearing, to be held within fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt of such notice, before the municipal governing body and shall give the notice of the date, time and place of said hearing to the applicant. 
(d)	The applicant shall be given the opportunity to appear personally, or through his counsel, or both, and the municipal governing body shall proceed to hear any evidence which may be presented both for and against the issuance of said license. 
(e)	If the municipal governing body determines from the evidence presented that in order to either provide for the safety, preserve the health, promote the prosperity, or improve the morals, order, comfort and convenience of the inhabitants of the municipality said license should not be granted, it shall enter an order to that effect; otherwise, said license shall be ordered issued upon payment of any required license fees. 
(Ord. No. 2007-06, § 18, 12-17-07)
 
Sec. 5-169. Procedure for revocation or suspension of license.
(a)	Any lawful license issued to any person to conduct any business shall be subject to revocation by the municipal governing body for the violation by the licensee, his agent, servant, or employee of any provision of this article or of any ordinance of the municipality, or any statute of the State of Alabama relating to the business for which such license is issued; and shall also be subject to revocation by the municipal governing body if the licensee, his agent, servant, or employee under color of such license violates or aids or abets in violating or knowingly permits or suffers to be violated any penal ordinance of the municipality or any criminal law of the State of Alabama; and shall also be subject to revocation by the municipal governing body if, in connection with the issuance or renewal of any license, the licensee or his agent filed or caused to be filed any application, affidavit, statement, certificate, book, or any other data containing any false, deceptive or other misleading information or omission of material fact. 
(b)	The conditions hereinabove set forth as grounds for the revocation of a license shall also constitute grounds for refusing to renew a license. 
(c)	The municipal governing body shall set a time for hearing on the matter of revoking or refusing to renew a license; and a notice of such hearing shall be given to the licensee, or the applicant for renewal, as the case may be, at least ten (10) days before the day set for said hearing. At the hearing the municipal governing body shall hear all evidence offered by any party and all evidence that may be presented bearing upon the question of revocation or the refusal of renewal, as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 2007-06, § 19, 12-17-07)
 
Sec. 5-170. Refunds on overpayments.
(a)	Any taxpayer may file a petition for refund with the municipality for any overpayment of business license tax erroneously paid to the municipality. If a final assessment for the tax has been entered by the municipality, a petition for refund of all or a portion of the tax may be filed only if the final assessment has been paid in full prior to or simultaneously with the filing of the petition for refund. 
(b)	A petition for refund shall be filed with the municipality within two (2) years from the date of payment of the business license tax, which is the subject of the petition. 
(c)	The municipality shall either grant or deny a petition for refund within six (6) months from the date the petition is filed, unless the period is extended by written agreement of the taxpayer and the municipality. The taxpayer shall be notified of the municipality's decision concerning the petition for refund by first class U.S. mail or by certified U.S. mail, return receipt requested, sent to the taxpayer's last known address. It the municipality fails to grant a full refund within the time provided herein, the refund petition shall be deemed to be denied. 
(d)	If the petition is granted or the municipality or a court otherwise determines that a refund is due, the overpayment shall be promptly refunded to the taxpayer by the municipality, together with interest to the extent provided for in [Code of Alabama,] § 11-51-92. If the municipality determines that a refund is due, the amount of overpayment plus any interest due thereon may first be credited by the municipality against any outstanding tax liabilities due and owing by the taxpayer to the municipality, and the balance of any overpayment shall be promptly refunded to the taxpayer. If any refund or part thereof is credited to any other tax by the municipality, the taxpayer shall be provided with a written detailed statement showing the amount of overpayment, the amount credited for payment to other taxes, and the resulting amount of the refund. 
(e)	A taxpayer may appeal from the denial in whole or in part of a petition for refund by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk of the circuit court of the county in which the municipality denying the petition for refund is located. Said notice of appeal must be filed within two (2) years from the date the petition was denied. The circuit court shall hear the appeal according to its own rules and procedures and shall determine the correct amount of refund due, if any. If an appeal is not filed with the appropriate circuit court within two (2) years of the date the petition was denied, then the appeal shall be dismissed for lack of jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2007-06, § 20, 12-17-07)
 
Sec. 5-171. Delivery license.
(a)	In lieu of any other type of license, a taxpayer may at its option purchase for one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus the issuance fee, a delivery license for the privilege of delivering its merchandise in the municipality if the taxpayer meets all of the following criteria: 
(1)	Other than deliveries, the taxpayer has no other physical presence within the municipality or its police jurisdiction; 
(2)	The taxpayer conducts no other business in the municipality other than delivering merchandise and performing the requisite set-up and installation of said merchandise; 
(3)	Such delivery and set-up and installation is performed by the taxpayer's employees or agents, concerns the taxpayer's own merchandise in that municipality, and is done by means of delivery vehicles owned, leased, or contracted by the taxpayer; 
(4)	The gross receipts derived from the sale and any requisite set-up or installation of all merchandise so delivered shall not exceed seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) during the license year; 
(5)	Any set-up or installation shall relate only to (i) that required by the contract between the taxpayer and the customer or as may be required by state or local law, and (ii) the merchandise so delivered; 
(6)	If at any time during the current license year the taxpayer fails to meet any of the above stated criteria, then within ten (10) days after any of said criteria have been violated or exceeded, the taxpayer shall purchase all appropriate business licenses from the municipality for the entire license year and without regard to this section. 
(b)	Mere delivery of the taxpayer's merchandise by common carrier shall not allow the municipality to assess a business license tax against the taxpayer, but the gross receipts derived from any sale and delivery accomplished by means of a common carrier shall be counted against the seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) limitation described in the preceding section if the taxpayer also during the same license year sells and delivers into the taxing jurisdiction using a delivery vehicle other than a common carrier. 
(c)	A common carrier, contract carrier, or similar delivery service making deliveries on behalf of others shall not be entitled to purchase a delivery license. 
(d)	The delivery license shall be calculated in arrears, based on the related gross receipts during the preceding license year. 
(e)	The purchase of a delivery license shall not, in and of itself, establish nexus between the taxpayer and the municipality for purposes of the taxes levied by or under the authority of Code of Alabama, Title 40 or other provisions of law, nor does the purchase of a delivery license conclusively determine that nexus does not exist between the taxpayer and the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 2007-06, § 21, 12-17-07)
 
Sec. 5-172. License classifications.
CODE 	2002 NAICS TITLES/BUSINESS 

LICENSE CODES 	SCHEDULE 
111 	Farming and Crop Production—Agriculture, crop production, nursery, fruit, growers 	A 
112 	Animal Production—Dairy, cattle, ranching, sheep, chickens, poultry 	A 
113 	Forestry—Logging, forestry, timber track operations, timber management 	A 
114 	Fishing and Hunting—Hunting and trapping, finfish, shellfish, supplies 	A 
115 	Agriculture Support—Cotton gins, farm mgt, post-harvest activities 	A 
211 	Oil and Gas Extraction—Natural gas liquid extraction, crude extraction 	Code of Alabama, § 40-20-2(c) 
212 	Mining (except for oil and gas)—All related mining activities 	A 
213 	Mining Support Services—For oil and gas mining activities, oil/gas wells 	A 
221 	Utilities—Electric power or light company 	Code of Alabama, § 11-51-129 
221 	Utilities—Natural gas company 	Code of Alabama, § 11-51-129 
221 	Utilities—Water, sewage treatment, steam, and other 	Code of Alabama, § 11-51-129 
236 	Contractors—General contractors, community building, residential, subdivisions 	C 
237 	Contractors—Heavy construction, highway, bridge, street, water, sewer 	C 
238 	Contractors—Specialty trade—Plumbing 	E 
238 	Contractors—Specialty trade—Painting and wall covering 	E 
238 	Contractors—Specialty trade—Electrical contractors 	E 
238 	Contractors—Specialty trade—Masonry and stone contractors 	E 
238 	Contractors—Specialty trade—Drywall, acoustical and insulation 	E 
238 	Contractors—Specialty trade—Tile, marble, terrazzo and mosaic 	E 
238 	Contractors—Specialty trade—Carpentry contractors 	E 
238 	Contractors—Specialty trade—Floor coverings/all types 	E 
238 	Contractors—Specialty trade—Roofing 	C 
238 	Contractors—Specialty trade—Concrete contractors 	E 
238 	Contractors—Specialty trade—Water well drilling and irrigation 	C 
238 	Contractors—Specialty trade—Structural steel erection 	C 
238 	Contractors—Specialty trade—Glass and glazing contractors 	E 
238 	Contractors—Specialty trade—Excavation and site development 	C 
238 	Contractors—Specialty trade—Wrecking and demolition 	C 
238 	Contractors—Specialty trade—Plumbing and electric 	F 
237 	Contractors—Specialty trade—Building equipment and mechanical install 	C 
238 	Contractors—Specialty trades contractors—Nongeneral and nonheavy 	C 
311 	Food Manufacturing—Meat, seafood, grain, fruit, dairy, animal, poultry processing 	D-1 
312 	Beverage Manufacturing—All types of soft drinks, bottled water, breweries, ice 	D-1 
312 	Beer—Off premise—State regulated through ABC 	H 
312 	Beer—On premise—State regulated through ABC 	H 
312 	Wine—State regulated through ABC 	H 
312 	Beer and Wine—Wholesale distributor 	H 
312 	Alcohol—State regulated through ABC 	H 
313 	Textile Manufacturing—Fabric, yarn, carpet, canvas, rope, twine, fabric mills 	D-1 
314 	Other Manufacturing—Mill operations not covered in 313, rugs, linen, curtains 	D-1 
315 	Apparel Manufacturing—Women, men, children, hosiery, lingerie outerwear, accessories 	D-1 
316 	Leather and Allied Products Manufacturing—Shoes, luggage, handbag, related products, all footwear 	D-1 
321 	Wood Manufacturing—Sawmills, wood preservation, veneer, trusses, millwork 	D-1 
322 	Paper Manufacturing—Pulp, paper, and converted products, stationary, tubes, cores 	D-1 
323 	Printing—Screen, quick, digital, books, lithographic, handbills, comm. 	D-1 
324 	Petroleum and Coal Manufacturing—Asphalt, grease, roofing, paving products 	D-1 
325 	Chemical Manufacturing—Of fertilizer, wood, pesticide, paint, soap, and resin 	D-1 
326 	Plastic and Rubber Manufacturing—Tires, pipe, hoses, belts, bottles, sheet, wrap, film 	D-1 
327 	Nonmetallic Manufacturing—Clay, glass, cement, lime, pottery, ceramic, brick, tile 	D-1 
331 	Primary Metal Manufacturing—Iron, steel, aluminum, wire, copper, foundries 	D-1 
332 	Metal Fabrication—Cutlery, structural, ornamental, machine shops 	D-1 
333 	Machinery Manufacturing—Office machinery, industrial, engines, farm, HVAC 	D-1 
334 	Computer and Electronic Manufacturing—Audio, video, circuit boards, peripherals 	D-1 
335 	Appliance Manufacturing—Small appliance, lighting, electrical, battery, freezer 	D-1 
336 	Transportation Manufacturing—Manufacturing auto, truck, trailer, motor home, boat, ship and motorcycle 	D-1 
337 	Furniture Manufacturing—Cabinets, office, household, beds, kitchen 	D-1 
339 	Miscellaneous Manufacturing—Miscellaneous Manufacturing, medical, dental, jewelry, sporting goods, toys, signs, all other 	D-1 
421 	Wholesale Trade—Durable, vehicle, machinery, equipment, furniture 	A-1 
422 	Wholesale Trade—Nondurable, wholesale gasoline distributor 	Y 
422 	Wholesale Trade—Nondurable, paper, apparel, grocery, beverages, dairy 	A-1 
441 	Motor Vehicle Parts and Accessories—Auto, motorcycles, boats, parts and accessories 	Z 
441 	Motor Vehicles—New and/or used automobiles, motorcycles, boats, etc. 
—Dealerships and lots 	  
Z (new) 
Z-1 (used only) 
442 	Furniture—Furniture, home furnishings, stores, floor coverings, window 	A 
443 	Electronic and Appliance Store—Household, radio, television, computers 	A 
444 	Building Materials and Gardening Equipment Dealers—Hardware, paint, home center, wallpaper, nursery 	C-1 
445 	Food and Beverage Stores—Grocery, convenience store, markets 	B 
445 	Package Stores—Selling beer, wine and liquor plus general merchandise 	A 
446 	Health and Personal Care Stores—Drug, pharmacy, cosmetic, optical, health food 	A 
447 	Gasoline Retail—Selling gasoline with or without convenience stores 	W 
448 	Clothing and Accessories—Men, women, children, infant, shoe, jewelry 	A 
451 	Sporting Goods and Hobbies—Toy, fish, gun, books, games 	A 
452 	General Merchandise Stores—Department, warehouse clubs, superstores 	A 
453 	Used Merchandise Stores—Books, miscellaneous, consignment, flea market 	A 
453 	Miscellaneous Retailers—Florist, gift, novelty, pet, art, and tobacco 	A 
454 	Non-Store Retailers—Vending machine operators, direct selling, mail order 	A 
454 	Non-Store Retailer—Peddlers license / local peddler 	I 
481 	Air Transportation—Airline tickets, shipping, freight, charters service 	D 
482 	Rail Transportation—Transportation, ticket offices, state regulated 	Code of Alabama, § 11-51-124 
483 	Water Transportation—Coastal, freight forwarders, inland, passenger 	A 
484 	Truck Transportation—Local, long-distance, freight, moving, and storage 	M-1 
484 	Truck Transportation—Terminal, state regulated 	Code of Alabama, § 37-3-33 
485 	Passenger Transportation—Charter and other vehicle transit services 	A 
485 	Passenger Transportation—Bus terminals state regulated 	Code of Alabama, § 37-3-33 
485 	Passenger Transportation—Buses, taxi cabs, limousine service, buggy, charters 	J 
487 	Sightseeing Transportation—Scenic and sightseeing, land, air, water, special trans 	A 
492 	Couriers—Couriers and local messengers, services, local delivery services 	A 
493 	Warehousing and Storage—Distribution, household, refrigerated, special 	T 
511 	Publishing Industries Except Internet—Newspaper, book, periodical, databases, software 	D-1 
512 	Motion Pictures—Theatres, videos, recording, drive-ins, sound studios 	A 
515 	Broadcasting—Radio and television stations 	A 
517 	Telecommunications—Telephone local per Code of Alabama, § 11-51-128 	K 
517 	Telecommunications—Telephone long distance per Code of Alabama, § 11-51-128 	K 
517 	Telecommunications—Cellular and other wireless, paging 	K 
517 	Telecommunications—Resellers of service 	K 
519 	Information Services and Data Processing—Providing, storing, processing, access to information 	D 
522 	Bank Main Office—Not branch location or ATM 	U 
522 	Bank Branch or ATM—Not main office of bank 	U 
522 	Savings and Loans—Not branch location or ATM 	U 
522 	Savings and Loans Branch or ATM—Not main office of savings and loans 	U 
522 	Pawn Shop—Whether title pawn or merchandise 	A 
522 	Credit Services—Companies and activities related to credit and mediation 	Q 
523 	Securities, Commodity—Brokerage, portfolio, investment, other financial services 	D 
524 	Insurance Company and/or its Agents—Casualty, fire, and/or marine premiums 	G-1, Code of Alabama, § 11-51-120/123 
524 	Insurance Company and/or its Agents—Health, allied and all other premiums 	G-2, Code of Alabama, § 11-51-120/123 
524 	Agent Office—Administration of third parties, pension funds, annuities, etc. 	D 
525 	Funds, Trusts, Other Financial Agencies—Funds, plans, and/or programs organized to pool securities or other assets for others, other than the Alabama Municipal Funding Corp 	D 
531 	Real Estate—Offices, agents, brokers, management, appraisers 	D 
532 	Rental and Leasing—Auto, truck, trailer, RV, all tangible property 	Z-2 
532 	Rental and Leasing—Movie and video rental 	A 
541 	Attorney/Lawyers—Individual and/or firm professional license 	D 
541 	Accountant/CPA's—Individual and/or firm professional license 	D 
541 	Architect—Individual and/or firm professional license 	D 
541 	Physician—Individual and/or firm professional license 	D 
541 	Dentist—Individual and/or firm professional license 	D 
541 	Chiropractor—Individual and/or firm professional license 	D 
541 	Optometrist—Individual and/or firm professional license 	D 
541 	Engineer—Individual and/or firm professional license 	D 
541 	Surveyor—Individual and/or firm professional license 	D 
541 	Computer Programmer—Individual and/or professional firm license 	D 
541 	Photographer—Studios, portrait, commercial, services 	D 
541 	Veterinarian—Individual and/or firm professional license 	D 
541 	Professional Services Not Elsewhere Classified—Scientific, technical 	D 
551 	Management Companies—Offices, enterprises, regional, corporate 	D 
561 	Exterminating Services—Exterminating company and its services 	A 
561 	Janitorial Firm—Janitorial cleaning services—Individual or firm 	E 
561 	Landscaping Services	P 
561 	Administrative Services—Answering, employment, office, sec., travel 	D 
562 	Waste Management—Companies, trucks, septic tanks, landfill, services 	C 
611 	Educational Services—Technical, computer, sports, services, business 	D 
621 	HMO—Medical centers and services 	D 
621 	Outpatient Care Centers—All other types of services 	D 
621 	Ambulance—Ambulance company and/or services 	M 
622 	Hospitals—Surgical, substance abuse, psychiatric, general care, special 	D 
623 	Nursing Care—Residential care facility, day care, assisted living 	D 
623 	Nursing Home—Care for elderly and continuing care facilities 	E-1 
624 	Social Assistance—Shelters, vocational, child care, abuse, emergency 	D 
711 	Arts and Sports—Dance, musical, teams, tracks, promoters, agents 	D 
711 	Special Events—Promoter or activity—See schedule for rates 	L 
712 	Museums—Museums and historical sites, zoos, botanical gardens, parks 	A 
713 	Amusement—Arcades, golf clubs, marinas, fitness, bowling centers 	A 
721 	Accommodations—Hotels, motels and similar facilities 	O 
721 	Accommodations—Bed and breakfast inns and services 	O 
721 	Accommodations—Trailer parks, RV parks, and travel parks 	O 
721 	Accommodations—Rooming houses and boarding houses 	O 
722 	Restaurant—Full service restaurant facility 	B 
722 	Restaurant—Limited facility or service 	B 
722 	Caterers and/or Mobile Food Services	B 
722 	Drinking Establishment—Club, lounge, bar or other 	B 
811 	Repairs and Maintenance—Auto, paint/body, carwash, other vehicular 	Z 
811 	Repairs and Maintenance—All electronic equipment 	A 
811 	Repairs and Maintenance—All appliances, home and garden equipment 	A 
812 	Personal Services—Hair, skin, barber, beautician, diet, nail, tanning, funerals 	A 
812 	Fortune Teller or Clairvoyant—Individual reader license 	D 
910 	Category for Number of—Vending machines for all types vending 	N 
910 	Category for number of—Pool tables 	N 
910 	Category for number of—Amusement devices and/or games 	N 
920 	Category for number of—Employees as a basis for calculating license 	R 
930 	Category for number of—Square feet used for calculating license amount 	S 
999000 	Unclassified miscellaneous business services not elsewhere classified 	A 
999001 	Unclassified miscellaneous personal services not elsewhere classified 	A 
999002 	Unclassified miscellaneous delivery	V 
999002 	Unclassified miscellaneous locksmith	X 
923 	Administration of Human Resource Programs	D 
924 	Administration of Environmental Quality Programs	D 
925 	Administration of Housing, Urban, Comm.	D 
926 	Administration of Economic Programs	D 
927 	Space, Research, and Technology	D 
928 	National Security and International Affairs	D 


(Ord. No. 2007-06, § 22, 12-17-07; Ord. No. 2009-08, § 1, 11-16-09)
 
Sec. 5-173. License fee schedules.
Schedule "A" 
If gross receipts are: 	
More 	Less 	
Than but 	than 	
$0 	$25,000.00 	$125.00 
25,000.00 	1,000,000.00 	 125.00 + .002 in excess of $25,000.00 
1,000,000.00 		 2,075.00 + .001 in excess of $1,000,000.00 

Schedule "A-1" 
If gross receipts are: 	
More 	Less 	
Than but 	than 	
$0 	$40,000.00 	$200.00 
40,000.00 	100,000.00 	 250.00 
100,000.00 	120,000.00 	 275.00 
120,000.00 	140,000.00 	 300.00 
140,000.00 	160,000.00 	 325.00 
160,000.00 	180,000.00 	 350.00 
180,000.00 	200,000.00 	 375.00 
200,000.00 		 375.00 + .0005 in excess of $200,000.00 

Schedule "B" 
If gross receipts are: 	
More 	Less 	
Than but 	than 	
$0 	$25,000.00 	$125.00 
25,000.00 	400,000.00 	 125.00 + .001 in excess of $25,000.00 
400,000.00 	1,000,000.00 	 500.00 + .0005 in excess of $400,000.00 
1,000,000.00 		 800.00 + .00025 in excess of $1,000,000.00 

Schedule "B-1" 
If gross receipts are: 	
More 	Less 	
Than but 	than 	
$0 	$100,000.00 	$200.00 
100,000.00 	200,000.00 	 200.00 + .001 in excess of $100,000.00 
200,000.00 	500,000.00 	 300.00 + .0005 in excess of $200,000.00 
500,000.00 	1,000,000.00 	 450.00 + .00025 in excess of $500,000.00 
1,000,000.00 		 575.00 + .000125 in excess of $1,000,000.00 

Schedule "C" 
If gross receipt are: 	
More 	Less 	
Than but 	than 	
$0 	$200,000.00 	$200.00 
200,000.00 	400,000.00 	 200.00 + .0025 in excess of $200,000.00 
400,000.00 		 700.00 + .001 in excess of $400,000.00 

Schedule "C-1" 
If gross receipt are: 	
More 	Less 	
Than but 	than 	
$0 	$50,000.00 	$200.00 
50,000.00 	1,000,000.00 	 200.00 + .001 in excess of $50,000.00 
1,000,000.00 		 1,150.00 + .0005 in excess of $1,000,000.00 

Schedule "D" 
If gross receipts are: 	
More 	Less 	
Than but 	than 	
$0 	$50,000.00 	$200.00 
50,000.00 		 200.00 + .0004 in excess of $50,000.00 

Schedule "D-1" 
If gross receipts are: 	
More 	Less 	
Than but 	than 	
$0 	$50,000.00 	$500.00 
50,000.00 	250,000.00 	 550.00 
250,000.00 	1,000,000.00 	 600.00 
1,000,000.00 	3,000,000.00 	 650.00 
3,000,000.00 	10,000,000.00 	 700.00 
10,000,000.00 	25,000,000.00 	 750.00 
25,000,000.00 	50,000,000.00 	 800.00 
50,000,000.00 		 1,000.00 

Schedule "E" 
If gross receipts are: 	
More 	Less 	
Than but 	than 	
$0 	$100,000.00 	$100.00 
100,000.00 		 100.00 + .0025 in excess of $100,000.00 

Schedule "E-1" - Hospitals 
An annual license of $250.00 

Schedule "F" 
If gross receipts are: 	
More 	Less 	
Than but 	than 	
$0 	$100,000.00 	$150.00 
100,000.00 		 150.00 + .0025 in excess of $100,000.00 

Schedule "G" - Utilities 
Amount of license is state regulated. See Code of Alabama 1975, § 11-51-129. For those utilities covered, the license shall not exceed an amount equal to three (3) percent of the gross receipts of the business transacted in the municipality for the previous year. 

Schedule "G-1" - Casualty, Fire and/or Marine Insurance 
Amount of license is state regulated. See Code of Alabama 1975, § 11-51-120/123. 

Schedule "G-2" - Health, Allied and all other Insurance 
Amount of license is state regulated. See Code of Alabama 1975, § 11-51-120/123. 


Schedule "H" - Beer, Wine and Liquor 	
State of Alabama Code 	Classification 	Amount 	Licensing 

Notes 	
040 (Beer On/Off Premise) 	312121 	$100.00 		
050 (Beer Off Premise Only) 	312122 	100.00 		
060 (Table Wine On/Off Premise) 	312131 	100.00 		
070 (Table Wine Off Premise Only) 	312131 	100.00 		
010 (Lounge Retail Liquor Class I) 	312121 	100.00 	All three (3) codes are part of the package plus the business license code. 	
	312141 	650.00 		
	312131 	100.00 		
011 (Package Store Liquor Class II) 	312122 	100.00 	All three (3) codes are part of the package plus the business license code. 	
	312141 	650.00 		
	312131 	100.00 		
020 (Restaurant Retail Liquor) 	312121 	100.00 	All three (3) codes are part of the package plus the business license code. 	
	312141 	650.00 		
	312131 	100.00 		
032 (Club Liquor Class II) 	312121 	100.00 	All three (3) codes are part of the package plus the business license code. 	
	312141 	650.00 		
	313131 	100.00 		
110 (Wholesale Table Wine and Beer) 	312132 	375.00 	Distributors License 	


Schedule "I" - Peddlers
Peddlers are prohibited in residential sections of the City of Opp. 
All others shall pay an annual license of $500.00. 

Schedule "J" - Taxi Cabs and Limousines
Each person operating taxicabs in the city shall comply with all requirements set out in sections 5-80 through 5-93, City of Opp Code of Ordinances. 
Each taxi cab or limousine shall pay an annual license of $200.00. 

Schedule "K" - Telephones and Telecommunications
Annual license rate for the privilege of doing business within the City of Opp is as set forth in Code of Alabama, § 11-51-128, as last amended for persons operating telephone exchanges and long distance telephone lines. Exchange $330.00, long distance $83.00. 

Schedule "L" - Special Events Licenses
All persons putting on a special event in the City of Opp not otherwise covered herein shall purchase a license in the amount of $250.00 per event. 

Schedule "M" - Ambulance Services
First ambulance $100.00 each additional $20.00. 

Schedule "M-1" - Motor Carrier
Each as defined by Code of Alabama, § 37-3-2, doing business in the city by receiving passengers of freight for transport or hire from this city to another point in the state or from another point in the state to this city shall pay an annual license of $500.00. 

Schedule "N" - Coin Operated Machines
First ten machines $50.00 each. Each additional machine $10.00 each. 

Schedule "O" - Motels, Trailer Parks, Self-Service Laundry
First ten prepared motel rooms or trailer spaces $75.00, each additional motel room or trailer space $10.00. First ten laundry machines $75.00, each additional laundry machine $5.00. 

Schedule "P" - Lawns, Shrubs, or Tree Care Services
Annual license of $100.00. 

Schedule "Q" - Finance Companies 
More 	Less 	
Than but 	than 	
$0 	$100,000.00 	$250.00 
100,000.00 		 250.00 + .001 in excess of $100,000.00 


Schedule "R" - Number of Employees 
R-1 	Where personnel are from 1 to 2 people 	$100.00 
R-2 	Where personnel are from 3 to 5 people 	250.00 
R-3 	Where personnel are from 6 to 10 people 	400.00 
R-4 	Where personnel are from 11 to 20 people 	550.00 
R-5 	Where personnel are from 21 to 50 people 	700.00 
R-6 	Where personnel are from 51 to 75 people 	850.00 
R-7 	Where personnel is from 76 to 100 people 	1,000.00 
R-8 	Personnel over 100 to be $1,000.00 + $50.00 per person over 100 

Schedule "S" - Square Feet 
S-1 	From 0 to 5,000 square feet 	$100.00 
S-2 	From 5,000 to 10,000 square feet 	200.00 
S-3 	From 10,000 to 20,000 square feet 	300.00 
S-4 	From 20,000 to 30,000 square feet 	400.00 
S-5 	From 30,000 to 40,000 square feet 	500.00 
S-6 	From 40,000 to 50,000 square feet 	600.00 
S-7 	From 50,000 to 60,000 square feet 	700.00 
S-8 	From 60,000 to 70,000 square feet 	800.00 
S-9 	From 70,000 to 80,000 square feet 	900.00 
S-10 	From 80,000 to 90,000 square feet 	1,000.00 
S-11 	From 90,000 to 100,000 square feet 	1,200.00 
S-16 	From 100,000 up - $1,200.00 plus $.01 per square foot over 100,000 


Schedule "T" - Warehouse/Mini-Storage
Annual license $100.00. 

Schedule "U" - Banks/Savings and Loans
Bank ATM location$10.00
Bank branch location10.00
Bank main office facility125.00
Savings and loan ATM location10.00
Savings and loan branch location10.00
Savings and loan mail office facility125.00

Schedule "V" - Delivery License
The rate for the delivery license is established in section 5-171 and is: $100.00. 

Schedule "W" - Gas/Fuel Pumps
First pump $50.00, each additional pump $20.00. 

Schedule "X" - Locksmith
Annual license of $75.00. 

Schedule "Y" - Gasoline Wholesale
$500.00 plus $50.00 per delivery point inside the city's jurisdiction, but no more than $1,000.00. 

Schedule "Z" - Auto License 
More 	Less 	
Than but 	than 	
$0 	$100,000.00 	$200.00 
100,000.00 	400,000.00 	 200.00 + .0005 in excess of $100,000.00 
400,000.00 		 350.00 + .0002 in excess of $400,000.00 

Schedule "Z-1" -Used Auto License 
More 	Less 	
Than but 	than 	
$0 	$50,000.00 	$200.00 
50,000.00 		 200.00 + .0002 in excess of $50,000.00 


Schedule "Z-2" - Auto U-Drive-It
First three units $50.00, each additional unit $10.00 each. 
(Ord. No. 2007-06, § 23, 12-17-07; Ord. No. 2008-04, § 1, 12-1-08; Ord. No. 2009-08, § 2, 11-16-09)
 
Sec. 5-174. Exchange of information.
(a)	The license officer may exchange tax returns, information, records, and other documents secured by the municipality, with other municipalities adopting similar ordinances for the exchange of taxpayer information, or with county or state authorities. The license officer may charge a reasonable fee for providing such information or documents. Any tax returns, information, records, or other documents so exchanged shall remain subject to the confidentiality provisions, restrictions, and criminal penalties for unauthorized disclosure as provided under state or municipal law. 
(b)	Any such exchange shall be for one (1) or more of the following purposes: 
(1)	Collecting taxes due. 
(2)	Ascertaining the amount of taxes due from any person. 
(3)	Determining whether a person is liable for, or whether there is probable cause for believing a person might be liable for, the payment of any tax to a state, county, or municipal agency. 
(c)	Nothing herein shall prohibit the use of tax returns or tax information by the municipality in the proper administration of any matter administered by the license officer. The license officer may also divulge to a purchaser, prospective purchaser as defined pursuant to the regulations of the Alabama Department of Revenue, or successor of a business or stock of goods the outstanding sales, use, or rental tax liability of the seller for which the purchaser, prospective purchaser as defined pursuant to the regulations of the Alabama Department of Revenue, or successor may be liable pursuant to the Code of Alabama, section 40-23-25, 40-23-82, or 40-12-224. 
(Ord. No. 2007-06, § 24, 12-17-07)
 
Sec. 5-175. License fees in police jurisdiction.
Any person, firm, association, or corporation engaged in any business outside the municipality but within the police jurisdiction hereof shall pay one-half (½) of the amount of the license imposed for like business within the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 2007-06, § 25, 12-17-07)
 
Chapter 6 COURT AND CRIMINAL PROCEDURE
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 6-1. Establishment of municipal court.
There is hereby established, effective December 27, 1977, a municipal court for the city pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 14, Title 12, Code of Alabama 1975, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1977-5, § 1, 12-5-77)
 
Sec. 6-2. Jurisdiction.
The municipal court shall have jurisdiction of all prosecutions for the breach of ordinances of the municipality within its corporate limits and police jurisdiction. This jurisdiction shall also extend to all prosecutions for violations of state offenses committed within the corporate limits and police jurisdiction of the municipality where such offenses have been made offenses against the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 1977-5, § 2, 12-5-77)
Cross reference(s)—Adoption of state offenses, § 10-1. 
State law reference(s)—Jurisdiction, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-1(b), (c); appeals, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 12-14-70, 12-14-71. 
 
Sec. 6-3. Time and place of holding court.
The municipal court shall be held at such time and place as the governing body may determine, with the advice of the municipal judge. 
(Ord. No. 1977-5, § 3, 12-5-77)
 
Sec. 6-4. Judge—Number; appointment term; qualifications; vacancies; oath; grounds of disqualification.
(a)	The municipal court shall consist of one (1) municipal judge to be appointed by a vote of a majority of the members elected or appointed to the governing body. The judge shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years. The municipal judge shall be eligible for reappointment upon the expiration of the term. The municipal judge shall hold office until a successor is appointed and qualified. 
(b)	The municipal judge shall be licensed to practice law in the state and shall be a qualified elector of the state. The judge shall not be otherwise employed in any capacity by the municipality during such judge's term of office. 
(c)	The office of the municipal judge shall be vacant if the incumbent dies, resigns, or is removed. Vacancies shall be filled by the governing body in the same manner as original appointments are made. Any person so appointed shall be eligible to serve two (2) years from the date of appointment. 
(d)	The municipal judge shall, before assuming office, take and sign the oath provided by the constitution and a copy thereof shall be filed in the office of the secretary of state, the administrative director of courts and the city clerk. 
(e)	The municipal judge shall be subject to all grounds of disqualification from hearing specific cases applicable to circuit court judges. 
(Ord. No. 1977-5, § 4, 12-5-77)
State law reference(s)—Requirement that council so provide, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-3; appointment, etc., Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-30. 
 
Sec. 6-5. Same—Compensation.
The annual salary of the municipal judge shall be that fixed from time to time by the council, and shall be payable in twelve (12) equal monthly installments. This salary shall not be diminished during the judge's term of office. Any general increase in the compensation of all or substantially all municipal employees shall be applied proportionately to the salary of the municipal judge. 
(Ord. No. 1977-5, § 5, 12-5-77; Ord. No. 1978-1, 2-20-78)
State law reference(s)—Fixing compensation, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-33. 
 
Sec. 6-6. Same—Issuance of warrants.
The municipal judge is authorized to issue, arrest and search warrants upon affidavit for municipal ordinance violations returnable to the municipal court and for violations of state law returnable to any state court. 
(Ord. No. 1977-5, § 9, 12-5-77)
State law reference(s)—Warrants, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-32. 
 
Sec. 6-7. Same—Acting judge.
In the absence from the city, death, disability, or disqualification of a municipal judge, for any reason, the mayor shall have the authority to designate a person, licensed to practice law in the state and a qualified elector of the state, not otherwise employed in any capacity by the municipality, to serve as acting municipal judge with all power and authority of a duly appointed municipal judge. No such acting judge may serve for more than thirty (30) successive days or a total of sixty (60) days in any calendar year; provided, that when the duly appointed municipal judge is disqualified pursuant to the constitution, the time of service limitations for acting judges shall not apply during such disqualification. 
(Ord. No. 1977-5, § 11, 12-5-77)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-34. 
 
Sec. 6-8. Same—Reports.
(a)	The municipal judge shall report on the proceedings of the municipal court as required by law or rule. 
(b)	The municipal judge shall make a report to the council on the operation of the municipal court every month. 
(Ord. No. 1977-5, §§ 12, 13, 12-5-77)
State law reference(s)—Reports, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 12-14-15, 12-14-16. 
 
Sec. 6-9. Powers of the mayor.
The mayor may remit fines and such costs as payable to the municipality and commute sentences imposed by municipal judges of the court to which an appeal was taken for violations of municipal ordinances, and may grant pardons, after conviction, for violation of such ordinances, and shall report such actions to the council at the first regular meeting thereof in the succeeding month with the reasons therefor in writing. 
(Ord. No. 1977-5, § 7, 12-5-77)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-15. 
 
Sec. 6-10. Magistrates.
The municipal judge shall take steps to have a magistrate appointed for the city, pursuant to Rule 18 of the Alabama Rules of Judicial Administration. The powers of the magistrate shall be limited to: (1) issuance of arrest warrants; (2) granting of bail in minor offenses prosecutions; (3) receiving of pleas of guilty in minor offenses where a schedule of fines has been prescribed by law or rule; (4) accountability to the municipal court for all uniform traffic tickets and complaints, monies received and records of offenses; and (5) such other authority as may be granted by law. 
(Ord. No. 1977-5, § 10, 12-5-77)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-51; the rules of judicial administration are found in Code of Ala. 1975, Vol. 23. 
 
Sec. 6-11. Powers of the court.
(a)	The municipal judge shall have the power to admit to bail any person charged with the violation of any municipal ordinance by requiring an appearance bond, with good security, to be approved by the municipal judge or the judge's designee in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or as otherwise authorized by law, and may, in such judge's discretion, admit to bail such persons on a personal recognizance bond conditioned on the appearance of such persons before such judge on a day named therein to answer the charges preferred against them. 
(b)	The municipal judge shall have the authority to punish any person convicted of violating any municipal ordinance with a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or a sentence of imprisonment or hard labor for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or as otherwise authorized by law; provided, however, that no fine or sentence of imprisonment shall exceed the maximum fine or sentence provided by the city ordinance violated, nor shall the fine or sentence exceed the maximum fine and sentence provided for violation of a substantially similar offense under state law. The penalty imposed on a corporation shall consist of the fine only, plus costs of court. 
(c)	The municipal judge in his judgment may provide that if a fine and costs are not paid within the time prescribed, the defendant, unless indigent, shall work out the amount of the judgment under the direction of the municipal authority allowing not less than ten dollars ($10.00) for each day's service. 
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-12, but see Rule. 
(d)	Upon each conviction in municipal court for a violation of any ordinance of the city, there shall be taxed against the defendant as court costs the sum of ten dollars ($10.00), and there shall also be taxed as costs the additional costs and fees imposed by the statutes of the state, and the latter such costs and fees shall be remitted pursuant to the statutes. All costs taxed for the city, as hereinabove provided, shall be paid into the city treasury. 
Cross reference(s)—Schedule of court costs, § 6-13; as to payment of costs by city, see § 1-11. 
State law reference(s)—Costs authorized, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-14; court costs may be imposed, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-19-153 et seq.; additional costs for peace officers' annuity fund, Code of Ala. 1975, § 36-21-67; docket fees in district court and circuit court, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-19-171 (required to be uniform, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-19-170); fair trial tax, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-19-250; schedule of fines and costs in summary disposition of traffic cases, Ala. Rules of Judicial Administration (Code of Ala. 1975, Vol. 23), Rules 18, 19; discretionary bond schedule, Rule 2; required to pay money over to treasurer daily, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-10. 
(e)	Upon conviction, the court may, upon a showing of inability to make immediate payment of fines and costs, accept defendant's bond with or without surety and with waiver of exemptions as to personalty payable within ninety (90) days, upon nonpayment of which execution may issue as upon judgments in state courts. 
(f)	The municipal judge shall have the authority to continue the case from time to time to permit the fines and costs to be paid, remit fines, costs and fees, impose intermittent sentences, establish work release programs, require attendance of educational, corrective or rehabilitative programs, suspend driving privileges for such times and under such conditions as provided by law and order hearings to determine the competency of the defendant to stand trial; provided further, that the judge may enter an order authorizing the defendant to drive under the conditions set forth in the order. 
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-10. 
(g)	All cases in municipal court shall be tried by a municipal judge without a jury. 
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-6. 
(h)	The municipal judge may suspend execution of sentence and place a defendant on probation for varying periods of time, not to exceed two (2) years, under the procedures and conditions set out in section 12-14-13, Code of Alabama 1975, as amended. 
(i)	The municipal judge may administer oaths, compel the attendance of witnesses and compel the production of books and papers, punish by fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) and/or imprisonment not exceeding five (5) days any person found and adjudged to be in contempt of court, and shall have power coextensive with the jurisdiction of the district court to issue writs and other process, and to approve and declare bonds forfeited. The municipal 
judge shall designate any other municipal officers who shall be authorized to approve appearance and appeal bonds. 
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-31. 
(j)	The municipal court shall take judicial notice of the ordinances of the municipality. 
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-7. 
(k)	The sheriff of the county and all law enforcement officers of the municipality shall obey the municipal judge having legal authority in faithfully executing the warrants and processes committed to them for service according to their mandates. 
(Ord. No. 1977-5, § 6, 12-5-77)
Cross reference(s)—General penalty, § 1-8; violation of orders, rules and regulations, § 1-9; imprisonment in default of payment of fine, § 1-10; adoption of state offenses, § 10-1. 
 
Sec. 6-12. Appeals.
All appeals from judgments of the municipal court shall be to the circuit court of the circuit in which the violation occurred for trail de novo. Such appeals shall be as provided in section 12-14-70, Code of Alabama 1975, as amended. Appeals from judgments of the circuit court shall be as provided in section 12-14-71, Code of Alabama 1975, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1977-5, § 8, 12-5-77)
 
Sec. 6-13. Schedule of fines for minor traffic infractions and non-traffic infractions.
(a)	Pursuant to the Judicial Article of the Constitution of Alabama, and the Alabama Rules of Judicial Administration, the Opp City Council adopts the state approved fine schedule for traffic and non-traffic violations and the state mandated procedures for pleading before a magistrate before court date. Only those violations listed in the "Magistrate Fine Schedule and Procedure if Defendant Elects to Plead Guilty" will be eligible for payment prior to court. These include: 
   OffensesAmount of Fine
Driving on wrong side of road$ 30.00
Failure to dim headlights10.00
Failure to stop at railroad crossing10.00
Failure to use child restraint10.00
Failure to wear safety belt10.00
Failure to yield right-of-way20.00
Following too closely20.00
Improper backing20.00
Improper brakes20.00
Improper lights20.00
Improper muffler10.00
Improper or no rearview mirror20.00
Improper passing20.00
Improper signal10.00
Improper tag25.00
Improper tires20.00
Improper turn20.00
No driver's license in possession10.00
No helmet (motorcycle rider)10.00
Running red light20.00
Running stop sign20.00
Speeding20.00
Stopping on highway30.00
Violating driver's license restriction10.00
Parking in handicapped zone15.00
All parking violations, excluding handicap5.00
Window tinting: 
First offense25.00
Second offense, within twelve (12) months of first offense50.00
Third or subsequent offense, within twelve (12) months of first offense100.00
Non-Traffic:
Noise Ordinance$ 25.00
Litter Ordinance100.00
Dog Ordinance25.00
Criminal trespassing by motor vehicle25.00
Violation of tobacco law: 
First offense10.00
Second offense30.00
Third or subsequent offense50.00
(b)	The amount of cost of court and state imposed fees shall hereafter increase by any additional amount of state fees imposed by the state legislature. 
(c)	The judge, in such official's discretion, may increase the amount of the fines set forth above if the judge trying the case deems the offense an aggravated one. 
(Ord. No. 1989-2, § 3, 2-6-89; Ord. No. 1994-4, § I, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 1996-6, § I, 12-16-96; Ord. No. 2000-6, § 1, 11-6-00)
Cross reference(s)—See also § 6-11(d). 
 
Sec. 6-14. Additional court costs; authority; purpose.
(a)	Pursuant to Act 94-694 and Code of Alabama 1975, section 11-47-7.1, a municipality may increase its court costs to that of the district court for the purpose of maintaining a court complex. 
(b)	The city maintains a court complex and contracts for the maintenance of their jailed prisoners. 
(c)	The city hereby increases traffic court costs in the amount of seventy-six dollars and fifty cents ($76.50) and increases the non-traffic costs in the amount of eighty-eight dollars ($88.00), which shall not exceed the court costs and fees authorized by general or local laws to be assessed in the district court of Covington County in similar cases. 
(d)	The increased amounts of the court costs shall be designated for the purpose of maintenance of a court complex and jail facility and placed into a separate account under that designation. 
(Ord. No. 1996-3, §§ 1—5, 9-3-96; Ord. No. 2020-02, §§ 1—4, 12-21-20)
 
Secs. 6-15—6-30. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. ESTABLISHMENT OF COURT DEFERMENT PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 6-31. Judge may defer proceedings against offender.
A circuit court judge and/or municipal court judge may defer proceedings against an offender of Opp Municipal Ordinances and/or enforcement of state law adopted by the City of Opp upon completion of the court approved deferment program within the jurisdiction of the Municipality of Opp, Alabama. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, § I(a), 9-7-2010)
 
Sec. 6-32. Completion of court deferment program approved by court.
The offender must complete the court deferment program approved by the court. The judge or municipal court shall dismiss and/or enter a not guilty adjudication by agreement of the charge at the time the defendant presents satisfactory evidence that the defendant has successfully completed the deferment program in a timely manner as required by the program and the court. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, § I(b), 9-7-2010)
 
Sec. 6-33. Dismissal not part of record.
A charge dismissed under this article may not be part of the defendant's criminal record or driving record or used for any purpose and the charges shall be dismissed. Federal law and DOT regulations will remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, § I(c), 9-7-2010)
 
Sec. 6-34. Establishment of deferment fee.
(a)	The defendant shall pay a deferment fee to the city municipal court of not more than the total court costs, administrative fee and fines that could be accessed by the court if the defendant had been found guilty of the charge. 
(b)	The total deferment costs shall not exceed the total amount if the defendant was found guilty of the same charge being deferred by the court. The deferment fees shall be established by the court. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, § I(d), 9-7-2010; Ord. No. 2020-03, §§ 1, 2, 12-21-20)
 
Sec. 6-35. Fees for indigents.
A judge or the municipal court may exempt a defendant for whom proceedings are deferred under this article from the requirement to pay all or part of the court costs, or fee or deferment program fees if the offender is found indigent that is imposed by this article and/or by another statute. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, § I(e), 9-7-2010)
 
Sec. 6-36. Court to establish program.
The Opp Municipal Court shall establish a deferment program in compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, § I(f), 9-7-2010)
 
Chapter 7 FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 7-1. Fire prevention code; fire codes.
The fire prevention code and the fire codes, adopted by reference in section 4-1, are hereby carried forward and made a part of this chapter. 
 
Sec. 7-2. Standards for volunteer firemen.
The minimum standards for Opp Volunteer Firemen shall be as follows. The minimum standards provided for Opp Volunteer Firemen shall apply to applicants and appointees as volunteer firemen who are not volunteer firemen in the City of Opp on December 1, 1993, and to applicants and appointees who, though volunteer firemen on December 1, 1993, cease to be such before making application for employment as a volunteer fireman or being employed as a volunteer fireman. The City of Opp shall employ any such applicant who is not on December 1, 1993, a volunteer fireman and who continues until the date of his application as a volunteer fireman unless such person shall have first submitted to the appointing authority an application for such employment verified by affidavit of the applicant and showing compliance with the following qualifications: 
(1)	Age. The applicant shall not be less than nineteen (19) years of age. 
(2)	Education. The applicant shall be a graduate of a high school accredited with or approved by the state department of education or shall be the holder of a certificate of high school equivalency. 
(3)	Physical qualification. The applicant shall be certified by a licensed physician designated by the appointing authority as being in good health and physically fit for the performance of his duties as a volunteer fireman. 
(4)	Character. The applicant shall be a person of good moral character and shall show that he or she has never been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving either force, violence or moral turpitude. 
(5)	Training. The applicant shall adhere to any and all training practices set forth by the fire chief and/or the assistant chief. 
(6)	Non-discrimination. Applicants shall be selected without regard to age, sex, race, creed, color, religion or national origin. 
(Ord. No. 1993-3, 12-6-93)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 1993-3, adopted Dec. 6, 1993, has been codified herein at the discretion of the editor as § 7-2. 
 
Secs. 7-3—7-20. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. COST RECOVERY FOR RESPONSE AND RECOVERY EFFORTS 
 
Sec. 7-21. Purpose.
This article is intended to provide for recovery by City of Opp of unbudgeted cost incurred in response and recovery efforts related to motor vehicle accidents and fire incidents, disasters, and other large-scale events or accidents. In addition, it is intended to provide for cost recovery for damages to natural resources and government owned properties. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 9-7-2010)
 
Sec. 7-22. Definitions.
Costs shall mean and include, but not be limited to, those expenses incurred responding to each incident that would not have been incurred if there was no incident. These costs shall include equipment and operating cost of the fire department including salaries, consumable, training, apparatus, and equipment, both direct and indirect; including those for which funds are not provided in the city's annual budget. 
(1)	All cost incurred for each response to a motor vehicle accident or fire incident. 
(2)	All cost incurred for response, containment, and/or removal and disposal of hazardous materials or remedial actions to include costs associated with transportation of hazardous material. 
(3)	All cost incurred for ensuring the safety of the public to include cost incurred for actions taken at the site of the motor vehicle accident or fire incident. 
(4)	Damages for injury to, destruction of, or loss of natural resources, as determined by the appropriate local, state, or federal agency, including the reasonable cost of assessing such injury, destruction, or loss resulting from a motor vehicle accident, fire incident or hazardous material incident. 
(5)	Health care costs for persons injured from a motor vehicle accident, fire incident including all medical assessment and treatment provided by first responders, EMTs, and paramedics at the scene prior to ambulance transport if necessary. 
(6)	Health care costs for persons or animals injured from a hazardous material incident or costs of any health effects study carried out as a necessity resulting from a hazardous material incident. 
(7)	All costs incurred for response and remedial actions to disasters and large-scale accidents or events to include, but not limited to, cost associated with capture, transport, and housing of animals; medical treatment of injured animals; etc. 
(8)	Labor including benefits, overtime, and administrative overhead for government employees. 
(9)	The costs of operating, maintaining, leasing, repairing, and replacing equipment, and any and all damage to equipment. 
(10)	Contract labor and equipment. 
(11)	Labor and equipment obtained by City of Opp, its agencies or agents. 
(12)	Materials, including but not limited to, medical supplies such as "C" collars, drug administration by trained first responders, EMTs, and/or paramedics. 
(13)	Materials, including but not limited to, absorbents, foams, disbursements, neutralization agents, overpack drums or containers, dart tranquilizers, euthanasia solutions, etc. 
(14)	Supervision of response. 
Motor vehicle shall mean every self-propelled vehicle which is designed for use upon highway, including trailers and semi-trailers designed for use with such vehicles but excepting traction engines, road rollers, farm tractors, tractor cranes, power shovels, mopeds, and well drillers, and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead wired but not upon rails. 
Motor vehicle accident shall mean a situation in which a motor vehicle collides with another motor vehicle, pedestrian, animal, or geographical or architectural obstacle. 
Fire shall mean a state, process, or instance of combustion in which fuel or other material that is ignited and combined with oxygen, giving off light, heat, and flame. 
Fire incident shall mean a situation in which a structure, vehicle, or grass is on fire. 
Hazardous materials shall mean any substance or material defined, listed, characterized, or classified as a hazardous material, hazardous substance, hazardous waste, or toxic substance according to any or all of the following: Title 40 Code of Federal Regulations Part 261 (Identification and Listing of Hazardous Waste); Title 40 Code of Federal Regulations part 302.1.4 (Designation of Hazardous Substances); Title 40 Code of Federal Regulations Part 355, Appendices A and B (List of Extremely Hazardous Substances); Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations Parts 172.101 and 172.102 (Hazardous Materials Table); and the Code of Alabama as last amended. 
Hazardous material incident shall mean actual or threatened release of hazardous substances or material, including hazardous waste, which pose an imminent threat to the environment and to health, safety or welfare of the population. 
Hazardous substance includes any solution, mixture, or formulation containing hazardous material, or any material which due to its chemical or physical characteristics, is determined by the county to pose a substantial threat to the life, health, or safety of persons or property or environment. The term includes, but not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum products, gases poisons, biologic agents, flammable and corrosives. 
Municipality shall mean City of Opp. 
Natural resources shall mean land, fish, wildlife, water, ground water, drinking water supplies, and other such resources belonging to, managed by, held in trust by, appertaining to, or otherwise controlled by City of Opp, its agencies or agents. 
Person shall mean an individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, commercial entity, consortium, joint venture, governmental entity, or any other legal entity. 
Recovery shall mean the provision of emergency and non-emergency assistance during and following an incident and to reduce the likelihood of secondary damage. 
Responsible party shall mean the person(s) whose act or omission cause an incident; or the person(s) who owned or had custody or control of the motor vehicle, structure, or hazardous substance or waste at the time of such incident without regard to fault or proximate cause; or the person(s) who owned or had custody or control of the container which held the hazardous substance at the time or immediately prior to such release without regard to fault or proximate cause. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 2, 9-7-2010)
 
Sec. 7-23. Liability for cost.
(a)	Any responsible party who causes a motor vehicle accident, fire incident, hazardous materials incident or any disaster or large-scale accident or event shall be liable for the payment of all reasonable and necessary extraordinary and unbudgeted costs incurred by the City of Opp, its agencies or agents, for response to and remediation of such incident. 
(b)	Remedies at law. City of Opp will seek all available remedies at law, to include provisions of the article, against any parties responsible for any motor vehicle accident, fire incident, hazardous material incident or any disaster or large-scale accident or event, to include those actions and remedies under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code relating to such matter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 3, 9-7-2010)
 
Sec. 7-24. Collection and disbursement of fund for cost recovery.
(a)	Agent for City of Opp. The City of Opp Fire Department shall serve as the city's agent for collecting invoices and billing the responsible party for cost incurred for emergency response. Agencies of Opp responding to such incidents or events in conjunction with the City of Opp are eligible to submit bills. 
(b)	Procedure for submitting invoices. An invoice identifying eligible cost under this article shall be submitted to the City of Opp within a reasonable time after the cost was incurred or identified. Submitted invoices must include sufficient documentation for cost reimbursement (i.e., copies of time sheets for specific personnel; copies of bills for materials, equipment, supplies procured or used; etc.). Accepting invoices from agencies outside of City of Opp shall not incur liability to the city to pay costs from such agencies until payment is received by City of Opp from the responsible party. 
(c)	Method of payment. The City of Opp shall submit one (1) or a series of consolidated invoices to the responsible party, identifying agencies, agents, or municipalities and their specific costs or reimbursements. The responsible party shall issue a certified check made payable to each governmental entity that responded and submitted an invoice. The check shall be sent to the City of Opp within sixty (60) days of the date of the consolidated invoice. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 4, 9-7-2010)
 
Sec. 7-25. Methods of enforcement.
(a)	Civil action. The City of Opp may enforce these provisions by civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of any amounts due hereunder plus administrative collection cost, attorneys' fees, or for any other relief that may be appropriate. A certified copy of a judgement in favor of the City of Opp may be recorded in the public records and thereafter shall constitute a lien upon any real or personal property owned by such person(s) and such lien shall be coequal with the lien of all state and municipal taxes superior in dignity to all other liens, titles, and claims until paid or extinguished. 
(b)	Other remedies. This article shall not prohibit the City of Opp from pursuing any other remedy, whether civil or criminal, or from instituting any appropriate action or proceedings, including injunction in a court of competent jurisdiction. Nor shall the recovery of expenses under this article in any way release the various parties, or limit them, from legal liability incurred as a result of cleanup or abatement as defined under any local, state of [or] federal rule or regulation. 
(c)	Failure to pay all or any part of the cost incurred within sixty (60) days of the date of the invoice will result in a five (5) percent late penalty on the unpaid fee each month or portion thereof until the invoice is paid. Penalties shall not exceed one hundred (100) percent of the original amount for cost incurred. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 5, 9-7-2010)
 
Sec. 7-26. Conflict with other laws.
Whenever the requirements or provisions of this article are in conflict with the requirements or provisions of any other lawfully adopted ordinance, the more restrictive requirements shall apply. Further this article shall not restrict or replace cost recovery from funding sources available under state and federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 6, 9-7-2010)
 
Chapter 9 MUNICIPAL UTILITIES AND SERVICES 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 9-1. Suspension of electric service—Defrauding board.
(a)	The utilities board of the city is hereby authorized and empowered to suspend service of electricity, without notice, to any customer violating any applicable provision of Code of Alabama 1975, as amended, prohibiting criminal tampering or theft of services. 
State law reference(s)—Criminal tampering, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-7-24 et seq.; theft of services, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-8-10 et seq. 
(b)	The utilities board of the city is hereby empowered and authorized to suspend service of electricity, without notice, to any building, dwelling, home, business or other operation and to the customer occupying, renting, owning or using such building if measuring appliances, meters or other devices designed and used by the board to measure consumption of electricity on customer's premises are prevented from functioning, or if for any other reason such customer is receiving or about to receive service of electricity without compensation. 
(c)	Proof that any of the acts specified in subsections (a) and (b) was done on the premises in possession of the customer, or that the customer received the benefits of any such act shall be prima facie evidence that the customer committed such act, or aided or abetted the commission thereof maliciously, or with the intent to injure or defraud. 
(Ord. of 6-8-76, §§ 2, 3, 5)
 
Sec. 9-2. Same—Restoration of service.
Whenever the board shall suspend service to any customer for violation of subsection (a) or (b) of section 9-1, the board shall not restore service of electricity to such customer until such customer shall have paid to the board such sum for electricity used as the board may reasonably calculate to have been due. The board or its designated employee shall use any reasonable method to calculate and estimate the amount of electricity used or consumed using sound discretion. In addition, the board shall require an additional deposit of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) to guarantee payment of future accounts. 
(Ord. of 6-8-76, § 4)
 
Secs. 9-3—9-19. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. SEWERS
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 9-20. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this article shall be as follows: 
BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees C. expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
Combined sewer: A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
Garbage: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce. 
Industrial wastes: The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
Natural outlet: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or ground water. 
pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
Properly shredded garbage: The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
Public sewer: A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and which is controlled by public authority. 
Sanitary sewer: A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted. 
Sewage: A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface, and storm waters as may be present. 
Sewage treatment plant: Any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
Sewage works: All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage. 
Sewer: A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Slug: Any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
Storm drain (sometimes termed "storm sewer"): A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
Superintendent: The superintendent of the city waterworks, or authorized deputy, agent, or representative. 
Suspended solids: Solids that are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
Watercourse: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. of 7-17-72, Art. I, §§ 1—22)
 
Sec. 9-21. Powers and authority of inspectors—Right-of-entry of property generally.
The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. The superintendent or the superintendent's representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
(Ord. of 7-17-72, Art. VII, § 1)
 
Sec. 9-22. Same—Right-of-entry of easements.
The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on such easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Ord. of 7-17-72, Art. VII, § 3)
 
Sec. 9-23. Same—Liability for injury or damage.
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in section 9-21, the superintendent or other duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in section 9-63. 
(Ord. of 7-17-72, Art. VII, § 2)
 
Sec. 9-24. Protection from damage.
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Ord. of 7-17-72, Art. VI, § 1)
 
Sec. 9-25. Penalties—Service of notice.
Any person found to be violating any provision of this article except section 9-24 shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(Ord. of 7-17-72, Art. VIII, § 1)
 
Sec. 9-26. Same—Punishment of violators.
Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in section 9-25 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 7-17-72, Art. VIII, § 2)
 
Sec. 9-27. Same—Liability in damages.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation. 
(Ord. of 7-17-72, Art. VIII, § 3)
 
Sec. 9-28. Deposit of waste in unsanitary manner.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. 
(Ord. of 7-17-72, Art. II, § 1)
 
Sec. 9-29. Discharge of untreated polluted water to natural outlet.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-17-72, Art. II, § 2)
 
Sec. 9-30. Prohibited facilities generally.
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Ord. of 7-17-72, Art. II, § 3)
 
Sec. 9-31. Sewer connection required after notice.
The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city, is hereby required at such owner's expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do so, provided that such public sewer is within one hundred (100) feet (30.5 meters) of the property line. 
(Ord. of 7-17-72, Art. II, § 4)
 
Sec. 9-32. Private sewage disposal.
The disposal of sewage by means other than the use of the available sanitary sewage system shall be in accordance with local county and state law. The disposal of sewage by private disposal systems shall be permissible only in those instances where service from the available sanitary sewage system is not available. 
(Ord. of 7-17-72, Art. III)
 
Secs. 9-33—9-39. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
 
Sec. 9-40. Permit to open, etc., sewer—Required.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent. 
(Ord. of 7-17-72, Art. IV, § 1)
 
Sec. 9-41. Same—Classes; application; fees.
There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: (1) for residential and commercial service, and (2) for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or the owner's agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the superintendent. A permit and inspection fee of two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50) for a residential or commercial building sewer permit and fifty dollars ($50.00) for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(Ord. of 7-17-72, Art. IV, § 2)
 
Sec. 9-42. Responsibility of owner as to connection expense; indemnifying city.
All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Ord. of 7-17-72, Art. IV, § 3)
 
Sec. 9-43. Separate and independent building date.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except that where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(Ord. of 7-17-72, Art. IV, § 4)
 
Sec. 9-44. Building sewer.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-17-72, Art. IV, § 5)
 
Sec. 9-45. Size, slope, alignment, materials, placement, etc., of building sewer.
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes and other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(Ord. of 7-17-72, Art. IV, § 6)
 
Sec. 9-46. Elevation of building sewer; lifting of sewage.
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall, be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Ord. of 7-17-72, Art. IV, § 7)
 
Sec. 9-47. Discharge of surface water to sanitary sewer.
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. of 7-17-72, Art. IV, § 8)
 
Sec. 9-48. Compliance with codes.
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and the W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the superintendent before installation. 
(Ord. of 7-17-72, Art. IV, § 9)
 
Sec. 9-49. Notice of inspection readiness; supervision of connection.
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the superintendent or the superintendent's representative. 
(Ord. of 7-17-72, Art. IV, § 10)
 
Sec. 9-50. Guarding of excavations; restoration of surface.
All excavation for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Ord. of 7-17-72, Art. IV, § 11)
 
Secs. 9-51—9-55. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 3. USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
 
Sec. 9-56. Discharge of surface or unpolluted water to sanitary sewer.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. of 7-17-72, Art. V, § 1)
 
Sec. 9-57. Discharge of unpolluted water to storm sewer.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the state water improvement commission. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the state water improvement commission to a storm sewer, or natural outlet. 
(Ord. of 7-17-72, Art. V, § 2)
 
Sec. 9-58. Prohibited discharges.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)	Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid solid or gas. 
(2)	Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to damage or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant. 
(3)	Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five and five-tenths (5.5), or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of sewage works. 
(4)	Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size as to be capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works, such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(Ord. of 7-17-72, Art. V, § 3)
 
Sec. 9-59. Discharges subject to conditions.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the superintendent that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the superintendent will give consideration of such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are: 
(1)	Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred and fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty-five (65) degrees Celsius). 
(2)	Any waters or wastes containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) and one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (zero and sixty-five (65) degrees Celsius). 
(3)	Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent. 
(4)	Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not. 
(5)	Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, cyanide, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree than any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the superintendent and/or the Division of Sanitary Engineering, Alabama Department of Public Health, for such materials. 
(6)	Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the (superintendent) as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters. 
(7)	Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the (superintendent) in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(8)	Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of nine and five-tenths (9.5). 
(9)	Materials which exert or cause: 
a.	Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate). 
b.	Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions). 
c.	Unusual BOD (above (300) mg/l), chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirement in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works. 
d.	Unusual volume of flow of concentration of wastes constituting "slugs" and defined herein. 
(10)	Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(11)	Waters or wastes containing suspended solids in excess of three hundred (300) mg/l. 
(Ord. of 7-17-72, Art. V, § 4)
 
Sec. 9-60. Options of superintendent as to hazardous wastes.
(a)	If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 9-59, and which in the judgment of the superintendent, and/or the division of sanitary engineering, state department of public health, or other appropriate state agency, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the superintendent may: 
(1)	Reject the wastes, 
(2)	Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers, 
(3)	Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge, and/or 
(4)	Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of section 9-65. 
(b)	If the superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent, and the state department of public health, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. 
(Ord. of 7-17-72, Art. V, § 5)
 
Sec. 9-61. Grease, oil and sand interceptors.
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the superintendent, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(Ord. of 7-17-72, Art. V, § 6)
 
Sec. 9-62. Maintenance of treatment, etc., facilities.
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. of 7-17-72, Art. V, § 7)
 
Sec. 9-63. Control manholes, meters and appurtenances.
When required by the superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters, and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at the owner's expense, and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Ord. of 7-17-72, Art. V, § 8)
 
Sec. 9-64. Measurements, tests, analyses.
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at such control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards of life, limb and property. (The particular analyses involved will determine whether a twenty-four-hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from twenty-four-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH's are determined from periodic grab samples.) 
(Ord. of 7-17-72, Art. V, § 9)
 
Sec. 9-65. Special agreements.
No statement contained in this division shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the industrial concern. 
(Ord. of 7-17-72, Art. V, § 10)
 
Secs. 9-66—9-69. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL 
 
Sec. 9-70. Definitions.
The following terms when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them unless the text clearly indicates otherwise: 
Business establishment: Each person licensed to do business in the city, and having a location therein generating refuse. This shall include medical buildings as defined in this section. 
Garbage: Includes all waste accumulations of animal, fruit, or vegetable matter that attend the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storage of meat, fowl, fish, fruits or vegetables; and tin cans or other containers originally used for foodstuffs. 
Garbage can: A watertight receptacle or container of substantial metal or plastic construction having a capacity of not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty-five (35) gallons, with a tight-fitting lid or cover, and two (2) handles on the receptacle or container by which same may be conveniently lifted or moved. No cans in excess of thirty-five (35) gallons' capacity will be serviced. This includes fifty-five-gallon drums at all businesses or residences. Plastic garbage bags may also be used and a strong bag is recommended. 
Medical building: Any doctor's office, dental clinic, veterinary clinic, hospital, nursing home or any such related establishment. 
Oversized wastes: Items which cannot readily be collected in the normal mechanized compaction truck; also, items which cannot be easily crushed having bulk in excess of ten (10) cubic feet or a maximum single dimension exceeding five (5) feet in length or exceeding four (4) inches in diameter. This includes wastes which are largely of metallic construction such as refrigerators, stoves, barrels, metal furniture, boilers, dryers, washing machines and bed springs. 
Premises: Any dwelling, flat, rooming house, apartment house, hospital, school, hotel, club, restaurant, boardinghouse, eating place, shop, church, place of business, manufacturing establishment, courthouse, jail, city hall, post office, or other public building. 
Refuse: Both garbage and rubbish as defined herein, dead animals, and any other material or substance, regardless of definition, presently picked up and handled by the sanitation department of the city except oversized burnables and oversized nonburnable wastes. 
Rubbish: Includes all nonputrescible solid wastes, consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, glass, crockery, excelsior, cloth and similar materials. 
Construction and demolition landfill: Place for dumping or disposing of refuse, operated by the city, or such other place designated and approved by the county health officer. 
(Ord. No. 1983-1, § 1, 1-17-83; Ord. No. 2009-07, § 2, 11-16-09)
 
Sec. 9-71. Residential service established; frequency of pick-up; levy of fees; collection of fees; fee exemption.
(a)	There is hereby established in the city a residential refuse collection, hauling and disposal service to be operated by the sanitation department. The collection, hauling and disposal of garbage shall be made by the sanitation department one (1) time each week in a residential area. Rubbish, trash, leaves, grass and shrubbery trimmings shall be collected as the route permits in a residential area. Oversized wastes will only be picked up on special work orders and only as the route permits. 
(b)	Residential garbage will only be picked up if contained in the city-approved 95-gallon containers. No other containers will be picked up. Cost of garbage pick-up shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) per month per 95-gallon city-approved container. 
(c)	The utilities board of the city is hereby designated as the agent, for collection of such refuse fees. All bills for service shall be rendered monthly on the same statement rendered by the utilities board for utility service. Failure to pay the charges herein provided, shall constitute a violation of this Code and shall be unlawful. 
(d)	The director of the sanitation department is authorized in such director's discretion to include within the residential service provided hereunder, those business establishments located on normal residential pickup routes provided such establishments do not generate more than two (2) cubic yards of refuse per week. In the event of such authorization, the person operating such establishment shall pay the service fee required of residents, in the manner prescribed above. Any such authorization shall be revocable by the director of sanitation or by the city. 
(e)	Each application for any exemptions required by Code of Alabama 1975, § 22-27-1 et seq., shall be determined by the city clerk or that person designated by the clerk upon the submission of such documentation and/or affidavit by the head of household as the clerk may deem appropriate to effectuate the requirements of the Solid Wastes Disposal Act. 
(f)	Limbs and rubbish that consist of no more than one (1) load will be picked up once monthly at no additional charge. Additional pick-ups or call backs will be fifty dollars ($50.00) per load or partial load. Each additional load or partial load will be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. No. 1983-1, § 20, 1-17-83; Ord. No. 1983-2, 2-21-83; Ord. No. 1992-4, § 1, 12-21-92; Ord. No. 2001-6, § 1, 10-1-01; Ord. No. 2009-07, §§ 1, 4, 11-16-09; Ord. No. 2014-02, § 4, 2-3-14; Ord. No. 2018-03, § 4, 9-24-18)
 
Sec. 9-72. Commercial garbage.
The city does not offer commercial garbage service except for the pick-up of garbage in city-approved 95-gallon containers. Cost of commercial garbage pick-up shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) per month per 95-gallon city-approved container. 
(Ord. No. 1983-1, § 21, 1-17-83; Ord. No. 1992-4, § 2, 12-21-92; Ord. No. 2009-07, § 5, 11-16-09; Ord. No. 2014-02, § 5, 2-3-14; Ord. No. 2018-03, § 5, 9-24-18)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2009-07, § 5, adopted Nov. 16, 2009, amended § 9-72 title to read as herein set out. Former § 9-72 title pertained to business service established; levy of fees; determining container size; collection of fees. 
 
Sec. 9-73. Unlawful accumulations; inspection of premises.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person in possession, charge or control of any premises to keep, or cause to be kept, or allow the keeping on any premises within the city or its police jurisdiction, of refuse in such manner that it will become offensive or deleterious to health or likely to cause disease and the same is hereby declared a public nuisance. 
(b)	The health officer or the health officer's authorized representatives, the director of sanitation, or such other duly authorized inspectors as may be designated by the governing body of the city are hereby authorized to inspect any premises in the city or its police jurisdiction for the purpose of seeing that the requirements of this article are being complied with, and it shall be unlawful for any person whomsoever to resist or interfere with such representatives by word, deed or act in the performance of such inspection. 
(Ord. No. 1983-1, § 6, 1-17-83)
Cross reference(s)—Clearing of litter, § 8-41. 
 
Sec. 9-74. Garbage containers—Required; defective containers.
(a)	It shall be the duty of every person in possession, charge or control of any premises where refuse is created or accumulated, at all times to keep or cause to be kept a sufficient number of garbage cans or other approved containers for the deposit therein of refuse to prevent the spreading of such refuse upon such premises or upon the premises of others. 
(b)	It shall be the duty of every person in possession, charge or control of any premises where garbage is created or accumulated, and in case of multiple dwellings or multiple occupancy, the owner of the premises, at all times to keep or cause to be kept, a sufficient number of garbage cans (at least one (1) garbage can for each family or other unit but not exceeding four (4) cans per family) for the deposit therein, and lids or covers of such garbage cans shall be kept tightly closed at all times other than when garbage is being deposited therein or removed therefrom. 
(c)	Containers used for the deposit of garbage for collection by the city sanitation department shall be in good condition so that collection therefrom shall not injure the person collecting the contents thereof. Containers that are rusted, having ragged or sharp edges or other defects shall be promptly replaced upon receipt of notice from the director of the sanitation department. Garbage in cans that have had a notice received on them will not be picked up. 
(d)	Plastic bags may be used for garbage, refuse or rubbish pick-up. These plastic bags shall be of a strong enough texture that they will not tear or spill out the contents. The person will be contacted if the plastic bag does not meet the requirements for the garbage it is to handle. 
(e)	Subject to the approval of the director of the sanitation department, persons charged in this section with the duty of providing suitable containers may arrange for the refuse to be deposited in large removable containers, such as Dempster-Dumpmaster containers, or other large containers, approved by the director or the director's agent, and in that event the same shall be classified as a business establishment. 
(f)	All medical buildings shall provide a garbage can for their premises; no freestanding plastic bags will be picked up. Plastic bags may be put in garbage cans, but the bags will never be picked up by themselves. 
(Ord. No. 1983-1, §§ 2, 4, 1-17-83)
 
Sec. 9-75. Same—Prohibited substances; service of defective containers.
It shall be unlawful to place in any garbage or rubbish container any acids or other dangerous liquids or substances which could cause injury to employees of the sanitation department engaged in removing refuse. Leaking and defective garbage cans with sharp or ragged edges likely to injure employees of the sanitation department engaged in removing refuse will not be serviced. A notice will be given to the person in charge of such garbage container as provided in section 9-74. 
(Ord. No. 1983-1, § 15, 1-17-83)
 
Sec. 9-76. Same—Placement for pick-up.
(a)	All garbage cans and approved containers to be emptied by the sanitation department shall be placed at places to be determined by the sanitation department on the days and between the hours designated by the said department. It will be unlawful on the scheduled day of pick-up for garbage to be put out before 5:00 a.m. and left out later than 11:00 p.m. Garbage should be put in the designated pick-up place by 7:00 a.m. on the designated pick-up day to assure pick-up. 
(b)	All garbage cans and approved containers shall be so situated so that they cannot be overturned by wind or animals. 
(c)	All garbage cans and approved containers shall be placed and maintained so as to be fully accessible and convenient to workers emptying the same, and so as to accommodate the equipment used in the performance of such service. 
(d)	It is the intention of the council by this article to provide collection of garbage at the alleys where they exist or if no alleys exist, garbage will be collected at the edge of the street in front of the house. It will be the duty of the person being served to place garbage cans at the alley or street on the outside of fences or obstructions for the convenient handling of the garbage collector. 
(e)	At no time will collection personnel enter houses, buildings, or fences for collection of garbage. 
(Ord. No. 1983-1, §§ 7, 8, 1-17-83)
 
Sec. 9-77. Same—Prohibited removal of refuse therefrom.
It shall be unlawful for any person other than those removing the entire contents thereof for disposal, to remove any garbage or other like materials from any garbage can or other container within the corporate limits and police jurisdiction of the city after it has been placed therein. 
(Ord. No. 1983-1, § 10, 1-17-83)
 
Sec. 9-78. Breaking down of cartons; placement of papers and magazines.
All cartons, crates, baskets, packages, boxes, and other similar items shall be broken down as to permit the same to be hauled flat. Paper and magazines may be placed in garbage cans or tied in bundles and placed alongside cans. 
(Ord. No. 1983-1, § 19, 1-17-83)
 
Sec. 9-79. Building debris, limbs, etc.
Building debris such as scrap lumber, plaster, roofing, concrete, brickbats and sanding dust resulting from the construction, repair or remodeling of any building or appurtenances on private property, dirt, stumps, and tree trunks, limbs and branches four (4) inches or larger in diameter or six (6) inches in length, will not be removed by the sanitation department, but the owner must remove this waste privately. All limbs must be placed with all tops in the same direction with butts facing the road. 
(Ord. No. 1983-1, § 11, 1-17-83)
 
Sec. 9-80. Landscaping, etc., refuse.
(a)	It shall be the responsibility of all fence companies, tree surgeons, nurseries, and landscape contractors or any person doing work on private property to remove from premises all residue and rubbish resulting from such work. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful to put trash, grass, leaves or limbs in street. All limbs, and trash shall be placed in orderly fashion on curb. Limbs shall be placed with all tops in same direction and butts facing the road in a neat manner. 
(Ord. No. 1983-1, § 14, 1-17-83)
 
Sec. 9-81. Refuse on property prior to occupancy.
The city shall not be responsible for the collecting or hauling of rubbish, trash, limbs, brush, or other debris from the private property preliminary to, during or subsequent to construction of new buildings of whatever type prior to occupancy. Such material shall be removed by the owner of such property or the contractor responsible for the accumulation of same. 
(Ord. No. 1983-1, § 12, 1-17-83)
 
Sec. 9-82. Dead animals.
(a)	Dead animals in the corporate limits of the city not in excess of fifty (50) pounds in weight will be picked up by the garbage collectors, but in no event shall any person having a dead animal on premises occupied or under the control of such person allow it to remain undisposed of for a period of longer than twelve (12) hours. In the event the dead animals must be disposed of on a day other than the regular designated collection day, the sanitation department shall be notified. All animals above fifty (50) pounds must be removed within twelve (12) hours by the owner and it shall be unlawful for any person to throw or put into the streets, lanes, alleys, parkways, or rights-of-way any dead animal. 
(b)	It shall be the duty of places of business making a business of treating, handling, keeping, or disposing of animals to remove all dead animals from their premises to the city dump under the same regulations as apply under subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)	No animal excreta shall be placed in garbage cans or containers regardless of how packaged. 
(Ord. No. 1983-1, § 13, 1-17-83)
 
Sec. 9-83. Confinement of vicious animals.
All vicious animals shall either be confined or garbage receptacles placed at a point where collectors may empty same without attack from such animals. Where commercial collections are made from private alleys and accessways, such approaches shall be maintained in such a manner as not to be a hazard to sanitation personnel or equipment. Failure to comply with the above provisions after notification by the sanitation department will cause service to be discontinued until such time as same is corrected. 
(Ord. No. 1983-1, § 3, 1-17-83)
 
Sec. 9-84. Receptacles placed by city.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or cause to be removed from any street or sidewalk in the city any receptacle furnished by the city for the deposit of trash. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to sit upon or deface any such receptacle or cause it to be used in any way which will make it inaccessible for the receipt of trash. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person to place, store or cause to be placed or stored, any goods, merchandise, lumber, trash or any other material near any such receptacle, for the purpose which it is intended to serve. 
(Ord. No. 1983-1, § 16, 1-17-83)
 
Sec. 9-85. City-owned construction and demolition landfill; electronic waste—Fees.
(a)	Dumping fees for trailers and dump trucks dumping in the construction and demolition landfill in the city are shall be as follows: 
(1)	Single-axle dump trucks or trailers capable of hauling six (6) cubic yards or less$45.00
(2)	Tandem-axle dump trucks or trailers capable of hauling up to fifteen (15) cubic yards$65.00
(3)	Tri-axle dump trucks or trailers capable of hauling up to twenty-one (21) cubic yards$95.00
(b)	Electronic waste. Monitors, desktop sets, computers, radios, and other electronic waste will be charged the following: 
(1)	Monitors, televisions, and computer towers, per piece$5.00
(2)	Radios, telephones, handheld devices and keyboards, per piece$2.50
(Ord. No. 1989-3, 3-20-89; Ord. No. 1992-3, 6-1-92; Ord. No. 2009-07, § 2, 11-16-09; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 1, 1-14-2013)
 
Sec. 9-86. Same—Dumping refuse at other places.
It shall be unlawful for any person to, or cause to be dumped, any refuse upon any property other than a construction and demolition landfill as defined in section 9-70. 
(Ord. No. 1983-1, § 5, 1-17-83; Ord. No. 2009-07, § 2, 11-16-09)
 
Sec. 9-87. Same—Dead animals prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump the bodies of dead animals, or any portion or part of the bodies of dead animals in any city construction and demolition landfill, or on any other property owned by the city. 
(Ord. of 12-12-60, § 2; Ord. No. 2009-07, § 2, 11-16-09)
 
Chapter 10 OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 10-1. Incorporation of state offenses.
(a)	Any person committing an offense within the corporate limits of the city or within the police jurisdiction thereof, which is declared by a law or laws of the state now existing or hereafter enacted to be a misdemeanor, shall be guilty of an offense against the city. 
(b)	Any person committing an offense within the corporate limits of the city or within the police jurisdiction thereof, which is declared by a law or laws of the state now existing or hereafter enacted to be a violation, shall be guilty of an offense against the city. 
(c)	Any person or corporation committing within the corporate limits of the city or within the police jurisdiction thereof, an offense as defined by section 13A-1-2 of the Code of Alabama 1975, as amended, which offense is not declared by a law or laws of the state now existing or hereafter enacted to be a felony, misdemeanor or violation, shall be guilty of an offense against the city. 
(Ord. No. 1983-4, §§ 1—3, 8-15-83)
Cross reference(s)—Punishment for such offenses, § 1-8. 
 
Sec. 10-2. Alcoholic beverages—Consumption on public ways.
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage upon any right-of-way or any street, highway, alley or public way with the city or its police jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 1, 8-5-85)
 
Sec. 10-3. Same—Consumption on schoolgrounds and other places open to the public.
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage upon the schoolgrounds of any public or private school, the grounds of any hospital, nursing home, stadium, public recreational facility grounds, the parking lot of any business, including lounges, bars, or taverns, or the parking lot of any shopping center or upon any public parking lot. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 2, 8-5-85)
 
Sec. 10-3.1. Same—Exceptions.
(a)	It shall be lawful for any person to consume alcoholic beverages within the city-owned structure known as the depot for a private event, provided that all other federal, state, and local laws, rules, and regulations are followed. 
(b)	It shall be lawful for any person to consume alcoholic beverages on the grounds immediate to the depot in association to a private event within the depot, provided that all other federal, state, and local laws, rules, and regulations are followed. 
(c)	It shall be understood that grounds immediate to the depot means within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the building, but does not include any city right-of-way, street, other building, and/or sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 2017-09, §§ 1—3, 9-5-17)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2017-09, §§ 1—3, adopted Sept. 5, 2017, set out provisions adding § 10-3A. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included herein as § 10-3.1. 
 
Sec. 10-4. Same—Punishment of violators.
Any person who violates any provision of sections 10-2 and 10-3 shall upon conviction be fined in the following amounts: First offense, not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00); second offense, not less than fifty dollars ($50.00); third and subsequent offenses in amount not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus cost of court; or may also be imprisoned or sentenced to hard labor for a period of time not to exceed thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 3, 8-5-85)
 
Sec. 10-5. Loitering, etc., on school property.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf and/or play around any city school building and playground area, the Opp Head Start Center and playground area, or Douglas McArthur State Technical College facilities, unless that person is there for the purpose of attending school during regular school term and/or during regular school hours. 
(b)	Any visitor to any of these premises shall first report to the administrative offices thereof. 
(Ord. of 3-2-81, §§ 1, 2)
State law reference(s)—Loitering, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-11-9. 
 
Sec. 10-6. Damaging school property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface or damage any public school building, Opp Head Start Center, or Douglas McArthur State Technical College. 
(Ord. of 3-2-81, § 3)
State law reference(s)—Destruction of property, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-7-20. 
 
Sec. 10-7. Peddlers going uninvited onto residential property.
(a)	There shall be no peddling, soliciting, or door-to-door canvassing in the city prior to 8 a.m. nor after 7 p.m. without the express invitation of the homeowner or tenant. 
(b)	There shall be no peddling or soliciting of sales, merchandise, wares, or services at any residence where a sign stating "no solicitation" is posted by the homeowner or tenant in a conspicuous location in plain view to anyone peddling or soliciting unless such peddling or soliciting is by express invitation of the homeowner or tenant. 
(c)	All individuals or companies engaging in peddling, soliciting, or door-to-door sales in the city of any goods, wares, merchandise, or services shall register with the city clerk and purchase a license for such in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(d)	Any person who violates subsections (a), (b) or (c), shall be guilty of trespassing and may be charged under trespass in section 10-8. 
(Ord. No. 1978-3, § 1, 3-6-78; Ord. No. 2009-03, 7-20-09)
Cross reference(s)—Peddler's license and permit, §§ 5-17, 5-18. 
State law reference(s)—Criminal trespass, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-7-2 et seq. 
 
Sec. 10-8. Trespass.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to go upon or remain upon the lands, buildings or premises of another, or any part, portion or area thereof, after having been forbidden to do so, either orally or in writing, by the owner, lessee, custodian or other person in possession thereof, such person's agent or representative, or after having been forbidden to do so by a sign on such lands, buildings, premises or part, portion or area thereof at a place where such sign may be reasonably seen. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit, urge, instigate or procure another or others to do anything prohibited by subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. of 5-6-63(1), §§ 1, 2)
 
Sec. 10-9. Soliciting funds; permit required.
(a)	Nonprofit religious organizations, clubs, etc., shall obtain a written permit from the mayor and city clerk prior to soliciting any funds or contributions on the public streets and sidewalks of the city. 
(b)	A certificate of charter shall be submitted to the city clerk with the following additional information: names of officers of the organization, purpose of the organization, nature of use in the city of the funds collected in the city, means of obtaining funds, and names and addresses of persons collecting contributions. 
(c)	The information requested in subsection (b) of this section shall be submitted to the city clerk at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the planned solicitation. 
(Ord. No. 1978-3, §§ 2—4, 3-6-78)
 
Sec. 10-10. Obstruction of public way by assemblages.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person, grouping or assemblage of persons whose standing, sitting or remaining or congregating upon any public street, sidewalk or other public way in the city shall obstruct, prevent or interfere with the free or unobstructed use of such street, sidewalk or other public way by other persons, to fail or refuse to move on or to disperse upon being ordered to do so by any police officer of the city or other peace officer. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person, grouping or assemblage of persons whose standing, sitting, remaining or congregating upon any entrance or exit of any public or private building or structure in the city shall obstruct, prevent or interfere with the free or unobstructed use of such entrance or exit, or of the street or sidewalk adjacent thereto, by other persons, to fail or refuse to move on or to disperse upon being ordered to do so by any police officer of the city or other peace officer. 
(Ord. of 5-6-63(2), §§ 1, 2)
State law reference(s)—Unlawful assembly, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-11-5; failure of persons to disperse, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 13A-11-6, 13A-11-7(a)(6). 
 
Sec. 10-11. Obedience to orders of police officer.
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to obey the direction or order of a member of the police department of the city while such member is acting in an official capacity in carrying out such officer's duties. 
(Ord. of 5-6-63(3), § 1)
State law reference(s)—Refusing to aid peace officer, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-10-5. 
 
Sec. 10-12. Attaching posters to utility poles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to tack, nail, paste or otherwise place or put upon any utility pole in the city or its police jurisdiction any sign, poster, handbill or other form of advertising or notice. 
(Ord. of 2-20-58(2), § 1)
Cross reference(s)—Posting notices on posts, etc., § 8-40. 
State law reference(s)—Criminal tampering, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-7-24 et seq. 
 
Sec. 10-13. Smoking, chewing tobacco and snuff prohibited in city-owned buildings and property; exceptions.
(a)	It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to smoke tobacco, chew tobacco or snuff within the confines of any city-owned and operated building or property, except in those outside areas which shall be established and designated at each facility by the city. 
(b)	Department heads shall establish tobacco use areas at all municipal facilities in their respective departments. 
(c)	These established areas shall be designated and posted as such. 
(d)	Notice of this section shall be given by posting written "THIS FACILITY IS TOBACCO FREE" signs at such locations as appropriate. Notice of this section shall be given on all rules and regulations signs located on city property. 
(e)	Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a minimum fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 1992-2, 4-6-92; Ord. No. 2001-3, §§ 1—6, 3-3-01)
Editor's note(s)—At the discretion of the editor, provisions enacted by Ord. No. 1992-2, adopted April 6, 1992, have been included herein as § 10-13. 
 
Sec. 10-14. Weapons.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his/her possession a firearm or non-firing replica, black powder, firearm, gas operated gun, air gun, zip gun, blank gun or starter's pistol, flare gun, knife, straight razor, razor blade, box cutter, exacto knife, carpet knife, or paint scraper with retractable razor blade, or any other item that utilizes a razor blade or other replaceable blade, brass knuckles, slingshot, club, bow and arrow, or crossbow, numchucks (nunchaku), throwing stars, fighting claw, or any other weapon utilized in the martial arts, explosive devices of any type, including fireworks, mace, tear gas or stun gun, fingernail clippers or other item that contains a knife blade or fingernail file that has been sharpened in such a way as to cut or puncture, bicycle or other heavy duty chain fashion as a weapon, bull whip, bike sprockets fashioned as a weapon (brass knuckles) ice pick, sword or sword cane, spear, hatchet or hand ax, police baton, impact baton, blackjack or night stick, spring billy, or any device capable of discharging a projectile of any kind, or any other object not specifically listed which is primarily meant and adapted for attack and the infliction of injury, while on school property within the police jurisdiction of the city, or while being transported to or from school or a school related activity on transportation by or endorsed by the city school system unless said weapon is authorized by a school official for use in a classroom or course. 
(b)	For purposes of this section, possession shall be defined to include any of the above named items being located on the person, in a locker, briefcase, desk, purse, satchel, book bag, gym bag, other like item of personal property, or a vehicle on school property that is in the custody and control of the person being charged with the offense. 
(c)	It shall further be unlawful to possess on school property any item not listed herein that has been specifically banned by the city school board as being illegal to possess on school property. Failure by the city school board to list a banned item shall not abrogate the right of the city to make such item illegal. 
(d)	Any person eighteen (18) years of age or above violating this section shall, on conviction, be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and may also be imprisoned in the city jail for not more than six (6) months. any person less than eighteen (18) years of age that violates this section will be adjudicated in the Covington County District (Juvenile) Court. 
(e)	This section shall not apply to school security personnel, police officers, marshals, sheriffs, and their regularly employed deputies or other law enforcement officers that enter school property in the line of duty. 
(Ord. No. 1996-1, § 1, 4-1-96)
 
Sec. 10-15. Abandoned and stolen property—General.
The chief of police is hereby authorized to take up and store abandoned or stolen personal property found within the city limits or outside the city limits, both in the police jurisdiction thereof, and to sell the same in the manner provided by section 11-47-116 of the Code of Alabama, 1975. A permanent record covering the date of the taking of each piece of such property, the place where found and taken, and a description of the property shall be kept by the chief of police. The property so taken shall be stored in a suitable place to protect it from deterioration; provided that, if the property be perishable the same may be sold at once, without notice, in which case the proceeds shall be held by the city for a period of six (6) months for the account of the owner, and if not called for within that time, it shall be converted into the general fund. 
(Ord. No. 2002-01, 3-1-02)
 
Sec. 10-16. Same—Disposition.
(a)	At least every six (6) months the chief of police shall sell or cause to be sold at public auction to the highest bidder for cash the property which shall have then been taken up and stored for a period of three (3) months or more, except property held for evidence in any pending case, and except illegal dangerous substances or contraband, and except motor vehicles, the sales to be made after notice of the time and place thereof shall have first been given by publication of notice once a week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, and by posting such notice in a conspicuous place in city hall. The first publication and posting of notice shall be at least twenty (20) days prior to the sale. 
(b)	Except as otherwise provided in subsection (e) the owner of any of the property taken up and stored may redeem the same at any time prior to its sale by establishing reasonable proof of ownership thereof and by paying the reasonable expenses of taking the property in charge, its maintenance and storage and a pro rata of the cost of publication. 
(c)	Each article shall be sold separately and a notation in the storage record book shall be made of the amount received for each article. The person making the sale shall have the right to reject any or all bids if the amounts bid are unreasonably low and shall have the right to continue the sales from time to time if no bidders are present. 
(d)	After deducting and paying all the expenses incurred in the taking up, storing, maintaining and selling of the property, the balance, if any, shall be paid into the general fund of the city. 
(e)	Illegal dangerous substances or contraband shall be disposed of as provided by law or as directed by the court. 
(f)	In the case of property which is needed or usable by any department of the city, the chief of police shall give notice by publication as set out in subsection (a) of this section. If the property is not claimed by the owner within twenty (20) days after publication and posting of notice, the chief shall transfer it to the requesting department and it shall be listed as inventory by that department. Ownership of the property shall vest in the city, except that the owner may redeem the property at any time by establishing reasonable proof of ownership and by paying the reasonable expenses of taking the property in charge, its maintenance and storage, and a pro rata share of the cost of publication. In such event, the city shall not be liable to the owner for any use of the property or for any damage or wear and tear caused by such use. 
(Ord. No. 2002-01, 3-1-02)
 
Secs. 10-17—10-19. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. HOUSING DISCRIMINATION
 
Sec. 10-20. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article and the interpretation and enforcement thereof the following definitions apply: 
Agent: Any real estate broker, real estate salesperson, and any other person who is acting for some other person within the relationship of principal and agent. 
Discriminate: To categorically distinguish between persons on a basis or by reason of race, color, religion, sex, age, or national origin. 
Owner: Any person holding legal or equitable title to or any interest in real estate located within the city. 
Residential real property: Any structure or portion thereof (including single-family, multi-family and transient accommodations) used for the purpose of providing basic shelter for its occupants. 
Unlawful real estate practice: Any act of commission or omission by any agent or owner which is herein declared to be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1989-1, § 2, 2-6-89)
 
Sec. 10-21. Declaration of policy.
It is declared to be the policy of the city that all persons shall have a fair and equal opportunity to purchase, own, lease, or occupy real estate located within the city without discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex, age, or national origin. 
(Ord. No. 1989-1, § 1, 2-6-89)
 
Sec. 10-22. Unlawful real estate practice.
It shall be an unlawful real estate practice and unlawful for any agent or owner: 
(1)	To make any distinction, discrimination or restriction against any person in price, terms, conditions or privileges of any kind relating to the sale, rental, lease or occupancy of any residential real property, or in furnishing of any facilities or services in connection therewith predicated upon race, color, religion, sex, age, or national origin of the prospective or actual buyer, tenant, or occupant thereof. 
(2)	To publish, circulate, issue or display or cause to be published, circulated, issued, or displayed, any communication, notice, advertisement, sign, or writing of any kind relating to the sale, rental or leasing of such real property predicated upon the race, color, religion, sex, age, or national origin of any prospective buyer, lessee, or renter. 
(3)	To refuse to sell, lease or rent real property for residential purposes because of the race, color, religion, sex, age, or national origin of the proposed buyer or renter. 
(4)	To discriminate or to participate in discrimination in connection with borrowing or lending money, guaranteeing loans, accepting mortgages or otherwise obtaining or making available funds for the purchase, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of any residential real property because of the race, color, religion, sex, age, or national origin of any person. 
(5)	To cheat, exploit, or overcharge any person for residential real property because of race, color, religion, sex, age or national origin of such person. 
(6)	To solicit for sale, lease or listing for sale or lease any residential real property on the grounds of loss of value due to the present or prospective entry into any neighborhood of any person of any particular race, color, religion, sex, age, or national origin. 
(7)	To distribute or cause to be distributed written material or statements designed to induce any owner of residential real property to sell or lease such person's property because of any present or prospective change in the composition of any neighborhood due to race, color, religion, sex, age, or national origin of any person. 
(8)	To deliberately and knowingly refuse examination of residential real property to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, age, or national origin of such person. 
(Ord. No. 1989-1, § 3, 2-6-89)
 
Secs. 10-23—10-40. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. ABATEMENTS 
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 10-41. Applicability.
The provisions of this act shall only apply to any municipality located in Covington County, Alabama. 
(Ord. No. 1997-5, Art. I(1), 9-15-97)
 
Secs. 10-42—10-60. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. WEEDS
 
Sec. 10-61. Declared public nuisance; abatement.
All weeds growing upon streets, sidewalks, or upon private property within any municipalities located in Covington County, Alabama, which bear seeds of a wingy or downy nature, which attain such a large growth as to become a fire menace when dry, or which are otherwise noxious or dangerous may be declared to be a public nuisance by the governing body of the municipality and may be abated as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 1997-5, Art. II(1), 9-15-97)
 
Sec. 10-62. Report of appropriate city official; resolution declaring a public nuisance.
The term "appropriate city official" as used in this division shall mean any city official or employee designated by the mayor or other chief executive officer of the city as the person to exercise the authority and perform the duties delegated by this division to the appropriate city official. 
The appropriate city official shall report to the city governing body whenever weeds are growing upon any street, sidewalk, or private property which constitute a nuisance. Upon receiving a report, the city governing body may declare the same to be a public nuisance and order its abatement. 
(Ord. No. 1997-5, Art. II(2), 9-15-97)
 
Sec. 10-63. Notice to owner; contents; posting of signs.
After the passage of a resolution, the appropriate city official shall send notice of the action to the last person or persons, firm, association, or corporation last assessing the property for state taxes, by certified or registered mail to the address on file in the revenue commissioner's office to remedy the growth of weeds within a reasonable time set out in the notice, not to exceed fourteen (14) days or suffer the weeds to be abated by the city and the cost thereof assessed against the property. The mailing of the certified or registered notice, properly addressed and postage prepaid, shall constitute notice as required herein. The city shall also place a sign conspicuously on the property indicating that the city governing body has found the property to be a public nuisance because of the unlawful growth of weeds. 
(Ord. No. 1997-5, Art. II(3), 9-15-97)
 
Sec. 10-64. Hearing.
Within the time specified in the notice, but not more than fourteen (14) days from the date the notice is given, any person, firm, or corporation, may file a written request for a hearing before the governing body of the city, together with objections to the finding by the city governing body that the weeds constitute a public nuisance. The filing of the request shall hold in abeyance any action on the finding of the city governing body until a determination thereon is made by the city governing body. The hearing shall be held not less than five (5) nor more than thirty (30) days after the request. In the event that no hearing is timely requested, the mayor of the city governing body shall order the weeds to be abated as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 1997-5, Art. II(4), 9-15-97)
 
Sec. 10-65. Entry of municipal employees and agents on property to abate nuisance; abatement by private contractor.
If the nuisance on the property has not been abated within fourteen (14) days after the city governing body's resolution, the mayor of the city shall order the nuisance to be abated. The abatement may be accomplished, at the option of the city, by its own forces or by contract. For purposes of this article, compliance with the competitive bid laws shall not be required. All city employees and duly authorized agents are expressly authorized to enter private property for the purpose of abating the nuisance thereon. 
(Ord. No. 1997-5, Art. II(5), 9-15-97)
 
Sec. 10-66. Accounting of costs of abatement.
The appropriate city official shall give an itemized written report to the city governing body regarding the cost of abating the nuisance. The cost of abatement shall be the actual cost the city incurs in the abatement, including administrative costs. Should the city contract for abatement, the cost shall be the actual costs the contractor charges the city for the abatement, including administrative costs the city incurs. Upon report of the costs by the appropriate city official, the governing body shall adopt a resolution confirming the costs of the reports, provided that any person, firm, or corporation having an interest in the property may be heard at the meeting concerning the fixing of the costs or the amounts thereof. The city clerk of the city shall give at least ten (10) days' notice of the meeting at which the fixing of the costs is to be considered by first-class mail to all entities having an interest in the property whose address and interest is determined from the revenue commissioner's records on the property or is otherwise known to the clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1997-5, Art. II(6), 9-15-97)
 
Sec. 40-67. Cost to constitute weed liens; report to revenue commissioner; amounts to be included in tax bills; collection.
The confirmed cost of abatement shall hereinafter be referred to as a weed lien and thus made and confirmed shall constitute a weed lien on the property for the amount of the weed lien. After confirmation of the reports, a copy shall be turned over to the Revenue Commissioner of Covington County who, under the optional method of taxation, is charged with the collection of the city's municipal taxes pursuant to Code of Alabama 1975, sections 11-51-40 through 11-51-74. Whereupon it shall be the duty of the county revenue commissioner to add the amounts of any weed lien to the next regular bills for taxes levied against the respective lots and parcels of land, and thereafter any weed liens shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal ad valorem taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency. The county revenue commissioner shall retain ten (10) percent of the amount of each weed lien collected and remit the remainder to the municipality. The amount retained by the revenue commissioner shall be used for operational purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1997-5, Art. II(7), 9-15-97)
 
Sec. 10-68. Article cumulative in nature.
This division shall be cumulative in its nature, and in addition to any and all power and authority which the city may have under any other law. 
(Ord. No. 1997-5, Art. II(8), 9-15-97)
 
Secs. 10-69—10-80. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 3. UNSAFE STRUCTURES
 
Sec. 10-81. Demolition of unsafe structures by any municipalities located in county.
Any municipality located in Covington County, Alabama, shall have authority, after notice provided herein, to move or demolish buildings and structures, or parts of buildings and structures, party walls and foundations, when the same are found by the governing body of the city to be unsafe to the extent of being a public nuisance from any cause. 
(Ord. No. 1997-5, Art. III(1), 9-15-97)
 
Sec. 10-82. Appropriate city official defined; duties; notice of unsafe or dangerous conditions.
The term "appropriate city official" as used in this article shall mean any city building official or deputy and any other city official or city employee designated by the mayor or other chief executive officer of the city as the person to exercise the authority and perform the duties delegated by this division to the appropriate city official. Whenever the appropriate city official of the city shall find that any building, structure, part of building or structure, party wall or foundation situated in any city is unsafe to the extent that it is a public nuisance, the official shall report the findings to the city governing body. At that time the city governing body shall determine whether the building, structure, part of building or structure, party wall, or foundation constitutes a public nuisance. Should the city governing body find by resolution that the building, structure, part of building or structure, party wall, or foundation is a public nuisance, then the appropriate city official shall give the person or persons, firm, association, or corporation last assessing the property for state taxes, by certified or registered mail to the address on file in the revenue commissioner's office, notice to remedy the unsafe or dangerous condition of the building or structure, or to demolish the same, within a reasonable time set out in the notice, which time shall not be less than thirty (30) days unless an extension is granted by the appropriate city official or suffer the building or structure to be demolished by the city and the cost thereof assessed against the property. The mailing of the certified or registered notice, properly addressed and postage prepaid, shall constitute notice as required herein. The city shall place a sign or placard within fifteen (15) feet of the entrance of the building or structure, indicating that the city had declared the building or structure to be a public nuisance; however, if there is no entrance in which to place the sign or placard, then the sign or placard may be posted at any location upon the building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 1997-5, Art. III(2), 9-15-97)
 
Sec. 10-83. Hearing procedure; order; appeal.
Within the time specified in the notice, but not more than thirty (30) days from the date the notice is given, any person, firm, or corporation having an interest in the building or structure may file a written request for a hearing before the governing body of the city, together with the objections to the finding by the city governing body that the building or structure is unsafe to the extent of becoming a public nuisance. The filing of the request shall hold in obeyance any action on the finding of the city governing body until a determination thereon is made by the city governing body. The hearing shall be held not less than five (5) nor more than thirty (30) days after the request. In the event that no hearing is timely requested, the governing body shall order the building or structure to be demolished. The demolition may be accomplished, at the option of the city, by the use of its own forces or it may provide by contract for the demolition. For purposes of this division, compliance with the competitive bid laws are not required. The city shall have authority to sell or otherwise dispose of salvaged materials resulting from the demolition. 
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the governing body at the hearing may, within ten (10) days thereafter, appeal to the circuit court upon filing with the clerk of the court notice of appeal and bond for security of costs in the form and amount to be approved by the circuit clerk. Upon filing of the notice of appeal and approval of the bond, the clerk of the court shall serve a copy of the notice of appeal on the clerk of the city and the appeal shall be docketed in the court, and shall be a preferred case therein. The clerk of the city shall, upon receiving the notice, file with the clerk of the court a copy of the findings and determination of the governing body in proceedings, and trials shall be held without jury upon the determination of the governing body that the building or structure is unsafe to the extent that it is a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 1997-5, Art. III(3), 9-15-97)
 
Sec. 10-84. Report of cost of demolition; adoption of resolution fixing costs; proceeds of sale of salvaged materials; objections to findings of cost; notice.
Upon demolition of the building or structure, the appropriate city official shall make an itemized written report to the governing body of the cost thereof. The cost of the demolition shall be the actual cost the city incurs in the demolition should the city use its own forces, including administrative costs the city incurs in abating the nuisance. Should the city contract for demolition, the cost shall be the actual cost the contractor charges the city for the demolition, including administrative costs the city incurs in abating the nuisance. Upon report of the costs by the appropriate city official, the governing body shall adopt a resolution fixing the costs which it finds were incurred in the demolition and assessing the same against the property; provided, however, the proceeds of any moneys received from the use of salvaged materials from the building or structure shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition; and provided, further, that any person, firm, or corporation having an interest in the property may be heard at the meeting concerning the fixing of the costs or the amounts thereof. The city clerk of the city shall give at least ten (10) days' notice of the meeting at which the fixing of the costs is to be considered by first-class mail to all entities having an interest in the property whose address and interest is determined from the revenue commissioner's records on the property or is otherwise known to the clerk. The fixing of costs by the governing body shall constitute a special assessment against the lot or lots, parcel or parcels of land upon which the building or structure was located, and thus made and confirmed shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property except liens for taxes, and shall continue in force until paid. A certified copy of the resolution shall be filed in the office of the Judge of Probate of Covington County. Upon filing, the revenue commissioner of the county shall add the amount of the lien to the ad valorem tax bill on the property and shall collect the amount as if it were a tax and remit the amount to the city. The county revenue commissioner shall retain ten (10) percent of the amount of each lien collected to be used for operational purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1997-5, Art. III(4), 9-15-97)
 
Sec. 10-85. Assessment of costs; sale and redemption of lots.
The city shall have the power to assess the costs authorized herein against any lot or lots, parcel or parcels of land purchased by the State of Alabama at any sale for nonpayment of taxes, and where any assessment is made against the lot or lots, parcel or parcels of land, a subsequent redemption thereof by any person authorized to redeem, or sale thereof by the state, shall not operate to discharge, or in any manner affect the lien of the city for the assessment, but any redemptioner or purchaser at any sale by the state of any lot or lots, parcel or parcels of land upon which an assessment has been levied, whether prior to or subsequent to sale to the state for the nonpayment of taxes, shall take the same subject to the assessment. The assessment shall then be added to the tax bill of the property, collected as a tax, and remitted to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1997-5, Art. III(5), 9-15-97)
 
Sec. 10-86. Payment of assessments.
Payment of any assessment, or if delinquent, the collection of the assessment, shall be made in the manner and as provided for the payment of municipal improvement assessments as provided for the payment of and delinquent collection of municipal improvement assessments pursuant to Code of Alabama 1975, article I (commencing with section 11-48-1) of chapter 2 of title 11. The city may, in the latter notice, elect to have the revenue commissioner collect the assessment by adding the same to the tax bill; upon the election the revenue commissioner shall collect the assessment using all methods available for collecting ad valorem taxes. Ten (10) percent of the amount of each assessment collected by the county revenue commissioner shall be retained by the county revenue commissioner and used for operational purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1997-5, Art. III(6), 9-15-97)
 
Sec. 10-87. Division cumulative in nature.
This division shall be cumulative in its nature, and in addition to any and all power and authority which any city may have under any other law. 
(Ord. No. 1997-5, Art. III(7), 9-15-97)
 
DIVISION 4. UNUSED SIGNS
 
Sec. 10-88. Declared public nuisance; abatement.
All unused signs, sign poles, or sign frames or damaged signs located upon private property within the city limits of Opp, Alabama may be declared to be a public nuisance by the governing body of the municipality and may be abated as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 2005-01, 4-18-05)
 
Sec. 10-89. Appropriate city official defined; duties; notice.
The term "appropriate city official" as used in this division shall mean the mayor or any city official, employee, or other person designated by the mayor or other chief executive officer of the city as the person to exercise the authority and perform the duties delegated by this division to the appropriate city official. 
The appropriate city official shall report to the city governing body whenever unused signs, sign poles, or sign frames or damaged signs are located upon any property which constitute a nuisance. Upon receiving a report, the city governing body may declare the same to be a public nuisance and order its abatement. 
(Ord. No. 2005-01, 4-18-05)
 
Sec. 10-90. Notice to owner; contents; posting of signs.
After the passage of a resolution, the appropriate city official shall send notice of the action to the last person or persons, firm association, or corporation last assessing the property for state taxes, by certified or registered mail to the address on file in the revenue commissioner's office to remove or remedy the unused signs, sign poles, sign frames or damaged signs within a reasonable time set out in the notice, not to exceed fourteen (14) days or suffer the unused signs, sign poles, sign frames or damaged signs to be abated by the city and the cost thereof assessed against the property. The mailing of the certified or registered notice, properly addressed and postage prepaid, shall constitute notice as required herein. The city shall also place a sign conspicuously on the property indicating that the city governing body has found the property to be a public nuisance because of the unused signs, sign poles, sign frames or damaged signs. 
(Ord. No. 2005-01, 4-18-05)
 
Sec. 10-91. Hearing.
Within the time specified in the notice, but not more than fourteen (14) days from the date the notice is given, any person, firm, or corporation, may file a written request for a hearing before the governing body of the city, together with objections to the finding by the city governing body that the unused signs, sign poles, sign frames or damaged signs constitute a public nuisance. The filing of the request shall hold in abeyance any action of the finding of the city governing body until a determination thereon is made by the city governing body. The hearing shall be held not less than five (5) nor more than thirty (30) days after the request. In the event that no hearing is timely requested, the mayor of the city governing body shall order the unused signs, sign poles, sign frames or damaged signs to be abated as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 2005-01, 4-18-05)
 
Sec. 10-92. Entry of municipal employees and agents on property to abate nuisance; abatement by private contractor.
If the nuisance on the property has not been abated within fourteen (14) days after the city governing body's resolution, the mayor of the city shall order the nuisance to be abated. The abatement may be accomplished, at the option of the city, by its own forces or by contract. For purposes of this article, compliance with the competitive bid laws shall not be required. All city employees and duly authorized agents are expressly authorized to enter private property for the purpose of abating the nuisance thereon. 
(Ord. No. 2005-01, 4-18-05)
 
Sec. 10-93. Accounting of costs of abatement.
The appropriate city official shall give an itemized written report to the city governing body regarding the cost of abating the nuisance. The cost of abatement shall be the actual cost the city incurs in the abatement, including administrative costs. Should the city contract for abatement, the cost shall be the actual cost the contractor charges the city for the abatement, including administrative costs the city incurs. Upon report of the cost by the appropriate city official, the governing body shall adopt a resolution confirming the cost of the reports, provided that any person, firm, or corporation having an interest in the property may be heard at the meeting concerning the fixing of the costs or the amounts thereof. The city clerk of the city shall give at least ten (10) days' notice for the meeting at which the fixing of the costs is to be considered by first-class mail to all entities having an interest in the property whose address and interest is determined from the revenue commissioner's records on the property or is otherwise known to the clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2005-01, 4-18-05)
 
Sec. 10-94. Cost to constitute unused sign liens; report to revenue commissioner; amounts to be included in tax bills; collection.
The confirmed cost of abatement shall hereinafter be referred to as an unused sign lien and thus made and confirmed shall constitute an unused sign lien on the property for the amount of the unused sign lien. After confirmation of the reports, a copy shall be turned over to the Revenue Commissioner of Covington County who, under the optional method of taxation, is charged with the collection of the city's municipal taxes pursuant to Code of Alabama 1975, sections 11-51-40 through 11-51-74. Whereupon it shall be the duty for the county revenue commissioner to add the amounts of any unused sign lien to the next regular bills for taxes levied against the respective lots and parcels of land, and thereafter any unused sign liens shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal ad valorem taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency. The county revenue commissioner shall retain ten (10) percent of the amount of each unused sign lien collected and remit the remainder to the municipality. The amount retained by the revenue commissioner shall be used for operational purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2005-01, 4-18-05)
 
Sec. 10-95. Article cumulative in nature.
This article shall be cumulative in its nature, and in addition to any and all power and authority which the city may have under any other law. 
(Ord. No. 2005-01, 4-18-05)
 
Chapter 11 PERSONNEL
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 11-1. Personnel system established; merit principles.
There is hereby established a personnel system for the city. Such system shall be established on the following merit principles: 
(1)	Recruiting, selecting and advancing employees on the basis of their relative ability, knowledge, and skills, including open competition of qualified applicants for initial appointment; 
(2)	Establishing pay rates consistent with the principle of providing comparable pay for comparable work; 
(3)	Training employees, as needed to assure high quality performance; 
(4)	Retaining employees on the basis of the adequacy of their performance, correcting inadequate performance and separating employees whose inadequate performance cannot be corrected; 
(5)	Assuring fair treatment of applicants and employees in all aspects of personnel administration without regard to political affiliation, race, color, creed, age, national origin or ancestry, sex or religion. 
(Ord. No. 1977-2, § 1, 6-6-77)
 
Sec. 11-2. Classified service; exceptions.
(a)	The classified service shall include all employees serving in continuing positions in the municipality except the following: 
(1)	Members of the municipal governing body and other elected officials; 
(2)	Members of appointed boards and commissions, municipal judges and municipal attorneys; 
(3)	Persons employed to work less than full-time; 
(4)	Administrative officials appointed by the mayor and/or municipal governing body, including but not limited to all department heads, the fire chief and the police chief; 
(5)	Volunteer personnel who receive no regular compensation from the municipality; 
(6)	Temporary positions scheduled for less than one (1) year's duration unless specifically covered by the action of the mayor and city council; 
(7)	Persons performing work under contract for the municipality who are not carried on the payroll as employees. 
(b)	Nothing herein shall be construed as precluding the mayor and/or governing body from filling any excepted positions in the manner in which positions in the classified service are filled. 
(Ord. No. 1977-2, § 2, 6-6-77)
 
Sec. 11-3. Personnel officer—Designated; staff.
The city clerk is hereby designated to perform the duties of personnel officer. The personnel officer may have other staff members designated to assist such officer or may designate any member of such officer's staff to assist such officer. 
(Ord. No. 1977-2, § 3, 6-6-77)
 
Sec. 11-4. Same—Duties.
The personnel officer shall be responsible for the personnel administration system and shall direct all of its administrative and technical activities. Such officer's duties shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)	Encourage and exercise leadership in the development of effective personnel administration practices within the municipality; 
(2)	Investigate from time to time the operation and effect of this chapter and the policies made hereunder and to report the findings and recommendations to the mayor and governing body; 
(3)	Establish and maintain comprehensive personnel records for each employee in the municipality's service including for each employee such officer's classification, pay rate, date of employment and other relevant data; 
(4)	Advise the mayor and governing body on matters affecting the most effective use of manpower resources; 
(5)	Make an annual report to the mayor and governing body regarding the status of the personnel administration program. 
(Ord. No. 1977-2, § 4, 6-6-77)
 
Sec. 11-5. Personnel rules and regulations—Enactment; scope.
The personnel officer, having drafted personnel rules and regulations for the municipality, such rules and regulations, became effective upon passage of an ordinance by the governing body. The policies shall provide for: 
(1)	The classification of all positions, based on duties, authority and responsibility of each position, with adequate provisions for reclassification of any positions warranted by changed circumstances; 
(2)	A pay plan for classified service positions; 
(3)	Announcement of employee vacancies and acceptance of application for employment; 
(4)	Preparation and administration of examinations, if appropriate; 
(5)	Establishment and use of eligibility lists, if appropriate; 
(6)	Establishment of promotion policies and procedures; 
(7)	Transfer, promotion and reinstatement of employees; 
(8)	Performance evaluations of employee, including those on probationary periods; 
(9)	Separation of employees from the classified service by resignation, suspension, dismissal, layoff, or incapacity to perform required duties; 
(10)	Grievance and appeal procedures; 
(11)	Establishment of hours of work, holidays, vacations, leave regulations and procedures; 
(12)	Outside employment of municipal employees; 
(13)	Establishment of a probation period for all employees prior to final appointment; 
(14)	Development of employee morale, safety and training programs; 
(15)	Such other matters as may be necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1977-2, § 5, 6-6-77)
 
Sec. 11-6. Same—On file.
The personnel rules and regulations have been printed in booklet, adopted as the rules and regulations governing personnel actions of the city, are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1977-3, § 1, 6-20-77)
 
Sec. 11-7. Payroll verification.
The personnel officer or such officer's authorized agent shall be responsible for the certification of the payroll vouchers that the persons named therein have been appointed and employed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the policies thereunder. The disbursing officer of the municipality shall not make or approve or take part in making or approving any payment for the personal service to any person holding a position in the municipality unless such payroll voucher or account of such pay bears the certification of the personnel officer or such officer's authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 1977-2, § 6, 6-6-77)
 
Sec. 11-8. Qualified retiree's retention of health insurance coverage.
(a)	The city shall, upon timely application by a qualified, retiring employee allow such qualified retiree to maintain the retiree's health insurance coverage that he or she had while employed by the city for so long as the retiree pays the full premium amount and remains eligible as set forth herein below. 
(b)	Such post retirement health insurance coverage is available only to qualified employees and their spouses. A qualified employee is one who has completed a minimum of twenty-five (25) years of active, full-time employment with the city, and who makes application for the same prior to the effective date of his/her retirement. Said coverage must commence immediately upon such retiree's retirement. 
(c)	A qualifying retiree who elects to and does participate in this post-retirement health insurance coverage plan shall continue to be eligible to participate until such time as said retiree becomes employed by another employer through whom the retiree can obtain health insurance coverage or until the retiree reaches the age of sixty-five (65) years, or until the retiree fails to timely pay the monthly premium for such coverage, which ever shall first occur. 
(d)	Such post-retirement health insurance coverage will be made available to the spouse of a retiree who is qualified and who participates in the plan. That post-retirement health insurance will be made available to an employee's dependents other than his/her spouse for the period of eighteen (18) months only, pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of the Cobra Act. 
(e)	The spouse of a qualifying and participating retiree can participate by making application at the time the retiree makes such application and such spouse remains eligible to participate until such time as the spouse becomes employed by an employer through whom the spouse can obtain health insurance coverage, or until the participating spouse reaches the age of sixty-five (65) years, or until the spouse fails to timely pay the monthly premium for such coverage, whichever shall first occur. 
(f)	A participating retiree and/or his/her spouse who are participating pursuant to this section and/or a dependent of a participating retiree, who is maintaining his/her coverage pursuant to the Cobra Act, shall each be responsible for making the total monthly premium payments for such health insurance coverage to the city on or before the tenth day of each month. 
(Ord. No. 1998-2, §§ 1—6, 8-17-98)
Editor's note(s)—Former §§ 11-8—11-11, relative to Social Security, and derived from §§ 1—5 of an ordinance adopted Mar. 5, 1951, have been deleted as superseded by the provisions of Ord. No. 1994-3, adopted Aug. 1, 1994, which has been included herein at the discretion of the editor as Art. II, §§ 11-21—11-27. 
 
Secs. 11-9—11-11. Reserved.
Note(s)—See editor's note, §§ 11-8. 
 
Secs. 11-12—11-20. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. SOCIAL SECURITY 
 
Sec. 11-21. Policy and purpose.
It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the City of Opp, Alabama, to extend, effective as of August 1, 1994, to the employees and officials thereof, not excluded by law or by this ordinance, and whether employed in connection with a governmental or proprietary function, the benefits of the system of Old Age, Survivor's, Disability and Health Insurance as authorized by the Federal Social Security Act and amendments thereto, including Public Law 734 of 81st Congress. In pursuance of said policy, and for that purpose, the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1994-3, § 1, 8-1-94)
 
Sec. 11-22. Execution of agreements.
The mayor, or other chief executive officer, of the City of Opp, Alabama, is hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the state office authorized to act to secure coverage of employees and officials as provided in section 11-21 hereof. 
(Ord. No. 1994-3, § 2, 8-1-94)
 
Sec. 11-23. Withholdings from salaries and wages.
Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purpose provided in section 11-21 hereof are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the federal agency designated by laws or regulations to receive such amounts. 
(Ord. No. 1994-3, § 3, 8-1-94)
 
Sec. 11-24. Contributions.
There shall be appropriated from available funds such amounts at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations for employer's contributions, which shall be paid over to the federal agency designated by such laws or regulations to receive same. 
(Ord. No. 1994-3, § 4, 8-1-94)
 
Sec. 11-25. Records and reports.
The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1994-3, § 5, 8-1-94)
 
Sec. 11-26. Other agreements restricted.
There is hereby excluded from this article any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position or any employee or official now covered, or authorized to be covered by any other ordinance or law creating any retirement system for any employee or official of the said city. 
(Ord. No. 1994-3, § 6, 8-1-94)
 
Sec. 11-27. Adoption of terms, conditions, requirements, etc.
The city does hereby adopt the terms, conditions, requirements, reservations, benefits, privileges, and other conditions thereunto appertaining, of Title II of the Social Security Act as amended by Public Law No. 734, 81st Congress, for and on behalf of all the officers and employees thereof, save and except any of such officers and employees now covered or authorized to be covered by any retirement system provided by law, and further excepting any official or employee who occupies any position, office, or employment not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws or regulations; and further excluding: 
( )	Elected officials. 
( )	Part-time employees. (Part time positions are all positions, less than full time, the compensation for which is less than fifty dollars ($50.00) per calendar quarter.) 
( )	Officials or employees whose compensation is on a fee basis. 
( )	Services performed by a student which would be excluded if performed for a private employer. 
( )	Agricultural labor, but only those services which would be excluded if performed for a private employer. 
(Check those desired to be excluded) 
(Ord. No. 1994-3, § 7, 8-1-94)
 
Secs. 11-28—11-50. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. POLICE DEPARTMENT
 
Sec. 11-51. General police services; limitation.
(a)	Following thirty (30) days' notice published in the Opp News, routine police services will no longer be provided in the police jurisdiction by the Opp Police Department. 
(b)	The Opp Police Department will still rewpond to emergency calls in the police jurisdiction and will secure the scene pending the arrival of the Covington County Sheriff's Department. 
(Ord. No. 2003-06, §§ 1, 2, 5-8-03)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2003-06, §§ 1, 2, adopted May 8, 2003, did not specify manner of codification, but has been included herein by the editor as § 11-51. 
 
Chapter 12 PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
 
Sec. 12-1. City planning commission—Composition.
Pursuant to section 11-52-3, Code of Alabama 1975, as amended, there is hereby created a planning commission for the city, to consist of nine (9) members, who shall be appointed for the terms and in the manner set forth in such statute. 
(Ord. of 5-16-60, § 1)
 
Sec. 12-2. Same—Adoption of master plan; powers and duties.
(a)	The planning commission is authorized and empowered to make and adopt a master plan for the physical development of the city, including any areas outside its boundaries which, in the commission's judgment, bear relation to the planning of such municipality. Such plan, with the accompanying maps, plats, charts and descriptive matter, shall show the commission's recommendations for the development of such territory, including among other things the general location, character, and extent of streets, viaducts, subways, bridges, waterways, waterfronts, boulevards, parkways, playgrounds, squares, parks, aviation fields, and other public ways, grounds and open spaces, the general location of public buildings and other public property, and the general location and extent of public utilities and terminals, whether publicly or privately owned or operated, for water, light, sanitation, transportation, communication, power, and other purposes; also the removal, relocation, widening, narrowing, vacating, abandonment, change of use or extension of any of the foregoing ways, grounds, open spaces, buildings, property, utilities, or terminals as well as a zoning plan for the control of the height, area, bulk, location and use of the buildings and premises. 
(b)	As the work of making the whole master plan progresses, the commission may from time to time adopt and publish parts thereof, any such part to cover one (1) or more major sections or divisions of the municipality, or one (1) or more of the aforesaid or other functional matters to be included in the plan. 
(c)	The commission is hereby authorized and empowered to exercise all powers and do all things authorized to such commission by section 11-52-6 et seq., Code of Alabama 1975, as amended, as it may deem necessary for its work. The commission is also authorized and empowered to exercise all powers and to do all things authorized to such commission by such law, and to exercise such control as it authorized under such law with reference to subdivision of unimproved property within five (5) miles of the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. of 5-16-60, § 2)
 
Sec. 12-3. Same—Powers and authority of mayor and council.
The mayor and city council may make all appointments and exercise all authority as authorized by sections 11-52-1 through 11-52-84, Code of Alabama 1975, as amended. 
(Ord. of 5-16-60, § 3)
 
Chapter 13 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 13-1. Regulations for naming of streets and roads; designation of property addresses within city.
The commission finds the orderly growth and development of this county and the efficient provision of law enforcement, fire, ambulance, mail and other services necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the county require that the names of streets and the designation of property addresses within the incorporated areas of the county be accomplished in a uniform and organized manner and the adoption of the following regulations would tend to accomplish this objective. 
(1)	Addressing standards and guidelines promulgated by the county E-911 Board, designated herein as the same, may be amended or modified from time to time upon approval of the city council, is hereby adopted by reference. 
(2)	All buildings, residencies, mobile homes, or other fixed structures, within the county boundaries and corporate limits of cities within the county shall have address numerals/characters permanently and visibly displayed in accordance with the adopted E-911 addressing standards and guidelines. 
a.	For the purposes of this section, an address for display is defined as the numerals and/or characters assigned, in compliance with this section, to a specific location but does not contain the street or road name. 
b.	The actual complete address consists of the following: Street, number, predirectional, primary street name, suffix and secondary number, if any, as defined by the United States Postal Addressing Conventions DM-940-89-03. 
c.	All numerals shall be Arabic numerals. 
(3)	The county E-911 board shall coordinate the assignment of addresses within the county. 
a.	All county E-911 maintained data must reflect the addresses and addressing criteria assigned within this section or the E-911 addressing standards guidelines. 
b.	The county E-911 board and the U.S. Postal Service shall have the authority to promulgate additional rules and regulations regarding addressing within county consistent with the United States Postal Addressing Conventions DM-940-89-03. 
c.	Violation or any promulgated rule shall be considered to be a violation of this section. 
(4)	New structures. As soon as initial construction of a new structure had begun, a clearly visible free-standing sign, as specified in the E-911 addressing standards and guidelines, is required until the permanent address numerals/characters are attached or otherwise displayed when the structure is completed and/or occupied. 
a.	Business structures must have addresses properly displayed before occupancy and/or use. 
b.	Single family residential structures must have addresses properly displayed within thirty (30) days of occupancy. 
(5)	Existing structures. The resident or current occupant of any dwelling, the manager or occupier of any business structure, or the owner of any structure that is not occupied is responsible for compliance with this section. 
(6)	It shall be a violation of this section to publish, broadcast, disseminate or utilize any address, within county, not in compliance with this section, or to utilize in any manner any address not officially approved or officially issued, as specified in this section. 
a.	This section shall not apply to official traffic control devices erected by the state, county, or the cities within county. 
(7)	All data collected by an agency related to the enhanced 911 system shall be confidential and not released to any other member of the public or any government agency, except to facilitate an emergency response or as otherwise specified herein. 
a.	This information may be used in the creation and maintenance of maps, 911 database, and for confirmation of public records during normal course of operations of the United States Post Office and the county E-911 board. 
b.	Nothing in this section shall prevent, or hinder the operations of the county E-911 board, nor shall this prevent the release of this information, when any part of such information is contained in other sources that are a public record. 
(8)	Failure to comply with this section or any portion or this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. The county E-911 board or their designee may cause to be issued an arrest warrant or summons to appear before the court to answer such alleged violation. A summons to appear may be served upon an alleged violator either in person or by first class mail. 
a.	The minimum fine for violation of this section of the Code shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00), plus court costs. The maximum sentence for violation of this section of the Code shall be one hundred eighty (180) days in jail and/or maximum fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
b.	Each day the violation continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. No. 1999-1, 8-16-99)
 
Secs. 13-2—13-4. Reserved.
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 1999-1, adopted August 16, 1999, has been treated by the editor as repealing the provisions of former §§ 13-1—13-4, and adding a new § 13-1. Former §§ 13-1—13-4 pertained to street numbers, and derived from an ordinance of October 2, 1978, §§ 1—4. 
 
Sec. 13-5. Obstructions on streets.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect any building, fence or wall or to place any object or any obstruction whatsoever in or on any street, avenue, alley or sidewalk in the city other than garbage collection cans in the manner otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 1, 2-4-85)
Cross reference(s)—Placing merchandise on sidewalks, § 5-19; obstructing street with vehicles, § 14-7. 
 
Sec. 13-6. Overhanging structures—Required height for clear vision.
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or erect any structure or appliance in such a manner that it overhangs any street, avenue, alley or sidewalk at a height that obstructs normal vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 2, 2-4-85)
 
Sec. 13-7. Same—Liability for injury.
The owner of any premises whereupon such overhanging structure is placed shall be absolutely liable for any damage to any person injured by objects falling from such overhanging structure, by someone walking into the overhanging structure, or by the falling of the overhanging structure. 
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 3, 2-5-85)
 
Sec. 13-8. Excavation permit—Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to dig or cause to be dug any ditch into, across, on, over or through any public street or other public way within the corporate limits of the city, without first having obtained from the mayor a written permit therefor. 
(Ord. of 3-4-46, § 1)
 
Sec. 13-9. Same—Money deposit.
The mayor shall not grant any permit for such work unless the applicant shall deposit with the city a sum of money in an amount not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00), the amount to be fixed and determined by the mayor, with the understanding and agreement that the sum so deposited shall be refunded by the city if and when the applicant has fixed the street in as good condition as it was prior to the disturbance of the soil and surface of the street, all without any expense to the city; and provided further, that if the street is not repaired in such manner, the mayor to be the judge, then such sum shall be forfeited to the city as damages. 
(Ord. of 3-4-46, § 2)
 
Sec. 13-10. Burning of leaves, etc.
It shall be unlawful for any person to put, place, pile or burn any trash, leaves or other debris on the paved portion of any street or sidewalk within the corporate limits or police jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-5-60(3), § 1)
 
Secs. 13-11—13-50. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. TREE REGULATIONS 
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 13-51. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed: 
Park trees are defined as trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the city, or to which the public has free access as a park. 
Street trees are defined as trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues or ways, within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1990-3, § 1, 9-4-90)
 
Sec. 13-52. Street tree species to be planted.
The following list constitutes the official Street Tree Species for Opp, Alabama. No species other than those included in this list may be planted as street trees without written permission of the city tree board. 
[Small Trees] 	[Medium Trees] 	[Large Trees] 
Flowering Dogwood 	Sweet Gum 	Hickory 
Japanese Red Maple 	Ginkgo 	Green Ash 
Laurel Cherry 	Bald Cypress 	Pine 
Crapemyrtle 	Red Maple 	Green Elm 
Bradford Pear 	Red Oak 	Pin Oak 

(Ord. No. 1990-3, § 7, 9-4-90)
 
Sec. 13-53. Spacing.
The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three (3) species size classes listed in section 13-52, and no trees may be planted closer together than the following: Small trees, thirty (30) feet; Medium trees, forty (40) feet; and Larger trees, fifty (50) feet; except in special plantings designed or approved by a landscape architect. 
(Ord. No. 1990-3, § 8, 9-4-90)
 
Sec. 13-54. Distance from curb and sidewalk.
The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and sidewalks will be in accordance with the three size classes listed in section 13-52, and no trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the following: Small trees, two (2) feet; Medium trees, three (3) feet; and Large trees, four (4) feet. 
(Ord. No. 1990-3, § 9, 9-4-90)
 
Sec. 13-55. Distance from street corners and fireplugs.
No street tree shall be planted within thirty-five (35) feet of any street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersection curbs or curblines. No street tree shall be planted within then (10) feet of any fireplug. 
(Ord. No. 1990-3, § 10, 9-4-90)
 
Sec. 13-56. Distance from utilities.
No street tree other than those species listed as small trees in section 13-52 may be planted under or within ten (10) lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, or over or within five (5) lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility. 
(Ord. No. 1990-3, § 11, 9-4-90)
 
Sec. 13-57. Public tree care.
(a)	The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to insure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. The city tree board should be consulted in cases where doubt exists as to public safety or effect on beauty. 
(b)	The city may remove or cause or order to be removed any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners. 
(Ord. No. 1990-3, § 12, 9-4-90)
 
Sec. 13-58. Pruning.
Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of eight (8) feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk. Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a street light or interferes with the visibility of any traffic control device or sign. 
(Ord. No. 1990-3, § 13, 9-4-90)
 
Sec. 13-59. Dead or diseased tree removal on private property.
The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property within the city, when such trees constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which constitutes potential threat to other trees within the city. The city tree board will notify in writing the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by said owners at their own expense within sixty (60) days after the date of service of notice. In the event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the city shall have the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of removal on the owner's property tax notice. 
(Ord. No. 1990-3, § 14, 9-4-90)
 
Sec. 13-60. Removal of stumps.
All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground. 
(Ord. No. 1990-3, § 15, 9-4-90)
 
Sec. 13-61. Interference with city tree board.
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the city tree board, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any street trees and park trees, as authorized in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1990-3, § 16, 9-4-90)
 
Sec. 13-62. Review of city tree board actions by city council.
The city council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and decisions of the city tree board. Any person may appeal from any ruling or order of the city tree board to the city council who may hear the matter and make final decision. 
(Ord. No. 1990-3, § 17, 9-4-90)
 
Sec. 13-63. Penalty.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be, upon conviction or a plea of guilty, subject to a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Ord. No. 1990-3, § 18, 9-4-90)
 
Secs. 13-64—13-80. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. CITY TREE BOARD
 
Sec. 13-81. Creation and establishment.
There is hereby created and established a city tree board for the City of Opp, Alabama, which shall consist of five (5) members, citizens and residents of the city, who shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council. 
(Ord. No. 1990-3, § 2, 9-4-90)
 
Sec. 13-82. Term of office.
The term of the five (5) persons to be appointed by the mayor shall be three (3) years except that the term of two (2) of the members appointed to the first board shall be for only one (1) year and the terms of two (2) members of the first board shall be for two (2) years. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term. 
(Ord. No. 1990-3, § 3, 9-4-90)
 
Sec. 13-83. Compensation.
Members of the board shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 1990-3, § 4, 9-4-90)
 
Sec. 13-84. Duties and responsibilities.
It shall be the responsibility of the board to study, investigate, counsel and develop and/or update annually and administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas. Such plan will be presented annually to the city council and upon their acceptance and approval shall constitute the official comprehensive city tree plan for the City of Opp, Alabama. The board, when requested by the city council, shall consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special matter or question coming within the scope of its work. 
(Ord. No. 1990-3, § 5, 9-4-90)
 
Sec. 13-85. Operation of board.
The board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Ord. No. 1990-3, § 6, 9-4-90)
 
Chapter 14 TRAFFIC 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 14-1. Adoption of state laws, rules and regulations.
In addition to all provisions of law relating to the speed and operation of motor vehicles in the city, there are hereby adopted by the city, all laws of the state and all rules and regulations of the state department of public safety pertaining to the control of traffic and motor vehicles on highways, that are misdemeanors under the state laws and a violation of such laws, rules and regulations in the city or in the police jurisdiction thereof, shall be violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-5-73, § 11)
State law reference(s)—Authority to adopt, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-8(c)(11). 
 
Sec. 14-2. Violations; punishment.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, except as otherwise provided by law, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), or may be imprisoned in the municipal jail or sentenced to hard labor for the city, for a period not exceeding ten (10) days; for a second such conviction within one (1) year thereafter, such person shall be punished by a fine not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or may be imprisoned in the municipal jail or sentenced to hard labor for the city for a period not exceeding twenty (20) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; upon a third or subsequent conviction within one (1) year after the first conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or may be imprisoned in the municipal jail or sentenced to hard labor for the city for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or by both fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. of 3-5-73, § 12)
State law reference(s)—Punishment for violation of state traffic laws, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-8. 
 
Sec. 14-3. Blood alcohol test.
The city, in compliance with Code of Alabama 1975, section 32-5-192, as amended, does hereby designate that chemical tests to determine blood alcohol levels in individuals suspected of driving under the influence of alcoholic beverages shall be by the breath method utilizing the Intoxilizer 5000, the Draeger Alcotest 711MK 111, or any other instrument approved by the department of forensic sciences to determine blood alcohol levels. If an individual is unable to submit to a breath test or if breath testing equipment is not available, other chemical test of blood or urine may be used as prescribed by statute. 
(Ord. No. 1985-3, § 1, 6-3-85; Ord. No. 2000-2, § 1, 5-15-00)
 
Sec. 14-4. U-turns.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make a U-turn with a vehicle on any street. 
(Ord. of 4-27-46, § 3)
 
Sec. 14-5. Parking in or obstructing alleys.
(a)	Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall park a vehicle in any alley in the business section of the city. 
(b)	No person shall park any delivery truck or other delivery vehicle in any alley within the business of the city for any period longer than that period necessary to load or unload such delivery truck or other vehicle. 
(c)	No person shall park any vehicle in the alley abutting the municipal building and fire station, which alley runs from Main Street to Whaley Street; and no person shall park any vehicle in the alley abutting the municipal building and fire station, which alley runs from Ida Avenue to Hart Avenue. 
(d)	No person shall place or store any merchandise, appliance, crate, or like object in the alley abutting the municipal building and fire station, which alley runs from Main Street to Whaley Street; and no person shall store or place any merchandise, appliance, crate, or like object in the alley abutting the municipal building and fire station, which alley runs from Ida Avenue to Hart Avenue. 
(Ord. of 1-18-65, §§ 1—4)
 
Sec. 14-6. Parking of large vehicles in residential areas.
(a)	For the purpose of this section, the term "commercial vehicle" means any motor vehicle which is used for the transportation of passengers for hire or which is constructed or used for the transportation of goods, wares, or merchandise. The term also means a motor vehicle which is designed or used for drawing other vehicles. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or for the vehicle's registered owner, to permit to be parked, any commercial vehicle weighing in excess of five thousand (5,000) pounds, or any trailer, tractor-trailer, mobile home or any other vehicle which when regularly operated in this state are required to carry truck tags, excepting therefrom station wagons and small trucks which are not larger than passenger automobiles, on any street in any residential area in the city for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials, goods, or merchandise. 
(c)	In any proceeding for violation of this section, where a motor vehicle displays commercial license registration plates, such registration shall constitute a prima facie presumption that it is a commercial vehicle at the time of any alleged violation. 
(Ord. No. 1988-2, §§ 1—3, 12-5-88)
 
Sec. 14-7. Obstructing street with vehicle.
(a)	The police department is hereby empowered to remove from any motor vehicle deemed to be impeding or obstructing the cleaning, maintaining or repairing of any street in the city or its police jurisdiction. 
(b)	The police department is hereby empowered to remove from any street any motor vehicle deemed to be impeding or obstructing traffic or the safe flow of traffic in the city or its police jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 2-20-58(1), §§ 2, 3)
Cross reference(s)—Obstructing sidewalks with merchandise, § 5-19; obstructions on streets, § 13-5. 
 
Sec. 14-8. Parade permit.
(a)	It shall be unlawful to promote, organize or hold, or to assist in organizing or holding, or to take part or participate in, any parade or procession or other public demonstration in the streets or other public ways of the city, unless a permit therefor has been secured from the city council. 
(b)	To secure such permit, written application shall be made to the city council setting forth the hour and date, and the probable number of persons, vehicles and animals which will be engaged in such parade procession or other public demonstration, the purpose for which it is to be held or had, and the streets or other public ways over, along or in which it is desired to have or hold such parade, procession or public demonstration. 
(c)	The city council shall grant a written permit for such parade, procession or public demonstration, prescribing the streets or other public ways which may be used therefor, unless in its judgment the public welfare, peace, safety, health, decency, good order, morals or convenience require that it be refused. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful to use for such purposes at the hour and on the date requested, any other street or public way than those set out in the permit. 
(e)	This permit shall not be required for funeral processions. 
(Ord. of 5-9-41(1), § 1; Ord. of 5-6-63, § 1)
 
Sec. 14-9. Speed zones.
(a)	Applicable to current jurisdiction: Speed limits as described in this section shall apply so long as the city limits remain as they are this date [March 19, 1990]. In the event they are extended, this section shall be revised to properly cover the new territory. 
(b)	Penalty for violation of section: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction thereof be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or may be imprisoned in the municipal jail or sentenced to hard labor for the city for a period not exceeding ten (10) days. For a second such conviction within one (1) year thereafter such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or may be imprisoned in the municipal jail or sentenced to hard labor for the city for a period not exceeding twenty (20) days or both such fine and imprisonment. Upon a third or subsequent conviction within one (1) year after the first conviction such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or may be imprisoned in the municipal jail or sentenced to hard labor for the city for a period not exceeding six (6) months or by both fine and imprisonment. 
(c)	Fifty-five miles per hour: No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a greater speed than fifty-five (55) miles per hour in the following listed zones of the city: 
(1)	On Alabama Highway No. 9 (U.S. 331) from the south city limits thence northerly for a distance of 0.75 mile. 
(2)	On Alabama Highway No. 12 (U.S. 84) from the east city limits thence westerly for a distance of 0.90 mile. 
(3)	On Alabama Highway No. 52 from the east city limits thence westerly for a distance of 0.50 mile. 
(4)	On Alabama Highway No. 134 from the east city limits thence westerly for a distance of 0.20 mile. 
(5)	On Alabama Highway No. 9 (U.S. 331) from the north city limits thence southerly for a distance of 1.80 miles. 
(d)	Forty-five miles per hour: No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a greater speed than forty-five (45) miles per hour in the following listed zones of the city: 
(1)	On Alabama Highway No. 9 (U.S. 331) from a point 0.75 mile from the south city limits thence northerly for a distance of 0.95 mile. 
(2)	On Alabama Highway No. 12 (U.S. 84) from a point 0.90 mile from the east city limits thence westerly for a distance of 0.50 mile. 
(3)	On Alabama Highway No. 12 (U.S. 84) from a point 4.54 miles from the east city limits thence westerly for a distance of 1.44 miles. 
(4)	On Alabama Highway No. 9 (U.S. 331) from a point 1.80 miles from the north city limits thence southerly for a distance of 1.25 miles. 
(5)	On Alabama Highway No. 52 from a point 0.50 mile from the east city limits thence westerly for a distance of 0.90 mile. 
(6)	On Alabama Highway No. 134 from a point 0.20 mile from the east city limits thence westerly for a distance of 0.60 mile. 
(e)	Forty miles per hour: No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a greater speed than forty (40) miles per hour in the following listed zones of the city: 
(1)	On Alabama Highway No. 9 (U.S. 331) from a point 3.05 miles from the north city limits thence southerly for a distance of 0.55 mile. 
(2)	On Alabama Highway No. 12 (U.S. 84) from a point 1.40 miles from the east city limits thence westerly for a distance of 0.30 mile. 
(3)	On Alabama Highway No. 52 from a point 1.40 miles from the east city limits thence westerly for a distance of 0.30 mile. 
(f)	Thirty-five miles per hour: No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a greater speed than thirty-five (35) miles per hour in the following listed zones of the city: 
(1)	On Alabama Highway No. 9 (U.S. 331) from a point 1.70 miles from the south city limits thence northerly for a distance of 0.50 mile. 
(2)	On Alabama Highway No. 12 (U.S. 84) from a point 3.42 miles from the east city limits thence westerly for a distance of 1.12 miles. 
(3)	On Alabama Highway No. 134 from a point 0.80 mile from the east city limits thence westerly for a distance of 0.75 mile. 
(g)	Thirty miles per hour: No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a greater speed than thirty (30) miles per hour in the following listed zones of the city: 
(1)	On Alabama Highway No. 12 (U.S. 84) from a point 1.70 miles from the east city limits thence westerly for a distance of 1.22 miles, overlapping Alabama Highway No. 9 (U.S. 331), south to Ida Avenue. 
(2)	On Alabama Highway No. 52 from a point 1.70 miles from the east city limits thence westerly to the junction of Alabama Highway No. 9 (U.S. 331), a distance of 0.40 mile. 
(h)	Twenty-five miles per hour: No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a greater speed than twenty-five (25) miles per hour in the following listed zones of the city: 
(1)	On Alabama Highway No. 9 (U.S. 331) from a point 2.20 miles from the south city limits thence northerly to the junction of Alabama Highway No. 12 (U.S. 84), south for a distance of 0.42 mile. 
(2)	On Alabama Highway No. 12 (U.S. 84) from a point 2.92 miles from the east city limits thence westerly for a distance of 0.50 mile. 
(3)	On Alabama Highway No. 134 from a point 1.55 miles from the east city limits thence westerly for a distance of 0.35 mile to the junction of U.S. 331. 
(4)	On any street or alley unless otherwise indicated by proper signs or markings. 
(Ord. No. 1990-2, §§ 1—8, 10, 3-19-90)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 1990-2, §§ 1—8, 10, adopted March 19, 1990, not specifically amendatory of this Code, has been included as § 14-9 at the discretion of the editor. Inasmuch as the provisions of § 9 of the ordinance are included in § 14-1 of this Code, § 9 of the ordinance has been omitted. 

 
Sec. 14-10. Thru truck traffic inside the Opp By-pass—Prohibited.
(a)	"Thru truck traffic" is prohibited on all streets and highways flowing from the Opp By-Pass in the direction of downtown Opp and on all such adjacent streets (all streets and highways inside the Opp By-Pass or in the general direction of downtown Opp from the Highway 331/Highway 84 By-Pass or Veteran's Memorial Parkway). 
(b)	"Thru truck traffic" is defined as any commercial vehicle of three (3) or more axles if truck only and four (4) or more axles if truck and trailer combination, having no delivery or pick-up destination inside the Opp By-Pass or which does not have a home base of a licensed place of business inside the Opp By-Pass or which does not have a legitimate business purpose such as the purchase of parts or fuel or mechanic services. 
(c)	Any violation of this section shall subject the violator to a citation punishable as a Class C misdemeanor. 
(d)	The City of Opp shall cause "No Thru Truck Traffic" signs to be erected on all highways leading from the Highway 331/Highway 84 by-pass into the City of Opp, including but not limited to old Highway 331 or Main Street, old Highway 84, Highway 134, Old Perry Store Road, Opine Road, and Highway 52. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, §§ 1—4, 7-20-09)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2009-04, §§ 1—4, adopted June 20, 2009, did not specifically amend the Code; therefore, said provisions have been included as § 14-10, at the editor's discretion. 
 
Sec. 14-11. Unauthorized drivers subject to towing.
(a)	Notwithstanding, any other provisions of law, and except as otherwise provided in this section, a motor vehicle is subject to impounding as a nuisance if driven on a highway or public roadway in the city if the motor vehicle is driven by a person whose license or license privilege is suspended, revoked, or cancelled at the time he/she was stopped by the police or involved in a traffic accident/incident. 
(b)	If a driver is unable to produce a valid driver's license on the demand of a law enforcement officer, the vehicle shall be impounded regardless of the ownership, unless the officer is reasonably able by other means to verify that the driver is properly licensed. Prior to impounding the vehicle, the law enforcement officer shall make a reasonable attempt to verify the license status of the driver who claims to be properly licensed, but who is unable to produce the license on demand of the officer. The driver and occupants of the impounded vehicle will be transported to a place of safety by the impounding officer and the impound report made with an inventory of items inside of the impounded vehicle. 
(c)	A law enforcement officer shall not impound a vehicle pursuant to this section if the license of the driver expired within the preceding ninety (90) days and the driver would have otherwise been properly licensed. 
(d)	If the owner of the vehicle or another family member of the owner is present in the vehicle and has valid license, the vehicle shall not be impounded and towed. 
(e)	If there is a medical necessity jeopardizing life or limb, the law enforcement officer may elect not to impound the vehicle. 
(f)	A vehicle impounded pursuant to this section shall be released if: 
(1)	The registered owner or a representative with written authorization from the registered owner appears at the city police department and presents a valid driver's license, a copy of the title, tag receipt, or notarized bill of sale. 
(2)	If the registered owner does not have a valid driver's license he/she may bring someone, who has valid license and the vehicle may be released without written, notarized permission. 
(3)	Any owner of a vehicle who suffers any loss due to impoundment of any vehicle pursuant this section may recover that amount of loss from the unlicensed, suspended, or revoked driver. 
(4)	The person redeeming the vehicle at the wrecker lot will be responsible for paying the set towing and storage fees. 
(5)	Any vehicle that is impounded that is not redeemed pursuant to this section within sixty (60) days may be sold by the wrecker company for the fees owed according to state law. 
(g)	The city shall be obligated to determine if any liens are listed on title of the vehicle and to notify the registered lien holders within three (3) business days of the date of the impoundment by telephone followed by a certified letter. The notice shall include a description of the vehicle, the date impoundment and the address where the impounded vehicle is located. A lien holder shall be entitled to the release of the vehicle as set forth in subsection (f) upon presentation of the original vehicle title evidencing the existence of the lien and written certification by the lien holder that the registered owner of the vehicle is in default on the indebtedness secured by the lien and that the lien holder is entitled to immediate possession of the vehicle. 
(h)	Impoundment hearings. 
(1)	The owner or person entitled to possession of any motor vehicle which is removed or towed, pursuant to this section, shall be entitled to an immediate due process hearing, prior to paying any towing or storage fee concerning the motor vehicle. The chief of police or any supervisory officer of the police department of the rank of sergeant or above, designated by the chief of police, is designated and appointed as a hearing officer for the purpose of carrying out these requirements. Any owner or person entitled to possession of any motor vehicle, unless the right is waived, shall be provided an immediate due process hearing before such officer prior to being required to pay any such towing charge or storage fee. When the hearing officer shall determine at the hearing that the towing of the vehicle was in error, the vehicle shall be ordered immediately released and returned to the owner or person in possession without payment of any changes or fees. 
(2)	Any person aggrieved by any decision of the hearing officer made pursuant to this section shall be entitled to a hearing before the municipal judge by filing notice with the clerk of the municipal court within five (5) days from the date of any such decision. 
(3)	At any time an arrest or citation for violation of municipal ordinances is made in connection with towing or impoundment of any motor vehicle by the police department, the municipal judge trying the case may also hear evidence concerning the impoundment, towing and storage of the vehicle. If the municipal judge shall determine, after a due process hearing, that the towing of the vehicle was in error, the municipal judge shall order the vehicle immediately released without the payment of any fees or charges that have already been paid, shall order the return of fees to the person paying the fees. 
(i)	Processing fees. 
(1)	A processing fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per impounded vehicle will be assessed at time of impoundment. 
(2)	The processing fee is payable prior to release of the vehicle unless otherwise ordered by the municipal judge. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, § 1, 2-4-2013)
 
Secs. 14-12—14-50. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS AND DEVICES 
 
Sec. 14-51. Current traffic control devices.
The city council hereby ratifies the placement of traffic-control signs, signals and devices currently in existence within its jurisdiction, including the placement of the four-way stop at the intersection of Old Perry Store Road and Maloy in lieu of a caution signal and two-way stop, and further directs that the traffic signals at the intersection of Covington Avenue and Main Street be removed and replaced with a four-way stop. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 7-19-10)
 
Sec. 14-52. Authority to install traffic control devices.
Section 14-51 notwithstanding, the city council shall have the authority, upon recommendation of the police chief, to direct the placement and maintenance of traffic-control signs, signals and devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances of this city to make effective the provisions of such ordinances, and may place and maintain such additional traffic-control devices as deemed necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic ordinances of this city or under state law, or to guide or warn traffic. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2, 7-19-10)
 
Sec. 14-53. Manual and specifications for traffic control devices.
All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual, and specifications, approved by the state highway department. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as type and location throughout the city. All traffic-control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this chapter shall be official traffic-control devices. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 3, 7-19-10)
 
Sec. 14-54. Obedience to official traffic control devices required; exceptions.
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with this article, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle under the Code of Alabama. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 4, 7-19-10)
 
APPENDIX A ZONING 
 
APPENDIX B SUBDIVISIONS 

ARTICLE 1. - TITLE, LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS AND OFFICIAL ZONING MAP 
 
Sec. 1.1. - Title. 
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "the zoning ordinance of the City of Opp, Alabama."  
Sec. 1.2. - Short title. 
This ordinance and all subsequent amendments, attachments, and supplements thereto shall be known as the "Opp Zoning Ordinance."  
Sec. 1.3. - Legal status provisions. 
1.3.1.  Authority. This ordinance has been drafted, subjected to public review, recommended by the Opp Planning Commission, and adopted by the Opp City Council under the authority of title 11, chapter 52 of the Code of Alabama, 1975 Compilation, as amended [Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-1 et seq.]. 
1.3.2.  Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to guide development within the City of Opp in accordance with title 11, chapter 52 of the Code of Alabama, 1975 Compilation, as amended [Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-1 et seq.]; and generally, to implement and support the developmental policies of the City of Opp. 
1.3.3.  Interpretation. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this ordinance, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, prosperity, and general welfare. 
1.3.4.  Conflict with other ordinances. In case of a conflict between this ordinance or any part thereof, and the whole or part of any existing or future ordinance of the city, the most restrictive shall in all cases apply. 
1.3.5.  Validity, severability. If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, item or any provision of this ordinance shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect any other article, section, subsection, or part thereof of this ordinance which is not of itself invalid or unconstitutional. 
1.3.6.  Repeal of conflicting ordinances. On the effective date of this ordinance, all other local ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict or inconsistent with this ordinance, and all amendments thereto, are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this ordinance full force and effect.  
Sec. 1.4. - Official zoning map. 
The city is hereby divided into zones or districts, as shown on the official zoning map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance. 
1.4.1.  The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor attested by the city clerk, and bearing the seal of the city under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the official zoning map of the City of Opp, Alabama," together with the date of the adoption of this ordinance. 
1.4.2.  If changes are made in district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the official zoning map, such changes shall be entered promptly after the amendment has been approved by the city council, hereinafter referred to as "the council." No amendment to this ordinance shall become effective until after such change and entry has been made on said map. 
1.4.3.  No changes of any nature shall be made on the official zoning map or matter shown thereon, except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this ordinance. Any unauthorized changes of whatever kind by any person or persons shall be considered a violation of this ordinance and punishable as described herein. 
1.4.4.  Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official zoning map, which may from time-to-time be published, the official zoning map shall be located in the office of the city clerk and shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land and water areas, building, and other structures in the city. 
1.4.5.  Replacement of the official zoning map. 
1.  In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the council may, by resolution, adopt a new official zoning map, which shall supersede the prior official zoning map. The new official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions on the prior official zoning map, but no such corrections shall have the effect of amending the original official zoning map or any subsequent amendment thereof. The new official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor attested by the city clerk, and bearing the seal of the city under the following words: "This is to certify that this official zoning map supersedes and replaces the official zoning map adopted (date of adoption of map being replaced) as part of the zoning ordinance." 
2.  Unless the prior official zoning map has been lost or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment.  
Sec. 1.5. - Using this ordinance. 
1.5.1.  Internal referencing. All references to articles, sections, subsections, paragraphs and items within this ordinance shall refer to articles, sections, subsections, paragraphs and items in this ordinance unless otherwise specified. When an article, section or other subdivision is referenced within a provision or requirement of this ordinance, unless otherwise specified, all subdivisions within such reference shall be assumed to be applicable. 
1.5.2.  Page numbering. Each article contains its own separate page numbering system. The page numbers are prefixed by the respective article number. As an example, page 10 of article 8 is designated page 8-10. 
Editor's note— Subsection 1.5.2 is incorrect given the page numbering scheme used in this publication. 

 
ARTICLE 2. - DEFINITIONS 
For the purposes of this ordinance, certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows: 
 
Sec. 2.1. - Interpretation. 
2.1.1.  The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." 
2.1.2.  The word "building" includes "structure." 
2.1.3.  The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation as well as an individual. 
2.1.4.  The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular. 
2.1.5.  The masculine gender shall include the feminine, and the feminine gender shall include the masculine. 
2.1.6.  The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. 
2.1.7.  The word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel." 
2.1.8.  Except as otherwise, provided herein, all words have their customary dictionary meaning. The zoning official is authorized to make a final determination of the meaning of any term used in this ordinance, which determination may be appealed to the board.  
Sec. 2.2. - Definitions of terms used in this ordinance. 
2.2.1.  Abutting: Touching along a common side, boundary or property line. Two pieces of property that are separated by a right-of-way are "adjacent," but not "abutting." 
2.2.2.  Access: A way or means of approach to provide physical entrance to a property. 
2.2.3.  Accessory structure or accessory building: A structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal structure. 
2.2.4.  Accessory use: A use of land or of a building or portion thereof commonly associated with and integrally related to the principal use of the land or building on the same lot. 
2.2.5.  Adjacent: Either abutting or on the opposite side of a street, right-of-way, or easement that separates it from the subject property. Properties separated by a railroad shall not be considered "adjacent." 
2.2.6.  Adjoining: See "Abutting." 
2.2.7.  Agriculture: The production, storage, keeping, harvesting, grading, packaging, processing, boarding or maintenance, for sale, lease, or personal use, of plants and animals, including, but not limited to: forages and sod crops; grains and seed crops; dairy animals and products; poultry and poultry products; the keeping, raising and breeding of livestock; bees and apiary products; fur animals; trees and forest products; fruits, nuts and vegetables; plants and flowers; or lands that are devoted to soil conservation or forestry management. 
2.2.8.  Alley: A public or private way, other than a driveway, less in width than a street, designed for the special accommodation of the property it reaches, and not intended for general circulation. 
2.2.9.  Alteration: Any change or rearrangement in the supporting members of an existing building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or interior partitions, as well as any change in doors or windows or any enlargement to a building or structure, whether horizontally or vertically, or the moving of a building or structure from one location to another. 
2.2.10.  Animal shelter: A nonprofit or public facility providing shelter for small domestic animals. 
2.2.11.  Applicable district: That zoning district in which a building, structure, property, or subdivision, for which a zoning application is submitted or permit is sought, is located or is to be moved. 
2.2.12.  Applicant: A person submitting an application for development, variance, special, exception, conditional use or rezoning. 
2.2.13.  Assisted living facility: A building, portion of a building, or a group of buildings in which room, board, meals, laundry, and assistance with personal care and other services are, provided for not less than 24 hours in any week to at least two ambulatory adults not related by blood or marriage to the owner and/or administrator and licensed by the State of Alabama. 
2.2.14.  Automotive repair, major: An establishment engaged in the repair and maintenance of vehicles, including painting, body work, rebuilding of engines or transmissions, upholstery work, fabrication of parts and similar activities, all of which shall be performed entirely within an enclosed building. 
2.2.15.  Automotive repair, minor: An establishment engaged in sales, installation, and servicing of mechanical equipment and parts, including audio equipment and electrical work, lubrication, tune-ups, wheel alignment, tire balancing, brake and muffler work, battery charging and/or replacement and similar activities. 
2.2.16.  Automotive sales or rental: An establishment engaged in the sale or rental of automobiles, light trucks, recreational vehicles, boats, [and] motorcycles, including the incidental parking, storage, maintenance, servicing and repair of such vehicles. 
2.2.17.  Bakery, retail: An establishment, which bakes goods for on-premises retail sale only. 
2.2.18.  Basement: A portion of a building located wholly or partially underground, having one-half or more of its floor-to-ceiling height above the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
2.2.19.  Bed and breakfast: A single-family detached dwelling, or part thereof, where lodging and meals are, provided on a daily basis; and in which the operator of the bed and breakfast resides. 
2.2.20.  Bedroom: A room marketed, designed or otherwise intended to function primarily for sleeping. 
2.2.21.  Block: A tract or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public streets other than alleys or a combination of streets, public land, public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, bodies of water or watercourses, or any other barrier to the continuity of development. 
2.2.22.  Block, double-tiered: A block for single-family detached and duplex dwellings bounded on all sides by streets and within which lots front only on two of the surrounding streets. The corner lots of such blocks are considered "standard corner lots." 
 
2.2.23.  Board of Zoning Adjustment or board: The Board of Zoning Adjustment of Opp, Alabama. 
2.2.24.  Boarding house: A single-family detached dwelling or part thereof in which, for compensation, lodging and meals are, provided on a weekly or monthly basis. 
2.2.25.  Broadcast studio: An establishment primarily engaged in broadcasting and other information relay services accomplished through the use of electronic and telephonic mechanisms. 
2.2.26.  Buffer: A strip of land that is landscaped to separate incompatible land uses, promoting visual harmony, reducing noise, diverting emissions, and reducing glare. Buffers may consist of existing or planted trees, shrubs or vegetation, fences, walls or berms. 
2.2.27.  Building: A structure, having a foundation and roof supported by columns, or by walls, designed to be used as a place of occupancy, storage or shelter. 
2.2.28.  Buildable area: The portion of the lot remaining after required yards and buffers, if any, have been, provided. 
2.2.29.  Building area: The portion of the lot occupied by the principal building and accessory and other structures. 
2.2.30.  Building code or city building code: The International Building Code as adopted, and as may be amended, by the city council. 
2.2.31.  Building height: For flat roof buildings, the vertical distance measured from grade level at the front of the building to the highest point of the roof. For pitched-roof buildings, the vertical distance measured from grade level at the front of the building to the average of the eaves and ridges. 
 
 
2.2.32.  Building line, front: A line extending across the width of a lot coincident with the front-most plane of the building, excluding eaves and cornices. 
2.2.33.  Building official: The city official assigned by the city council to administer the city building code and provisions of this ordinance as specified herein, including his/her designee. 
2.2.34.  Building, principal: The building in which is conducted the principal use of the concerned lot. This includes any structures attached to such building, including a garage, carport, porte-cochere, or porch. 
2.2.35.  Building spacing: The minimum distance between buildings measured from the outermost projection, excluding bay windows, chimneys, flues, ornamental features, cornices and eaves. 
2.2.36.  Business office or professional office: A room or group of rooms used for the conduct of a business, profession, service, [or] industry and generally furnished with desks, tables and communications equipment. 
2.2.37.  Business support service: A business which supplies support services primarily to business establishments, such as sales of office equipment, supplies and services; cleaning services; computer and office equipment repair and similar services. 
2.2.38.  Campground: A plot of ground on which two or more campsites are located, established, or maintained for occupancy by camping units as temporary living quarters for recreation, education or vacation purposes. 
2.2.39.  City: The City of Opp, Alabama. 
2.2.40.  Club: A group of people organized for a common purpose to pursue common goals, interests and activities and usually characterized by certain membership qualifications, payment of fees or dues, which holds regular meetings and has a constitution or by-laws. 
2.2.41.  Commercial parking: Parking of motor vehicles on a temporary basis within a commercially operated, off-street parking lot or garage. 
2.2.42.  Commercial school: A private, gainful business providing instruction in arts, business, crafts, trades or professions. 
2.2.43.  Communication tower: A transmission tower that either: 
(1)  Serves an individual user and is not available to the general public; 
(2)  Is privately owned and operated for the purpose of leasing tower space to others; and/or 
(3)  Is a single-purpose facility and not part of a cellular network. 
2.2.44.  Conditional use: A use that would not generally be appropriate throughout a zoning district without restriction(s), but which, if controlled as to number, location, area, size, traffic, noise, lighting or other impacts, would not be detrimental to public health. This use is permitted subject to approval by the commission and council. 
2.2.45.  Conservation subdivision or development: A form of development that permits a reduction in dimensional requirements, provided there is no increase in the overall density of the development, and the remaining land area is devoted to open space, recreation, or preservation of environmentally sensitive areas. 
2.2.46.  Convenience store: A retail establishment, often associated with a gas station, selling food products and beverages, household items, newspapers, magazines and similar goods. 
2.2.47.  Council or city council: The city council of the City of Opp. 
2.2.48.  Country club: Land or buildings containing recreational facilities and clubhouses for private club members and their guests. Facilities in which the primary function is the operation of a casino, nightclub, dance hall or bingo hall is [are] not considered a country club. 
2.2.49.  Day care center: A licensed facility, other than a residence, providing care for part of a 24-hour day to children, elderly, handicapped or infirm persons in accordance with the applicable regulations of the State of Alabama. 
2.2.50.  Density: The minimum required lot area per dwelling unit or the maximum number of dwelling units per acre of site area. 
2.2.51.  Development: Any proposal to affect the use of land or structures including: subdivision; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, alteration, relocation or enlargement of a structure; any mining, dredging, fitting, grading, paving, excavation, drilling or disturbance of land; and, any use or extension of the use of the land. 
2.2.52.  Dwelling: Any building or portion thereof, which is designed and used for residential occupancy. 
2.2.53.  Dwelling, accessory: A dwelling located on the same lot of and that is subordinate to a detached, single-family dwelling. Accessory dwellings are commonly referred to as guest houses, garage apartments, mother-in-law units or mews units. 
2.2.54.  Dwelling, caretaker: A residence, incidental to a principal use, for an on-site manager, watchman or caretaker employed on the premises. 
2.2.55.  Dwelling, duplex: A building containing two single-family dwelling units totally separated from each other by an unpierced wall extending from basement to roof. 
2.2.56.  Dwelling, garden/patio home: A detached, single-family dwelling on a small lot that is permitted a zero-lot line on one side. 
2.2.57.  Dwelling, multifamily: A building containing three or more dwelling units on a commonly shared lot. 
2.2.58.  Dwelling, single-family (detached): A building containing one dwelling unit and that is not attached to any other dwelling by any means and is surrounded by open space or yards. 
2.2.59.  Dwelling, townhouse: A single-family dwelling in a row of three to eight such units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located over another, and each unit is separated by one or more vertical common fire-resistant walls. 
2.2.60.  Dwelling unit: One or more rooms occupied as separate living quarters, with cooking, sleeping, and sanitary facilities, provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of a single-family maintaining a household. 
2.2.61.  Dwelling, upper-story: A dwelling unit located on a floor above a use of another type. Upper-story dwellings may commonly be referred to as "loft apartments." 
2.2.62.  Entertainment, indoor: A commercial establishment providing spectator entertainment within an enclosed building, including movie theaters, playhouses, concert halls, etc. 
2.2.63.  Entertainment, outdoor: An establishment providing spectator entertainment in open or partially enclosed or screened facilities, including sports arenas, racing tracks, drive-in theaters, amusement parks, etc. 
2.2.64.  Family: Any one of the following arrangements when living together in a dwelling as a single-housekeeping unit: 
1.  An individual; 
2.  Two or more persons related by legal adoption, blood, or a licit marriage plus up to two unrelated individuals; 
3.  A group of not more than five unrelated persons. 
2.2.65.  Farm: Land used primarily for agricultural purposes. 
2.2.66.  Farm support business: A commercial establishment engaged in the sale of farm support goods and services, including, but not limited to, the following: the sale of feed, grains, fertilizers, pesticides and similar farm support goods; the provision of warehousing and storage facilities for raw farm products; and the provision of veterinary services to farm animals. 
2.2.67.  Fence: An artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land. 
2.2.68.  Floor area, gross: The total area of a building measured using the outside dimensions of the building at each floor level intended for occupancy or storage. 
2.2.69.  Fowl: Chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese, quail, guineas, etc. 
2.2.70.  Front-accessed: Having vehicular access from the front of the property, requiring a driveway along a front lot line. 
2.2.71.  Freight depot or truck terminal: An area and building where trucks load and unload cargo and freight and where the cargo and freight may be broken down or aggregated into smaller or larger loads for transfer to other vehicles or modes of transportation. 
2.2.72.  Garden center or nursery: The growing, cultivation storage and sale of garden plants, trees, flowers, shrubs, and fertilizers, as well as the sale of garden tools and similar accessory and ancillary products, to the general public. 
2.2.73.  Gas station: An establishment dispensing automotive fuels at retail. A gas station that includes minor vehicle repair activities is considered a "service station." 
2.2.74.  Grade level: For buildings, the average level of the finished grade at the front building line. For trees, landscaping, signs and light fixtures, the level of finished grade at the base of the tree, plant, sign or fixture. 
 
2.2.75.  Grocery store: A retail establishment primarily selling food for off-premises consumption and/or preparation, as well as other convenience and household goods. 
2.2.76.  Group care home: A dwelling for the sheltered care of persons, which, in addition to providing food and shelter, may also provide some combination of personal care, social or counseling services, and transportation. Group care homes are further defined and regulated by the State of Alabama. 
2.2.77.  Home occupation: A business, profession, occupation or trade conducted for gain or support as an incidental activity within a dwelling. 
2.2.78.  Home improvement center: A place of business providing building, yard and garden materials, appliances, tools and supplies at retail or wholesale. 
2.2.79.  Hospital: An establishment providing primary health services and medical or surgical care to persons, primarily inpatients, suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity, and other abnormal physical or mental conditions and including as an integral part of the institution related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient facilities, training facilities, medical offices and staff residences. 
2.2.80.  Hotel: A lodging establishment, in which guest rooms are accessed from the interior of the building. Hotels may also include, as an incidental use, a liquor lounge. 
2.2.81.  Improvement: Any permanent item that becomes a part of, is placed upon or is affixed to real estate. 
2.2.82.  Independent living facility: A multifamily residential facility for the elderly. These facilities may provide meals and other services such as housekeeping, linen service, transportation, and social and recreational activities. Such facilities do not provide, in a majority of the units, assistance with activities of daily living such as supervision of medication, bathing, dressing, toileting, etc. 
2.2.83.  Industry or industrial use: Economic activities including resource extraction; construction; manufacturing; transportation, communication, electric, gas, and sanitary services; wholesale trade; and warehousing. 
2.2.84.  Industry, heavy: Meat or poultry processing, slaughterhouses, resource extraction, the storage or manufacturing of flammable, explosive or toxic materials or other materials generally considered to be hazardous or offensive in nature. 
2.2.85.  Industry, light: An industry characterized by one or more of the following: 
1.  Smaller in bulk and area, employing fewer employees, and having lesser noise and other environmental impacts than heavy industries; 
2.  Produce goods for end users rather than as intermediates for other industries; 
3.  Produce goods of relatively high value per weight using moderate amounts of partially processed materials. 
2.2.86.  Institutional use: Structures or land occupied by a group, cooperative, or other entity created for nonprofit purposes or for public use or services; but not including those of an industrial nature such as garages, repair or storage yards, and warehouses. Institutional uses are further categorized as follows: 
1.  Low intensity: places of assembly up to 250 seats; day care centers and group care homes; and nursing care facilities and other homes for the aged up to 10,000 sf. 
2.  Medium intensity: government buildings up to 12,500 sf.; elementary and junior high/middle school; places of assembly up to 500 seats; and health and other institutions up to 35,000 sf. 
3.  High intensity: government buildings greater than 12,500 sf.; places of assembly greater than 500 seats; high schools, universities, colleges, and junior colleges; health and other institutions greater than 35,000 sf.; and stadiums and arenas. 
2.2.87.  Internal street: A street completely contained within the boundaries of a planned development whether dedicated for public use or not. 
2.2.88.  Junk yard: See "Salvage yard." 
2.2.89.  Kennel: An establishment in which domesticated animals are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained, or sold, all for compensation. 
2.2.90.  Landfill: A State-approved site for solid waste disposal employing an engineering method of disposing of solid wastes in a manner that minimizes environmental hazards by spreading, compacting to the smallest volume and applying cover material over all exposed waste at the end of each operating day. 
2.2.91.  Laundering plants: Establishments primarily engaged in high volume laundry and garment services, including commercial and industrial laundries; garment pressing and dry cleaning; linen supply; diaper service; carpet and upholstery cleaners, but excluding laundromats and dry-cleaning pick-up stations without dry cleaning equipment. 
2.2.92.  Laundry services: Laundromat, laundry and dry-cleaning pick-up stations, dryer, and clothing storage, but excluding laundering plants. 
2.2.93.  Liquor lounge: A licensed establishment engaged in the preparation, sale or serving of liquor for consumption on the premises only. This includes but is not limited to the following terms: taverns, bars, cocktail lounges, nightclubs and similar uses where liquor consumption is a primary or incidental activity on the premises of the establishment. 
2.2.94.  Livestock sales: The sale of animal livestock within an enclosed yard or structure, including livestock markets, horse or cattle auctions and similar activities. 
2.2.95.  Lot: A parcel of land in one ownership, used or set aside and available for use as the site of one or more buildings and accessory structures or for any other permitted purpose. 
 
2.2.96.  Lot, corner: A lot abutting two or more streets at their intersections or on two parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. 
1.  Non-standard corner lot: A corner lot on other than a double-tiered block. Non-standard corner lots have two front yards, each abutting the front yards of the two interior lots adjoining it. 
2.  Standard corner lot: A corner lot, for single-family detached and duplex dwellings, on a double-tiered block. A standard corner lot has a front yard, abutting the front yard of the adjoining interior lot, and a street side yard abutting the same of the adjoining standard corner lot. 
2.2.97.  Lot, interior: A lot other than a corner lot. 
2.2.98.  Lot, reverse frontage: A through lot fronting on both a major street and a parallel, lesser street. Reverse frontage lots may be required to have access from the lesser street. 
2.2.99.  Lot, through: A lot that fronts on two streets that do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot. 
2.2.100.  Lot area: The total area within the lot lines of a lot, excluding any rights-of-way. 
2.2.101.  Lot frontage: The lot width measured at the front lot line. 
2.2.102.  Lot line: A line bounding a lot which divides it from another lot or from a street or from any other public or private place. 
 
2.2.103.  Lot line, front: The lot line separating a lot from a street right-of-way. In the case of standard corner lots, there shall be a front lot line and a street side lot line. The shorter of the two shall be the front lot line. For all other corner lots, any lot line along a street frontage shall be considered a front lot line. 
2.2.104.  Lot line, rear: That lot line which is parallel to and most distant from the front line. In the case of a triangular or irregularly shaped lot, a line ten ft. in length, entirely within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line. 
2.2.105.  Lot line, side: Any lot line other than a front lot line or a rear lot line. 
2.2.106.  Lot line, street side: For standard corner lots, that lot line corresponding with the longer of the two street frontages. 
 
2.2.107.  Lot of record: A lot that exists as shown or described on a plat or deed that has been recorded in the Office of the Probate Judge. 
2.2.108.  Lot width: The minimum distance measured between the side lot lines at the front building line. For corner lots, lot width is the distance measured between the side lot line and the opposite lot line. 
2.2.109.  Maintenance service: An establishment providing building and yard maintenance services, such as janitorial services, exterminating services, landscaping services, window cleaning services, office cleaning services and similar uses. 
2.2.110.  Manufactured homes: 
1.  Class A manufactured home: A double-wide or larger manufactured home constructed after July 1, 1976 that meets or exceeds the construction standards promulgated by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development that were in effect at the time of construction and that satisfies the criteria in § 6.7 and where the manufactured home has a length not exceeding four times its width. 
2.  Class B manufactured home: A single-wide manufactured home constructed after July 1, 1976 that meets or exceeds the construction standards promulgated by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development that were in effect at the time of construction. 
3.  Class C manufactured home: A manufactured home built before 1976 that does not meet the definition of a Class A or Class B manufactured home. Class C manufactured homes are not allowed in the city, except as existing structures permitted prior to the adoption of this ordinance. 
2.2.111.  Manufactured home lot: A lot designed for the siting of a manufactured home in a manufactured home subdivision. 
2.2.112.  Manufactured home space: A space designed for the siting of a manufactured home within a manufactured home park. 
2.2.113.  Manufactured home subdivision: A subdivision designed and intended for the siting of Class A manufactured homes. 
2.2.114.  Manufactured home park: Land used or designed to accommodate a manufactured home community of multiple spaces for rent or lease. 
2.2.115.  Manufacturing: Industrial uses that involve the processing and manufacturing of materials or products and the incidental storage, sale and distribution of such products. 
2.2.116.  Manufacturing, heavy: The manufacture, predominantly from extracted or raw materials of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment and packing of such products. 
2.2.117.  Manufacturing, light: The manufacture, predominantly from previously prepared materials of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment and packing of such products. 
2.2.118.  Medical clinic: A facility providing medical, psychiatric or surgical services for sick or injured persons exclusively on an outpatient basis. 
2.2.119.  Medical support service: A place of business, which supplies medical support services to individuals, medical practitioners, clinics and hospitals, including, but not limited to, a pharmacy, medical and surgical supply store, and an optician. 
2.2.120.  Mini-warehouse: A structure group of structures partitioned for leasing of individual storage spaces and is exclusively used for the storage of non-volatile, non-toxic and non-explosive materials. 
2.2.121.  Mixed use or mixed use development: The combination of a residential use with commercial and/or lodging uses on the same site or within the same building. 
2.2.122 	Modular Home: A structure built in sections or parts that are manufactured offsite and delivered to and installed on a lot. Not to be confused with manufactured homes, modular homes do not have frame, tongue, and/or axles and wheels. 
2.2.123.  Motel: A lodging establishment, in which guest rooms are accessed from the exterior of the building. Motels may also include, as an incidental use, a liquor lounge. 
2.2.124.  Nonconformities: Lawful uses of lots, structures or characteristics of uses, which, as a result of amendment to this ordinance, no longer conform to all applicable zoning provisions. 
2.2.125.  Nonresidential: Land uses including agricultural, institutional, commercial, lodging and industrial activities. Mixed-use developments shall also be considered nonresidential uses. 
2.2.126.  Nursing care facility: A licensed institution providing skilled nursing care and medical supervision at a lower level than that, provided in a hospital but at a higher level than, provided in an assisted or independent living facility. 
2.2.127.  Office: See "Business office." 
2.2.128.  Open air market: Retail sales of arts, crafts, produce, discount or used goods, which are located partially or wholly outside of an enclosed building. This may include produce market, craft market, farmers market or similar activities. 
2.2.129.  Open space, common: Land area within a development owned and maintained by the developer or held in common ownership and maintained by a property owner's association for all of the owners for recreation, protection of natural land features, amenities or buffers; is freely accessible to all owners of the development; and, is required by this ordinance to remain in such use. 
2.2.130.  Outdoor storage: The keeping, in an unenclosed area, of any goods, materials, merchandise, products or vehicles in the same place for more than 48 hours. 
2.2.131.  Owner: The person having the right and legal title to, beneficial interest in or a contractual right to purchase a lot or parcel of land, or their authorized designee. 
2.2.132.  Park: Publicly owned and operated parks, playgrounds, recreation facilities and open spaces. Parks owned and operated by a property owners association are referred to as "common open spaces." 
2.2.133.  Personal service: An establishment primarily engaged in providing services involving the care of a person or their personal goods or apparel. 
2.2.134.  Perimeter: The boundaries or borders of a lot, tract or parcel of land. 
2.2.135.  Place of assembly: A facility used for and providing religious, fraternal, recreational, social, educational or cultural activities. 
2.2.136.  Planning commission or commission: The planning commission of the City of Opp, Alabama. 
2.2.137.  Premises: A lot, parcel, tract or plot or land together with the structures hereon. 
2.2.138.  Printing establishment: Blue printing, copying, printing, engraving or other reproduction services. 
2.2.139.  Property line: The lot line or boundary line. 
2.2.140.  Public facility: Buildings providing public services, not otherwise defined in this section, including government offices, post offices, museums, libraries, transit stations, police and fire stations, emergency service stations, civil defense operations and similar uses. 
2.2.141.  Public utility facility: A facility that provides public utility services to the public at large, including water and sewer, gas distribution, electric transmission and distribution, and cable transmission and distribution facilities. 
2.2.142.  Rear-accessed: Having vehicular access by way of an alley or similar means and without a driveway along any front lot line. 
2.2.143.  Recreation: A commercial establishment providing recreational or sports activities to participants, including bowling alleys, billiard parlors, video game centers, ice and roller skating rinks, driving ranges, miniature golf courses, conventional golf courses, swimming pools, tennis courts and other commercial recreational and sports activities. 
2.2.144.  Recreational vehicle: A vehicular type portable structure without permanent foundation that can be towed, hauled, or driven and is designed primarily as a temporary living accommodation of recreational and camping purposes. 
2.2.145.  Recycling center: Land, with or without buildings, upon which used materials are separated and processed for shipment for eventual reuse in new products. 
2.2.146.  Recycling plant: A facility, other than a junk yard, in which recoverable resources, such as newspapers, magazines, books and other paper products; glass, metal cans and other products are recycled, reprocessed and treated to return such products to a condition in which they may be used again in new products. 
2.2.147.  Research laboratory: A building or group of buildings in which are located facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing or experimentation, but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of products, except as incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory. 
2.2.148.  Resource extraction: The removal of soil, sand, stone, chert, clay, gravel, limestone, or other minerals or similar materials, for commercial purposes, including quarries, sand and gravel operations, gas extraction, and mining operations, and the loading, sizing, crushing, and processing of such materials, and the incidental storage, sale and distribution of such materials. 
2.2.149.  Restaurant, drive-in or drive-through: An establishment where food and drink are rapidly prepared for drive-through or drive-in service, but which also includes on-premises dining. 
2.2.150.  Restaurant, standard: An establishment where food and drink are prepared, served and primarily consumed within the building where patrons are seated and served. 
2.2.151.  Restaurant, take-out only: An establishment where food and drink are prepared and served for consumption off-premises only. 
2.2.152.  Retail, general: 
1.  General retail, enclosed retail sales of goods and services including, but not limited to; food sales, department stores, clothing stores, home furnishings, appliance stores, automobile parts and supply stores, video rental, gift shops, florist shops, hardware stores, specialty shops, jewelry stores, variety stores, sporting goods stores, antique shops, auction houses and similar retail activities. 
2.  General retail, unenclosed retail sales of goods and services conducted partially or fully outside of a building, including, but not limited to, flea markets and similar activities. 
2.2.153.  Salvage yard or junk yard: A lot or structure or part thereof, used primarily for the collecting, storage and sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal or discarded material or for the collecting, dismantling, storage and salvaging of machinery or vehicles not in running condition or for the sale of parts thereof. 
2.2.154.  School: A public or nonprofit school. 
2.2.155.  Screen: To visually shield or obscure a building, structure or use from adjacent property or public view by means of opaque fencing, walls, berm or densely planted vegetation. 
2.2.156.  Service station: A gas station that engages in minor vehicle repair activities. 
2.2.157.  Shopping center: A group of commercial establishments located on a lot planned and developed in a unified manner and design with shared parking and driveway facilities and under a common ownership or management authority. 
2.2.158.  Site: Land intended to have one or more buildings or intended to be subdivided into one or more lots. 
2.2.159.  Special, exception use: A use that would not generally be appropriate in a zoning district without restriction(s), but which, if controlled as to number, area, location or relation to the neighborhood, would not be detrimental to public health, safety and general welfare. See § 13.6. 
2.2.160.  Story: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, the ceiling next above and including basements used for the principal use. A top floor, in which the floor area with eight ft. or more of head clearance is 50 percent or less than the floor area of the story next below, is considered a "half story." A basement is considered a story if its ceiling is more than five ft. above grade level or if it is used for residential purposes. 
2.2.161.  Street: A vehicular way dedicated for public use including all land within the right-of-way. Streets are further classified as: 
1.  Arterial: A major street serving as a primary artery, intended to mainly carry through traffic and to connect major activity centers in the city, and as further classified following: 
a.  Major arterials include US 331, US 84, AL 52, and AL 134.
b.  Minor arterials include Florala Hwy, W Cummings Ave, Business 33, and E Stewart Ave. 
2.  Collector: A street that collects traffic from an area and moves it to the arterial network while providing some access to abutting property, including, but not limited to: Opine Road, Old Perry Store Road, Maloy St, N Jackson St, Cool Springs Road, and Barnes St. 
3.  Local street or minor street: A minor street used primarily for access to abutting properties. 
2.2.162.  Street line: The right-of-way line of a street. 
2.2.163.  Structure: A combination of materials that form a construction for use, occupancy, or ornamentation whether installed on, above or below the surface of land or water. All buildings are structures but not all structures are buildings. 
2.2.164.  Studio: A place of work for an artist, photographer or craftsman, including instruction, display, production and retail sales of materials produced on the premises. 
2.2.165.  Subdivision: The division of a lot, tract or parcel or land into two or more lots, plats, sites or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or of building development. Such term includes re-subdivision of land and when appropriate to the context relates to the process of subdivision or to the land or territory subdivided. 
2.2.166.  Tree, canopy: A deciduous tree that reaches a mature height of at least 20 ft. 
2.2.167.  Tree, understory: A deciduous tree that reaches a mature height of fifteen to 25 ft. 
2.2.168.  Truck stop: An establishment involving the maintenance, servicing, storage or repair of commercial vehicles; the retail dispensing of motor vehicle fuels; and the sale of accessories or equipment for trucks and similar commercial vehicles. Truck stops may include overnight accommodations or dining. 
2.2.169.  Variance: A relaxation or waiver of the terms of this ordinance (other than use provisions) as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship. 
2.2.170.  Vehicle and equipment sales, rental and service: An establishment engaged in the sale or rental of heavy trucks (over one ton), construction equipment, tractors farm implements and similar equipment, including the storage, maintenance and servicing of such vehicles and equipment. 
2.2.171.  Veterinary hospital: A place where animals are given medical care and the boarding of animals is limited to short-term care incidental to the hospital use. 
2.2.172.  Wholesaling establishment: An establishment primarily engaged in selling merchandise to other businesses, including retailers, industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business users, other wholesalers, or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to, such individuals or companies. 
2.2.173.  Yard: A minimum open area unobstructed from the ground up extending along a lot line and inward to the structure. The yard shall be measured as the shortest distance between the structure and the lot line. 
1.  Front yard: A yard extending the full width of the lot between any building and the front lot line and measured perpendicular to the building at the closest point to the front lot line. 
 
2.  Rear yard: A yard extending the full width of the lot between the principal building and the rear lot line and measured perpendicular to the building to the closest point of the rear lot line. 
3.  Side yard: A yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the principal building and the side lot line and measured perpendicular from the side lot line to the closest point of the principal building. 
In some cases, there may be lots-of-record platted along dead end streets without cul-de-sac turnarounds. In such cases there yards are defined as shown below. In such cases, the side and rear yards are determined by the zoning official based on the arrangement of abutting lots. 
 
4.  Street side yard: For standard corner lots, a yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the principal building and the street side lot line and measured perpendicular from the street side lot line to the closest point of the principal building. 
2.2.174.  Zero lot line: A lot line with no required setback. 
2.2.175.  Zoning official: The city official assigned by the city council to administer this ordinance, including his/her designee.  
Sec. 2.3. - Abbreviations used in this ordinance. 
2.3.1.  BR—Bedroom. 
2.3.2.  CR—County Road. 
2.3.3.  Dr.—Drive. 
2.3.4.  DU—Dwelling Unit. 
2.3.5.  EQ—Equal. 
2.3.6.  FAA—Federal Aviation Administration. 
2.3.7.  FEMA—Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
2.3.8.  ft.—Foot or feet. 
2.3.9.  GFA—Gross Floor Area. 
2.3.10.  GLA—Gross Leasable Area. 
2.3.11.  max.—Maximum. 
2.3.12.  min.—Minimum. 
2.3.13.  na—Not applicable. 
2.3.14.  oc—On center. 
2.3.15.  PL—Property line or Lot Line. 
2.3.16.  ROW—Right-of-way. 
2.3.17.  sf—Square feet. 
2.3.18.  %—Percent. 
2.3.19.  §—Section, subsection, paragraph or item within this ordinance or other regulations, as specified.  
ARTICLE 3. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 3.1. - Districts. 
For the purposes of this ordinance, the city is hereby divided into the types of districts designated as follows: 
3.1.1.  AR Agricultural and Recreational. 
3.1.2.  R-1 Low Density Residential. 
3.1.3.  R-2 Medium Family Residential. 
3.1.4.  R-3 Single and Two-family Residential. 
3.1.5.  R-4 Multifamily Residential. 
3.1.6.  R-5 Group Housing Residential. 
3.1.7.  P-1 Planned Unit Development. 
3.1.8.  P-2 Planned Neighborhood Development. 
3.1.9.  P-3 Planned Industrial Development. 
3.1.10.  T-1 Manufactured Home. 
3.1.11.  C-1 Central Business. 
3.1.12.  C-2 Neighborhood Business. 
3.1.13.  C-3 General Commercial. 
3.1.14.  C-4 Regional Commercial. 
3.1.15.  INST Institutional. 
3.1.16.  M-1 Light Manufacturing. 
3.1.17.  M-2 Heavy Manufacturing.  
Sec. 3.2. - District boundaries. 
The boundaries of the above districts are hereby established as shown on the official zoning map. 
3.2.1.  Boundary interpretations. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
1.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
2.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
3.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following such city limits. 
4.  Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be mid-way between the main tracks. 
5.  Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be construed to follow such shore lines, and in the event of change in the shore line, it shall be construed as moving with the actual shore line; boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such center lines. 
6.  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in paragraphs 1 through 5 above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
7.  When physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map or in circumstances not covered by paragraphs 1 through 6 above, the board of zoning adjustment, hereinafter referred to as "the board," shall interpret the district boundaries. 
8.  Where a district boundary line divides a lot, which was in single ownership at the time of passage of this ordinance, the board may permit, as a special, exception, the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot not to exceed 50 ft. beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot.  
ARTICLE 4. - NONCONFORMITIES 
 
Sec. 4.1. - Purpose of regulations. 
Within the districts established by this ordinance, as amended, there exist lots, structures, uses of land and structures and characteristics of use which were lawful before this ordinance was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this ordinance or future amendment. It is the intent of this ordinance to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. It is further the intent of this ordinance that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
4.1.1.  Nonconforming uses are declared by this ordinance to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. A nonconforming use of a structure, land, or structure and land in combination shall not be extended or enlarged after the passage of this ordinance by attachment on a building or premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off-premises, or by the addition of other uses, of a nature that would be prohibited generally in the district involved. 
4.1.2.  To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance and upon which actual building construction has been carried on diligently. 
1.  Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. 
2.  Where excavation or demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to building, such excavation or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be carried on diligently.  
Sec. 4.2. - Nonconforming lots of record. 
4.2.1.  In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any lot of record at the effective date of this ordinance, or amendment thereto, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this ordinance. Such lot must be in separate ownership and not continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership. This provision shall apply even though a lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the districts, provided that yard dimensions and requirements other than those applying to area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the applicable district. 
4.2.2.  Variance of yard requirements shall be obtained only through action of the board. 
4.2.3.  If two or more lots or combination of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the effective date of this ordinance, or amendment thereto, and if all parts of the lots do not meet the requirements established for lot width and area, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this ordinance, and no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this ordinance nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with width or area below the requirements stated in this ordinance.  
Sec. 4.3. - Nonconforming uses of land. 
Where at the time of passage lawful use of land exists, which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this ordinance, and where such use involves no individual structure with a replacement cost less than $1,000.00 (determined by the building official), the use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, provided: 
4.3.1.  No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased or extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of this ordinance or amendment thereto. 
4.3.2.  No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or part to any portion of the lot or parcel than that occupied by such use at the effective date of this ordinance or amendment thereto. 
4.3.3.  If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than 30 consecutive days, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this ordinance for the applicable district. 
4.3.4.  No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this ordinance shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming use of land.  
Sec. 4.4. - Nonconforming structures. 
Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of this ordinance, or amendment thereto, that could not be built under the terms of this ordinance by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its location on the lot, or other requirements concerning the structure, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
4.4.1.  No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its nonconformity. 
4.4.2.  Should such nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of structure be destroyed by any means to a condition exceeding more than 50 percent of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed, except in conformity with this ordinance. 
4.4.3.  Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the applicable district.  
Sec. 4.5. - Nonconforming uses of structures or of structures and premises in combination. 
If lawful use involving individual structures with a replacement cost of $1,000.00 or more (determined by the building official) or of structures and premises in combination, exists at the effective date of this ordinance, or amendment thereto, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to: 
4.5.1.  No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this ordinance in the applicable district shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the applicable district. 
4.5.2.  Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the effective date of this ordinance, or amendment thereto, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building. 
4.5.3.  If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of structure, or structure and premises, may as a special, exception be changed to another nonconforming use, provided that the board, either by general rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the board may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
4.5.4.  Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for this ordinance, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed. 
4.5.5.  When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six consecutive months or for 18 months during any three-year period (except when government action impedes access to the premises), the structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used, except in conformity with this ordinance. 
4.5.6.  Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. Destruction for the purpose of this subsection is defined as damage to an extent of more than 50 percent of the replacement cost at the time of destruction.  
Sec. 4.6. - Nonconforming improvements. 
When there exist nonconforming improvements on a developed site, such as driveway access points, landscaping, buffers, screening, or off-street parking or loading facilities, such improvements shall be made to conform to the applicable provisions of this ordinance in the following circumstances: 
1.  When the premises remains vacant for a period of two or more years; 
2.  When the use of the premises is expanded or changes to a more intensive use.  
Sec. 4.7. - Repairs and maintenance of nonconforming structures. 
On any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding ten percent of the replacement cost of the nonconforming portion of the structure as the case may be, provided that the cubic content existing when it became nonconforming shall not be increased. 
4.7.1.  If a nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to the lack of repairs and maintenance, and is declared by any duly authorized officials to be unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall not therefore be restored, repaired or rebuilt, except in conformity with this ordinance. 
4.7.2.  Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official.  
Sec. 4.8. - Uses under special, exception provisions are not nonconforming. 
Any use, which has been approved by the board as a special, exception, other than a change through board action from nonconforming use to another use not generally permitted in the district, shall not be considered a nonconforming use. 

 
ARTICLE 5. - SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 5.1. - Uses. 
5.1.1.  Permitted, special exception and conditional uses. In each district no other uses other than the types specified as uses permitted-by-right or by approval of a special, exception (see § 13.6) or conditional use (see § 12.11) shall be allowed. Uses permitted-by-right are permitted upon application to the zoning official. Permits shall only be issued for special, exception or conditional uses upon approval by the board or the commission, respectively. 
5.1.2.  Interpretation of uses. The use tables in this ordinance (i.e., table 6-1 and table 7-1) are not intended to be all-inclusive. Therefore, the zoning official may make interpretations so as to classify any questioned use within a listed use of most similar impact and characteristics. 
5.1.3.  Unclassified uses. In the event the zoning official finds a new or unusual use that cannot appropriately fit a listed use in any district, the following procedures shall be followed: 
1.  If compatible with the existing zoning district intent, the unclassified use shall be permitted by special, exception upon approval and subject to the conditions set by the board. 
2.  If the unclassified use would not be compatible with the intent of the existing zoning district, the applicant may request rezoning to another district in which the zoning official determines the unclassified use is best suited. If rezoning is sought, the unclassified use may only be permitted by special, exception in the requested district. Following final action on the unclassified use, the commission may initiate an amendment to this ordinance to list the use in the most appropriate district(s).  
Sec. 5.2. - Area and dimensional regulations. 
The regulations set by this ordinance shall be the minimum regulations and shall apply to each class or kind of structure or land, and particularly, except as hereinafter, provided: 
5.2.1.  No building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered, except in conformity with this ordinance. 
5.2.2.  No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered: 
1.  To exceed the height or bulk; 
2.  To accommodate or house a greater number of families; 
3.  To occupy a greater percentage of lot area; 
4.  To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or other open spaces than herein required or in any manner contrary to the provisions of this ordinance. 
5.2.3.  Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky, unobstructed by any structure or part thereof, and unoccupied for storage, servicing or similar uses, except as otherwise specified in this ordinance. 
5.2.4.  No part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required about or in connection with any building for the purpose of complying with this ordinance shall be included as part of a yard, open space, or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building, unless specifically, provided for otherwise in this ordinance. 
5.2.5.  No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this ordinance shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this ordinance. 
5.2.6.  All territory, which may hereafter be annexed to the city, shall be considered to be in the low density residential district, unless otherwise classified. However, if an annexation petitioner desires to have property classified within any zone other than R-1, following annexation, the petitioner must obtain the approval from the commission prior to the submission of the formal annexation request to the council, and the council must approve such zoning classification. 
5.2.7.  Each structure hereafter erected or altered shall comply with the area and dimensional regulations applied by this ordinance. Exceptions to these requirements are as follows: 
1.  Where the owner of a lot of official record at the time of adoption of this ordinance does not own sufficient adjacent land to enable such owner to conform to area and dimensional requirements, one building and its accessory structures may be built, provided the setbacks and other requirements conform as closely as possible, in the opinion of the board, to the requirements of the applicable district; and further, provided that neither side yard shall be reduced to less than five ft. in width, except where a lesser or no side yard setback is required. 
2.  No building shall be required to be set back more than the average of the setbacks of the existing principal buildings within 100 ft. each side thereof.  
Sec. 5.3. - Height. 
Height limitations shall not apply to church steeples, barns, silos, farm structures, chimneys, flag poles, public utility poles, cooling towers, water tanks, and industrial structures, when required by manufacturing process and, provided the structure does not exceed 25 percent of the lot area, except in those districts where height restrictions are for the protection of aircraft.  
Sec. 5.4. - Structures. 
It is the intent of this ordinance that there shall be but one principal structure plus any permitted accessory structures on any lot used for single-family or duplex dwellings; however, any and all accessory structures shall not be used as living quarters, unless specifically permitted by this ordinance. This shall not apply to single-family and duplex dwelling developments under condominium ownership that otherwise meet the area and dimensional requirements of this ordinance. Protective shelters classified as accessory structures may provide temporary living quarters in times of danger or emergency. 

 
Sec. 5.5. - Future street lines. 
On any lot which, as of the effective date of this ordinance or amendment thereto, may be reduced in area by widening a public street to the right-of-way width indicated on any duly adopted federal, state, regional county (sic) or municipal plan, or as same may be hereafter amended, the minimum required yards, lot area, lot width, and lot coverage area shall be measured by considering such future street lines as the lot line of the concerned lot. However, upon a recommendation by the City Planner, the commission may modify this requirement as it applies to streets under the city's jurisdiction.  
Sec. 5.6. - Rear yard abuts a public street. 
When the rear yard of a lot abuts a public street, all buildings or structures on that rear yard shall observe the same setback from the street line or property line as required for adjacent properties which front on that street. In addition, any structure located within 25 ft. of that setback line shall observe the side yard requirements of the adjoining properties fronting on that street.  
Sec. 5.7. - Intersection visibility. 
To provide a clear view at intersections, there shall be an unobstructed triangular area at the intersection of any two streets or a street with a driveway, alley or railroad. The size of this triangular area shall be determined in accordance with table 5-1. Such distance shall be measured from the position of a car stopped at the intersection to the centerline of the intersecting street, as shown in Figure 5.7. Within this triangular area, no structure, sign or planting shall be permitted which obstructs motorist's view between a height of 2.5 ft. and eight ft. above grade level at the intersection. 
Table 5-1 Sight Distance Requirements 
Design Speed of Intersecting Street (mph) 	Intersection Sight Distance (ft.) 1 
15 	170 
20 	225 
25 	280 
30 	335 
35 	390 
40 	445 
 
1 Distances are intended as a minimum guideline. Site conditions such as grades, traffic volumes, signalization types, etc. may warrant increases in desired sight distances. 
  
Sec. 5.8. - Rear dwelling prohibited. 
No accessory structure or building on the lot of a single-family or duplex dwelling, other than the principal building used for such single-family or duplex dwelling, may be used for residential purposes, unless specifically approved as part of a planned development.  
Sec. 5.9. - Location of accessory buildings. 
Accessory buildings may be erected on any lot; however, such buildings shall be located so as to comply with the following requirements: 
5.9.1.  No accessory building shall be erected in any required front or side yard and shall not occupy more than 30 percent of any required rear yard. Accessory buildings shall be at least five ft. from all lot lines and from any building on the same lot. 
5.9.2.  No accessory building not an integral part of the principal building shall be located within 60 ft. from the front lot line. 
5.9.3.  In the case of a corner lot adjoined in the rear by a lot facing the side street, the accessory structure shall be located in such a manner as to conform with the front and side yard requirements of the adjoining lots.  
Sec. 5.10. - Access to public streets. 
Every use, building or structure established after the effective date of this ordinance shall be on a lot or parcel with street frontage. All structures shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection and required off-street parking.  
Sec. 5.11. - Fences, walls, hedges. 
Notwithstanding other provisions of this ordinance, fences, wall and hedges may be permitted in any required yard, or along the edge of any yard, provided no fence, wall, or hedge shall exceed 2.5 ft. in height within the clear sight triangle required by § 5.7. 


 
Sec. 5.12. - Essential community facilities. 
Nothing in this ordinance shall prohibit the provision of essential services, provided the installation of such facility or service does not violate any other applicable provision of this ordinance. 
Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to permit the erection, construction or enlargement of any building, tower, or maintenance depot for provision of an essential community facility or service, except as otherwise permitted in this ordinance.  
Sec. 5.13. - Access streets. 
The following regulations shall apply to all commercial and industrial developments located on major arterials: 
5.13.1.  There shall be provisions made by the developer whereby adequate land shall be set aside to provide an access street parallel to the major arterial. 
5.13.2.  The developer shall provide a paved access street for the length of the lot frontage and that meets city specifications. 
5.13.3.  Ingress and egress points to the access road from private property shall be coordinated by the developer with the City Planner. 
5.13.4.  The commission may waive any parts of this provision governing access streets if it is determined by the City Planner that direct access will not adversely affect traffic safety and movement on the major arterial and any adjoining streets.  
Sec. 5.14. - Parking and storage of certain vehicles. 
Automotive vehicles or trailers of any kind or type without current license plates, or which are inoperable or otherwise disabled for a period of seven consecutive days, shall not be stored or parked on any residentially zoned property, whether occupied as a residence or not, or on property used for residential purposes in a nonresidential district other than in a completely enclosed building. For the purposes of this section, a vehicle shall be deemed inoperable or otherwise disabled if it is unable to operate on the streets and roadways of the State of Alabama in full compliance with the various provisions of the Code of Alabama, 1975, as amended. 
Campers, travel trailers, or recreational vehicles may be stored in any district, provided that they are parked in either the side or rear yards, or in a garage or accessory structure conforming to the requirements of this ordinance. No such vehicle shall be used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on a residential lot or in any location not approved for such use.  
Sec. 5.15. - Manufactured homes and portable buildings. 
5.15.1.  Manufactured homes not in use may be stored only in conforming manufactured home sales lots, within the confines of a building, or in individual lots in conforming manufactured home parks with only one manufactured home permitted per manufactured home space. 
5.15.2.  Portable buildings meeting the definitions of Class A or B manufactured homes may be used as bona fide construction offices on any premises for which a building permit has been issued and remains valid. 
5.15.3.  Portable buildings meeting the definitions of Class A or B manufactured homes may be used as accessory structures on lots in nonresidential districts that are already developed with a permanent structure that houses the principal use. In such cases, the portable building may only house a use that is customarily incidental to the principal use, including a caretaker dwelling, but shall only be placed behind the front building line. Where such placement is insufficient to obscure public views of the portable building, screening may be required by the zoning official, consistent with the standards in § 11.3, screening. 
5.15.4.  In accordance with § 12.3, building permit required, the placement of any manufactured home on property, whether temporarily or permanently, shall require a building permit. This shall not apply to the placement of a manufactured home on a previously approved manufactured home park space nor the placement of a manufactured home for sale on an approved manufactured home sales lot. 
5.15.5 	Manufactured homes are only allowed in a designated Manufactured Home Park or District (T-1).  
Sec. 5.16. - Swimming pool. 
5.16.1.  Swimming pools shall not be located closer to any lot line than ten ft., and non-commercial pools shall be enclosed by a fence or wall not less than five ft. to prevent uncontrolled access. 
5.16.2.  Private swimming pools may be established in residential districts for the exclusive use of the occupants of the subject property and their guests and, provided that no part of the swimming pool extends into any required front or side yard.  
Sec. 5.17. - Additional regulations for areas of special flood hazard. 
All properties within areas of special flood hazard, as defined in Ordinance 439 Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance, City of Opp, shall also be subject to the applicable regulations of said ordinance in addition to the requirements of this ordinance. Wherever there is a conflict between the provisions of this ordinance and those of Ordinance 439, the more restrictive shall apply.  
Sec. 5.18. - Ownership and maintenance of common open spaces and facilities. 
For all proposals involving the creation of open spaces or facilities (including stormwater detention ponds and similar facilities) to be owned and maintained by a developer or a homeowner, property owner, or condominium association, including where such open spaces are required by this ordinance, the following shall apply: 
5.18.1.  Owner's association. In the case of an owner's association, such association shall own the common open space or facility in perpetuity. Membership in the association shall be mandatory and automatic for all owners of the subdivision or condominium and their successors. The association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection of dues from all members. The responsibility for maintaining the common open space and/or facilities located thereon shall be borne by the association. 
5.18.2.  Management plan, submittal. The applicant shall submit, along with a proposed preliminary plat or site plan, as applicable, a plan for the management of open space and/or common facilities that: 
1.  Allocates responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance and operation of the common open space/facilities including provisions for ongoing maintenance and for long-term capital improvements; 
2.  Estimates the costs and staffing requirements needed for maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the common open space/facilities and outlines the means by which such funding will be obtained or, provided; 
3.  Provides that any changes to the plan be approved by the commission; and 
4.  Provides for enforcement of the plan. 
In the event the party responsible for maintenance of the common open space fails to maintain all or any portion in reasonable order and condition, the city may enter the premises and take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance. The costs of such maintenance may be charged to the association, or to the individual owners that make up the association, and may include administrative costs and penalties. Such costs shall become a lien on all involved properties.  
Sec. 5.19. - Noise standards. 
In addition to the separation and landscaping requirements of § 11-1, buffers, no use shall produce continuous, recurring, scheduled or intermittent noise beyond its property and that exceeds the levels indicated in table 5-2. 
5.19.1.  Any use which may produce noise levels in excess of those permitted at the property line as indicated in table 5-2 shall be required to incorporate noise baffles or other noise suppression techniques in order to comply with these requirements. 
Table 5-2. Noise Standards 
Use or Zoning of 
Abutting Property 	Daytime 
7:00 a.m.—9:00 p.m. 	Nighttime 
9:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m. 
Residential 	75 dB 	70 dB 
Commercial or Institutional 	80 dB 	75 dB 
Industrial 	85 dB 	80 dB 
 
5.19.2.  Exemptions. The following uses and activities shall be exempt from this § 5.19: 
1.  Noise from safety signals, warning devices, and emergency pressure relief valves. 
2.  Noise from any authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency. 
3.  Noise from aircraft or railways. 
4.  Noise from utility stations, utility substations or utility plants. 
5.  Noise from construction activities occurring between 7:00 a.m. and sundown or from temporary operation of maintenance equipment or activities in residential and commercial areas between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
5.19.3.  Where a change in zoning or use occurs on abutting property, the noise from a pre-existing industrial or commercial use shall be subject to the pre-existing restrictions, as if the zoning or use of the abutting property had not changed.  
Sec. 5.20. - Lighting standards. 
The intent of these standards is to reduce the impacts of glare, light trespass and light pollution while promoting safety and energy conservation. For all nonresidential and multifamily developments, the following shall apply: 
5.20.1.  Definitions. For this § 5.20, the following terms shall have the meanings, provided herein: 
1.  Floodlighting: Artificial lighting so directed or diffused as to provide comparatively uniform illumination over a large area. 
2.  Full cut-off light fixture: A light fixture that, by design of the housing, does not allow any light dispersion or direct glare to shine above [a] 90-degree horizontal plane from the base of the fixture. 
3.  Glare: The sensation produced by a bright light source that is sufficiently brighter than the level to which the eyes are adapted, which causes annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance. 
4.  Glare, direct: Glare resulting from direct line-of-sight eye contact with a direct light source. 
5.  Light trespass: Light from an artificial source that is intruding into an area where it is not wanted or does not belong. 
6.  Light fixture shield: A non-reflective covering, canopy or other such device fitted over a light source preventing light from illuminating an area not intended to be illuminated. 
7.  Uplighting: Any light source that distributes illumination above a horizontal plane. 
5.20.2.  Standards. 
1.  All outdoor lighting fixtures shall be designed, shielded, aimed, located and maintained to prevent light trespass and glare onto adjacent properties or roadways. 
2.  The intensity, location, and design of lighting shall be such that not more than one foot candle of light is cast upon adjacent residential property. 
3.  Light fixtures shall be full cut-off fixtures, with the following, exceptions: 
a.  Holiday lighting from November 15 to March 1. 
b.  Sensor activated lights, provided that: 
1)  It is located in such a manner as to prevent glare and lighting onto properties of others or into the public right-of-way; 
2)  The light is set to illuminate only when activated and to extinguish within five minutes after activation has ceased; and 
3)  The light must not be triggered by activity that occurs off of the subject property. 
c.  All temporary emergency lighting needed by fire and police departments or other emergency agencies. 
d.  Floodlights with external shielding if the luminaire does not cause glare or light to shine on adjacent property or public rights-of-way. 
e.  Up lighting for flags, address markers, and architectural features and low-voltage landscape lighting, provided that direct illumination is focused exclusively on the object and away from adjoining properties and public streets and sidewalks. In all cases, up lighting must not cause glare or light trespass. 
f.  Light fixtures that have a maximum output of 1,000 lumens per fixture (equal to a single 60-watt incandescent light), regardless of the number of lamps, provided: 
1)  The bulb of the fixture is not visible; 
2)  The fixture uses frosted, opalescent, clear or iridescent glass; 
3)  The fixture has an opaque top or is under an opaque portion of the building; 
4)  If the fixture utilizes clear glass, the output of the fixture must be shielded by the architecture of the structure; and 
5)  All fixtures must not cause glare or light trespass beyond the property. 
g.  Floodlighting used for outdoor recreational facilities, provided: 
1)  To the extent practicable, all light fixtures/light poles used to illuminate playing fields, courts and other outdoor recreational facilities shall be set back a minimum of one foot for every foot in height from any residential property line or right-of-way. 
2)  In any case, floodlighting shall be turned off no later than one hour after an event is concluded. The fixtures must be aimed so that their beams are directed and fall within the primary playing or performance area. All sports and event lighting must be equipped with a glare-control package (louvers, shields or similar devices), and the fixtures must be aimed so that beams are directed and fall within the primary playing area and light trespass is minimized. 
4.  In parking lots, light fixture poles shall not be more than 30 feet in height. 
5.  Light fixtures under any canopy shall be recessed into the canopy ceiling with a flat lens to prevent glare. The bottom of the fixtures may protrude a no more than two inches from the ceiling. No other portions of the canopy not included in the sign area shall be illuminated. 
5.20.3.  Lighting plan required. For all nonresidential and multifamily developments involving off-street parking areas in excess of 20 spaces, a lighting plan shall be submitted as part of the required site plan. The lighting plan shall be prepared by a registered engineer, design or lighting professional and shall include the information listed in appendix 5.  
ARTICLE 6. - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
The following sections present the specific regulations which govern development within each of the city's residential zoning districts. 
 
Sec. 6.1. - Residential district regulations, generally. 
6.1.1.  Uses permitted. Uses shall be permitted in each residential district as indicated in table 6-1. Any use not specified in table 6-1 as permitted is prohibited (except as, provided in § 5.1, uses). Any additional uses shall be allowed only through amendment of this ordinance. Refer to the specific district regulations for any limitations that may apply to certain uses. 
6.1.2.  General development criteria. All developments shall comply with the area and dimensional requirements in table 6-2, the provisions specified in the regulations of the applicable district and the provisions referenced following, where applicable: 
1.  See article 5, supplementary regulations. 
2.  See article 9, supplementary use regulations. 
3.  See article 10, parking and loading requirements. 
4.  See article 11, landscaping, screening and buffers. 
a.  Buffers shall be, provided, pursuant to § 11.1, when a new use of higher intensity is developed abutting an existing use of lesser intensity. 
b.  Landscaping shall be, provided around and within vehicular areas pursuant to § 11.2. 
c.  Screening shall be, provided for outdoor storage areas, dumpsters, and similar site elements pursuant to § 11.3.  
Sec. 6.2. - Low Density (R-1) Residential District. 
6.2.1.  Intent. The R-1 district is designed to facilitate the development of single-family, low-density residential areas, with additional facilities limited to those which enhance and preserve the residential neighborhood environment. 
6.2.2.  No new R-1 district may be established which contains less than five acres.  
Sec. 6.3. - Medium Density (R-2) Residential District. 
6.3.1.  The R-2 district is designed to facilitate the development of single-family, medium-density residential areas, with additional facilities limited to those which enhance and preserve the residential neighborhood environment. 
6.3.2.  No new R-2 district may be established which contains less than five acres.  
Sec. 6.4. - Single- and Two-Family (R-3) Residential District. 
6.4.1.  Intent. The R-3 district is designed to facilitate the development of single-family and low-density multifamily dwelling units, not to exceed two dwelling units per structure, and additional uses which enhance the residential environment of the district. 
6.4.2.  No new R-3 district may be established which contains less than five acres. 
6.4.3.  Development criteria. 
1.  More than one two-family unit structure may be erected on the same lot, provided there shall be a minimum distance of 20 ft. between structures, and, provided all other area and dimensional requirements are satisfied. 
Table 6-1. Uses Permitted in Residential Districts 
Districts 	R-1 	R-2 	R-3 	R-4 	R-5 	T-1 
Residential Uses 
Boarding House 			SE 	SE 		
Duplex 			Y 	Y 		
Conservation Subdivision, § 9.7 	Y 	Y 	Y 		Y 	
Family Day Care Home, § 9.12 	Y 	Y 	Y 			
Home Occupation, § 9.3 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	
Independent Living Facility 				SE 		
Manufactured Home Park 						C 
Manufactured Home Subdivision 						C 
Multifamily Dwelling 				Y 		
Residential Accessory Structure 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 
Single-family Detached Dwelling 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 
Townhouse 					Y 	
Nonresidential Uses 						
Assisted Living Facility, Nursing Care Facility 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Bed and Breakfast, § 9.8 		SE 	SE 	SE 		
Cemetery, § 9.2 	SE 	SE 	SE 	SE 	SE 	
Communications Tower, § 9.9 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Country Club 	SE 	SE 	SE 	SE 	SE 	
Day Care Center, § 9.12 	SE 	SE 	SE 	SE 	SE 	
Group Care Home, § 9.12 				R 		
Place of Assembly, Public or Semi-Public 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Public Buildings (fire stations, libraries, etc.) 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Public Recreational Facility (parks, playgrounds, stadiums) 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Public Utility Facility, § 9.6 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Public Utility Service 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 
School, Public or Private 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
 
Y - The use is permitted by right, subject to any limitations of the applicable district. Similar uses to those listed may also be permitted subject to § 5.1.2 and § 5.1.3. 
SE - Special, exception use, requires approval by the board of zoning adjustment (see § 13.6). May also be subject to district limitations. 
C - Conditional use, required approval by the commission (see § 12.11). May also be subject to district limitations. 
A use followed by a numeric cross-reference is also subject to the supplementary use regulations referenced. 
A blank cell indicates that the use is prohibited. 
Table 6-2. Area and Dimensional Requirements for Residential Districts 
Refer also to the applicable district regulations for any development criteria that may modify or supplement the requirements shown herein. 
District 	R-1 	R-2 	R-3 	R-4 1 	R-5 	T-1 2 
					townhouse 	patio home 	
Min. Lot Size 	15,000 sf. 	10,500 sf. 	7,000 sf. 	10,000 sf. plus 1,600 sf. per unit for over 4 units 	1,500 sf. 	6,000 sf. 	8,000 sf. 
Min. Lot Width (at Building Line) 	100 ft. 	70 ft. 	60 ft. 	100 ft. 	20 ft. 	60 ft. 3 	60 ft. 
Min. Lot Frontage 	50 ft. 	50 ft. 	35 ft. 	35 ft. 	18 ft. 	35 ft. 	na 
Min. Front Yard Setback 	40 ft. 	35 ft. 	25 ft. 	25 ft. 	10-15 ft. 4 	20 ft. 	25 ft. 
Min. Rear Yard Setback 	45 ft. 	40 ft. 	25 ft. 	25 ft. 	25 ft. 	25 ft. 	25 ft.Min. Side Yard Setback 
One-story 	15 ft. 	ten ft. 	ten ft. 	ten ft. 	0 ft.; 12 ft. at end of group 	10 ft. one side; 0 ft. other side 	10 ft. 
Multi-story 	18 ft. 	12 ft. 	12 ft. 	12 ft. 			
Min. Street Side Yard Setback 	30 ft. 	25 ft. 	20 ft. 	na 	na 	na 	na 
Max. Lot Coverage 	25% 	25% 	30% 	35% 	55% 	40% 	naMax. Building Height 
Principal Buildings 	2½ stories or 35 ft. 	2½ stories or 35 ft. 	2½ stories or 35 ft. 	3 stories or 45 ft. 	3 stories or 45 ft. 	1 story or 20 ft. 
Accessory Structures 	20 ft. 	20 ft. 	20 ft. 	20 ft. 			
Supplemental Requirements for Nonresidential Uses 
Min. Lot Size 	30,000 sf. 	30,000 sf. 	30,000 sf. 	30,000 sf. 	30,000 sf. 	na 	
Min. Yard Setbacks 	40 ft. 	40 ft. 	30 ft. 	30 ft. 	30 ft. 	na 	
Min. Lot Width (at Building Line) 	na 	na 	na 	na 	100 ft. 	na 	
 
1. Minimum lot size, minimum lot width (at building line), and minimum street side yard for single-family dwellings shall be as, provided for the R-3 district. 
2. Requirements are for manufactured home subdivisions lots. For manufactured home parks, refer to § 6.7. 
3. Minimum lot width at building line may be reduced to 50 ft. if lots are rear-accessed. 
4. See § 6.6.5.4a for specific requirement.  
Sec. 6.5. - Multifamily (R-4) Residential District. 
6.5.1.  Intent. The R-4 district is designed to facilitate the development of multifamily dwellings, and additional uses which enhance the residential environment of the district. 
6.5.2.  No new R-4 district may be established which contains less than ten acres. 
6.5.3.  Development criteria. 
1.  More than one multifamily dwelling may be erected on the same lot, provided there shall be a minimum distance of 20 ft. between structures, and, provided all other area and dimensional requirements are satisfied. 
2.  Multifamily dwellings shall be buffered from any single-family and duplex dwellings as required in § 11.1.  
Sec. 6.6. - Group Housing (R-5) Residential District. 
6.6.1.  The R-5 district is designed to facilitate the development of garden/patio homes and townhouses, and additional uses which enhance the residential environment of the district. 
6.6.2.  No new R-5 district may be established which contains less than five acres. 
6.6.3.  Patio home developments and townhouse developments shall not share the same block frontage with detached single-family dwellings or duplexes unless separated by an alley, watercourse or buffer. Patio home developments and townhouse developments shall be similarly separated. 
6.6.4.  All lots shall be served by water and sewer. All utilities shall be placed underground or in an alley for rear-accessed lots. 
6.6.5.  Development criteria for townhouses. 
1.  All lots shall front on a street; and each townhouse shall have a front entrance facing a street and be accessible from the rear. 
2.  No less than three nor more than eight townhouses shall be located within a continuous building group. 
3.  Each townhouse shall be located on a separate platted lot, except where developed under condominium ownership. 
4.  Except as, provided herein, minimum dimensional requirements shall be as shown in table 6-2. 
a.  Front yard: Townhouses shall be set back no less than ten ft. from the nearest edge of a required sidewalk. Where the front yard is less than 15 ft., the ground floor of the unit shall be no less than two ft. above grade level at the sidewalk. 
b.  Rear yard: Where an alley is present at the rear of the lot, the minimum rear yard setback for accessory buildings shall be 12 ft. from the alley centerline. 
c.  A side yard shall only be required at the end of a row of townhouses, in which case the minimum width shall be 12 ft. However, when the end unit abuts a street, the minimum front yard setback shall apply. 
d.  Each townhouse shall have its own yard containing not less than 400 sf., exclusive of paved parking space, reasonably secluded from view from streets and from neighboring property. 
5.  Off-street facilities shall be, provided on and to the rear of the individual townhouse lots, or grouped in bays in the interior of blocks. 
6.  Common open spaces and facilities shall comply with § 5.18. 
6.6.6.  Development criteria for patio homes. 
1.  No patio home shall be located less than 25 ft. from any boundary of the development that abuts an R-1, R-2 or R-3 district. 
2.  Though a zero lot line is permitted on one side, there shall be a minimum spacing of ten ft. between the sides of all patio homes.  
Sec. 6.7. - Manufactured Home (T-1) District. 
6.7.1.  Intent. The T-1 district is designed to provide locations within the city for the development of planned manufactured home parks. The areas are developed and located to provide safe and sanitary living conditions for occupants and are conveniently located near shopping centers, schools and other community facilities. 
6.7.2.  No new T-1 district may be established which contains less than five acres. A site plan shall be submitted with all requests for establishment of a manufactured home district including those materials listed in appendix 1. 
6.7.3.  Manufactured home classifications. Only Class A manufactured homes and site-built homes shall be permitted in manufactured home subdivisions. Only Class A and Class B manufactured homes shall be permitted in manufactured home parks. Class C manufactured homes and non-manufactured homes are prohibited in manufactured home parks. 
6.7.4.  Development criteria for manufactured home subdivisions. 
1.  Area and dimensional requirements shall be as shown in table 6-2. 
2.  Only site-built single-family detached dwellings and Class A manufactured homes shall be permitted. Class A manufactured homes shall comply with the following: 
a.  The manufactured home shall have a minimum of 960 sf. of enclosed and heated living area. 
b.  The roof shall have a minimum vertical rise of three ft. for each 12 ft. of horizontal run and shall be finished with a type of shingle commonly used in standard residential construction. 
c.  All roof structures shall have an eave projection of no less than six inches, which may include a gutter. 
d.  The exterior siding shall consist predominantly of vinyl or aluminum horizontal siding, wood, or hardboard, comparable in composition, appearance and durability to the exterior siding commonly used in standard residential construction 
e.  All manufactured homes shall be blocked and tied down in conformance with the standards set forth in section 11-49-219, Code of Alabama, 1975, as amended [Code of Ala. 1975, § 24-5-30 et seq.], and shall have skirting installed between the base of the structure and the ground. This skirting shall be made of concrete block, wood, vinyl, or other approved materials. 
f.  The moving hitch, wheels and axles, and transporting lights shall be removed prior to occupancy. 
6.7.5.  Development criteria for manufactured home parks. 
1.  Only Class A and Class B manufactured homes shall be permitted. 
2.  The main service roadway for the manufactured home park shall have access to a public street. All streets and rights-of-way within manufactured home parks shall comply with the city subdivision regulations and all other applicable street construction standards of the city. 
3.  All off-street parking shall have access to an interior roadway within the park. No direct access shall be allowed between manufactured home spaces and any exterior street. 
4.  Requirements for manufactured home spaces: 
a.  Min. area: 2,800 sf. 
b.  Min. width: 32 ft. 
c.  Min. front and rear yards: 25 ft. 
d.  Min. side yard: ten ft. 
5.  No more than ten manufactured home spaces may be developed per gross acre of land area. 
6.  Accessory uses may not constitute more than ten percent of the total site. 
7.  No manufactured home shall be less than 25 ft. from the property lines of the park where it adjoins a residential district. 
8.  All manufactured homes shall be blocked and tied down in conformance with the standards set forth in section 11-49-219, Code of Alabama, 1975, as amended [Code of Ala. 1975, § 24-5-30 et seq.], and shall have skirting installed between the base of the structure and the ground. This skirting shall be made of concrete block, wood, vinyl, or other approved materials. 
9.  Signage shall be identified on the site plan and allowable as approved through the review process. 
10.  No permanent addition of any kind shall be built onto or become a part of any manufactured home, unless wheels and axles of the manufactured home are removed and the manufactured home is mounted on a permanent foundation. All construction shall comply with the requirements of the city building code. 
11.  Utilities. 
a.  A sanitary sewer collection system shall be extended to every manufactured home space. 
b.  Every home space shall be, provided with an individual branch water line in accordance with all applicable standards of the city and service provider. Each lot shall have a water meter. 
c.  Every home space shall be, provided with individual electrical service in accordance with all applicable standards of the city and service provider. A primary service line shall not be located across the top of any manufactured home. 
12.  Density incentive for storm shelters. The commission may increase the maximum allowed density (§ 6.7.5.5) to 12 manufactured home spaces per gross acre when the developer and/or park operator installs and maintains storm shelters in accordance with the following: 
a.  Storm shelters: 
1)  Have a minimum floor area of seven sf. for each manufactured home space and be located no farther than 1,320 linear ft. from the furthest home space in the manufactured home park. 
2)  Be designed for compliance with all applicable city building, mechanical, plumbing and electrical codes by a licensed structural engineer or architect and built in accordance with plans as approved by the building inspector. 
3)  Be designed and constructed to meet all FEMA requirements and guidelines if located in a floodplain. 
4)  Be designed and constructed to meet all applicable requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). 
b.  The park operator shall be responsible for making the storm shelter accessible and usable in times of need. It is unlawful for any required storm shelter to be used for storage purposes if such storage reduces the minimum floor area available for shelter of persons below the requirements of this subsection. 
13.  Future additions. Additions of ten or more manufactured home spaces to the park shall comply with either the normally allowed maximum density in § 6.7.5.5 or the increased density allowed pursuant to § 6.7.5.12. If the addition will include storm shelter provisions as specified in § 6.7.5.12, the density calculation shall be based on the gross park acreage including the proposed new spaces. Otherwise, the density calculation shall be based only on the acreage of the area containing the spaces proposed to be added. 


 
ARTICLE 7. - NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
The following sections present the specific regulations that govern development within the city's nonresidential zoning districts. 
 
Sec. 7.1. - Nonresidential district regulations, generally. 
7.1.1.  Uses permitted. Uses shall be permitted in each residential district as indicated in table 7-1. Any use not specified in table 7-1 as permitted is prohibited (except as, provided in § 5.1, uses). Any additional uses shall be allowed only through amendment of this ordinance. Refer to the specific district regulations for any limitations that may apply to certain uses. 
7.1.2.  General development criteria. All developments shall comply with the area and dimensional requirements in table 7-2, the provisions specified in the regulations of the applicable district and the provisions referenced herein, where applicable: 
1.  See article 5, supplementary regulations. 
2.  See article 9, supplementary use regulations. 
3.  See article 10, parking and loading requirements. 
4.  See article 11, landscaping, screening and buffers. 
a.  Buffers shall be, provided, pursuant to § 11.1, when a new use of higher intensity is developed abutting an existing use of lesser intensity. 
b.  Landscaping shall be, provided around and within vehicular areas pursuant to § 11.2. 
c.  Screening shall be, provided for outdoor storage areas, dumpsters, and similar site elements pursuant to § 11.3. 
5.  Lot frontage. It is intended that each nonresidential development front on and be visible from a public street and that accesses to abutting developments are either shared or adequately separated for safety and legibility. Therefore, while the lot frontage requirements in table 7-2 allow flexibility in the design and arrangement of nonresidential developments, no lot or site plan shall be approved when the narrowness of a lot frontage, from which access is to be taken, conflicts with these intents and the requirements of § 10.4, driveway spacing. 
6.  Portable buildings may be permitted for temporary construction offices and as accessory structures in nonresidential districts pursuant to § 5.15.  
Sec. 7.2. - Agricultural (AR) District. 
7.2.1.  Intent. The AR district is designed to facilitate the continued use of property for an encourage the new development of agricultural and recreational related uses. 
7.2.2.  No new AR district may be established which contains less than five acres. 
7.2.3.  Any structure used for the housing of livestock or poultry of any kind, including any facilities for watering, feeding and animal waste/manure storage and disposal shall not be located closer than 100 ft. to any property line.  
Sec. 7.3. - Central Business (C-1) District. 
7.3.1.  Intent. The C-1 district is designed to facilitate and preserve a central area of intensive commercial, financial, professional, governmental and cultural activities scaled to pedestrian needs. 
7.3.2.  No new C-1 district may be established which contains less than four acres. 
7.3.3.  Development criteria. 
1.  Rear yard requirement shall be waived if the lot abuts a public alley and if loading and unloading facilities are, provided. 
2.  Requirements for upper-story dwellings. 
a.  Minimum size of 800 sf. of living space per dwelling unit. 
b.  Maximum of one resident per 300 sf. of living space; maximum of two unrelated individuals per dwelling unit. 
c.  Developers shall furnish the building inspector with architectural or engineered building plans complying with all adopted editions of the building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, fire and life safety codes. 
d.  The removal of solid waste, size and location of cans must be approved by the Opp Sanitation Superintendent.  
Sec. 7.4. - Neighborhood Commercial (C-2) District. 
7.4.1.  Intent. The C-2 district is designed to facilitate the unified grouping of retail and personal service facilities that provide for the daily needs of residential neighborhoods. The facilities are intended to blend with residential uses. 
7.4.2.  No new C-2 district may be established which contains less than three acres. 
7.4.3.  Development criteria. Single-family detached dwellings, existing prior to the effective date of this ordinance, shall be subject to article 4, Nonconformities, except as follows: If damaged by fire or natural disaster, such dwellings may be renovated, repaired or replaced, on the existing foundation only, regardless of the amount of damage.  
Sec. 7.5. - General Commercial (C-3) District. 
7.5.1.  Intent. The C-3 district is designed to facilitate the development of general and personal business activity, with an orientation toward vehicular accessibility. 
7.5.2.  No new C-3 district may be established which contains less than five acres. 
7.5.3.  Development criteria. 
1.  Rear yard requirements shall be waived if a lot abuts an alley and if loading and unloading facilities are, provided. 
2.  The minimum front yard setback shall be 100 ft. along U.S. Highway 331 and 84. 60 ft. along all other arterials. 

 
Sec. 7.6. - Regional Commercial (C-4) District. 
7.6.1.  Intent. The C-4 district is designed to facilitate the development of commercial establishments which cater specifically to motor vehicle use. 
7.6.2.  No new C-4 district may be established which contains less than 15 acres. 
7.6.3.  Development criteria. The minimum front yard setback shall be 100 ft. along U.S. Highway 331 and 84. 60 ft. along all other arterials.  
Sec. 7.7. - Institutional (INST) District. 
7.7.1.  Intent. The INST district is designed to facilitate the development of community and regional-scale institutional uses.  
Sec. 7.8. - Light manufacturing (M-1) District. 
7.8.1.  Intent. The M-1 district is designed to facilitate the development of light industrial uses, including light manufacturing and assembly plants. 
7.8.2.  No new M-1 district may be established which contains less than ten acres.  
Sec. 7.9. - Heavy manufacturing (M-2) District. 
7.9.1.  Intent. The M-2 district is designed to facilitate the development of industrial uses, including heavy industrial and manufacturing uses, which are more acceptably operated in a defined area due to their community impact. 
7.9.2.  No new M-2 district may be established which contains less than ten acres. 
Table 7-1. Uses Permitted in Nonresidential Districts 
Districts 	AR 	C-1 	C-2 	C-3 	C-4 	INST 	M-1 	M-2 
Agricultural Uses 
Dairy Farm with on-site retail sales 	Y 							
Farm 	Y 							
Farm Support Business 	SE 			Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 
Fruit and Produce, Wholesale 	SE 							
Grain and Feed Manufacturing 	Y 							
Hatchery, Aquaculture 	Y 							
Kennel 	Y 							
Livestock Sales 	SE 							
Residential Uses 
Caretaker Dwelling, as an accessory use 				SE 	SE 	SE 	SE 	SE 
Home Occupation, § 9.3 	Y 							
Independent Living Facility 						Y 		
Upper-Story Dwelling, § 9.10 		Y 						
Residential Accessory Structure 	Y 							
Single-Family Detached Dwelling 	Y 							
Institutional Uses and Utilities 
Animal Shelter 						SE 	Y 	Y 
Assisted Living Facility, Nursing Care Facility 		C 	C 	C 	C 	Y 		
Bus Station 		Y 		Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 
Cemetery, § 9.2 	SE 		Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 
Club, Private 		Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 
Communications Tower, § 9.9 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Country Club 	SE 			Y 	Y 	Y 		
Day Care Center, § 9.12 			Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 
Hospital 		C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		
Military Installation 						C 	Y 	Y 
Penal Institution 						C 	Y 	Y 
Place of Assembly, Public or Semi-Public 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	Y 	C 	
Public Recreational Facility (parks, playgrounds, stadiums) 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	Y 	C 	
Public Utility Facility, § 9.6 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Public Utility Service 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 
School, Public or Private 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	Y 	C 	
Commercial and Industrial Uses 
Airport 	C 						C 	C 
Ambulance, Security Service 		SE 	SE 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 
Amusement, Indoor or Outdoor 		Y 		Y 	Y 			
Automotive Parts Sales 		Y 		Y 	Y 		Y 	
Automotive Repair, Major 							Y 	Y 
Automotive Repair, Minor 		Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 
Automotive Sales or Rental 				Y 	Y 		Y 	
Bakery, Retail 		Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 			
Bank or Financial Service 		Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 
Bed and Breakfast, § 9.8 	SE 		SE 					
Boat Sales and Service 				Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 
Broadcast Studio, Radio or Television 		Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 
Business or Professional Office 		Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 
Business Support Service 		Y 		Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 
Campground 	SE 			C 	C 			
Car Wash 			Y 	Y 	Y 		Y 	
Caterer 		Y 		Y 	Y 		Y 	
Commercial Parking 		Y 		Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 
Commercial School 		Y 					Y 	
Construction Supply, Lumber Yard 				Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 
Contractor Storage Yard 							Y 	Y 
Dairy or Creamery 	Y 						Y 	Y 
Drive-in Theater, § 9.4 				C 	SE 			
Entertainment, Indoor (comedy club, movie theater, etc.) 		Y 		Y 	Y 			
Food Products Manufacturing, Light 	SE 						Y 	Y 
Freight Depot, Truck Terminal 								Y 
Funeral Home 				Y 	Y 			
Garden Center, Nursery 	SE 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 		Y 	
Gas Station, § 9.5 		Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 
General Retail, Enclosed 		Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 			
General Retail, Unenclosed 				SE 	SE 		Y 	Y 
Home Improvement Center 		Y 		Y 	Y 		Y 	
Hotel 		Y 		Y 	Y 			
Landfill 	C 						C 	C 
Laundering Plant 				Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 
Laundry Service (pick-up station) 		Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 		Y 	
Liquor Sales for off-premises consumption only 		Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 			
Liquor Sales with on-premises consumption 		Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 			
Maintenance Service (janitorial, plumbing, exterminator) 				Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 
Manufactured Home Sales, Repair 				Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 
Manufacturing, Heavy 								Y 
Manufacturing, Light 							Y 	Y 
Medical or Dental Clinic 		Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 		
Medical Support Services 				Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	
Mini-warehouse, § 9.11 				Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 
Motel 				Y 	Y 			
Pawn Shop 		Y 		Y 	Y 		Y 	
Personal Services (barber, salon, tailor, shoe repair, etc.) 		Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 			
Printing Service 		Y 		Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 
Repair Service, Major (large appliances) 							Y 	Y 
Repair Service, Minor (small engine, electronics, etc.) 		Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 
Recreation, Indoor (spa, gymnasium, health club, etc.) 			Y 	Y 	Y 			
Recycling Center 			SE 	SE 	SE 	SE 	SE 	SE 
Recycling Plant 							SE 	Y 
Research Laboratory 							Y 	Y 
Resource Extraction and Processing 								Y 
Restaurant, Fast Food (with drive-through or drive-in) 				Y 	Y 		Y 	
Restaurant, Standard 		Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 			
Salvage or Junk Yard 							Y 	Y 
Seafood Store, Retail 		Y 		Y 	Y 		Y 	
Studio (artist, photography, dance, etc.) 		Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 		Y 	
Textiles Production 	Y 						Y 	Y 
Truck and Heavy Equipment Sales, Rental, Repair 				Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 
Truck Stop 							Y 	Y 
Veterinary Hospital 			Y 	Y 	Y 		Y 	
Warehousing and Distribution, Enclosed 					Y 		Y 	Y 
Warehousing and Distribution, Unenclosed 								Y 
Wholesaler, no on-site storage 			Y 		Y 		Y 	Y 
Wholesaler, with on-site storage 					Y 		Y 	Y 
Wood or Lumber Processing (sawmills, planning mills, etc.) 								Y 
 
Y - The use is permitted by right, subject to any limitations of the applicable district. Similar uses to those listed may also be permitted subject to § 5.1.2 and § 5.1.3. 
SE - Special, exception Use, requires approval by the board of zoning adjustment (see § 13.6). May also be subject to district limitations. 
C - Conditional use, required approval by the commission (see § 12.11). May also be subject to district limitations. 
A use followed by a numeric cross-reference is also subject to the supplementary use regulations referenced. 
A blank cell indicates that the use is prohibited. 
Table 7-2. Area and Dimensional Requirements for Nonresidential Districts 
Refer also to the applicable District Regulations for any Development Criteria that may modify or supplement the requirements shown herein. 
District 	AR 	C-1 	C-2 	C-3 	C-4 	INST 	M-1 	M-2 
Min. Lot Size 1 	1 acre 	na 	5,000 sf. 	na 	15,000 sf. 	5,000 sf. 	1 acre 	1 acre 
Min. Lot Width (at Building Line) 	200 ft. 	25 ft. 	50 ft. 	25 ft. 	75 ft. 	25 ft. 	75 ft. 	75 ft. 
Min. Lot Frontage 	50 ft. 	25 ft. 	25 ft. 	25 ft. 	25 ft. 	25 ft. 	75 ft. 	75 ft. 
Min. Front Yard Setback 2 	50 ft. 	10 ft. 3 	25 ft. 	25 ft. 	20 ft. 	na 	50 ft. 	50 ft. 
Min. Rear Yard Setback 	50 ft. 	20 ft. 	20 ft. 	20 ft. 	20 ft. 	20 ft. 	25 ft. 	50 ft. 
Min. Side Yard Setback 	25 ft. 	na 	na 	na 	15 ft. 	na 	15 ft. 	25 ft. 
Max. Lot Coverage 	5% 	na 	35% 	75% 	75% 	50% 	50% 	50% 
Max. Building Height 	2½ stories or 35 ft. 	5 stories or 65 ft. 	3 stories or 45 ft. 	5 stories or 65 ft. 	5 stories of 65 ft. 	3 stories of 45 ft. 	4 stories or 50 ft. 	4 stories or 50 ft. 
 
1. It is the intent of this ordinance that lots of sufficient size be used for any commercial, industrial or related use to provide adequate parking and loading space and buffers, if applicable, in addition to the space required for the other normal operations of the business or service. 
2. Refer to district regulations for, exceptions to these general front yard requirements. 
ARTICLE 8. - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 8.1. - Planned development regulations, generally. 
8.1.1.  Procedure. The procedure to be followed in the creation of a planned development district shall conform to the regulations for any other zone change with the following, exceptions: 
1.  Any petition for the establishment of a planned development district shall be made in the form of a master plan as prescribed in this section and shall be submitted to the commission for review and recommendation. It shall be the burden of the applicant to show through the master plan: 
a.  That the proposed development is consistent with the intent and purpose of the Opp Strategic Plan and of this ordinance to promote public health, safety and the general welfare. 
b.  That the value and character of property adjacent to the planned development will not be adversely affected. 
c.  That the proposed master plan meets the requirements of all other regulating bodies. 
2.  The establishment of a planned development district will be for the express purpose of improving the land for uses in accordance with an approved master plan. 
3.  After a recommendation by the commission, rezoning to a planned development district may be considered by the council concurrently with consideration of the master plan. Such rezoning, if approved, shall remain valid for the duration of the master plan approval (see § 8.1.5). 
4.  Unless specific variations are noted on the master plan and approved by the commission, the most restrictive requirements for parking, loading, yards and dimensional regulations for the proposed use as, provided in this ordinance shall apply. 
8.1.2.  Master plan submittal. Any application for a planned development district shall be submitted to the zoning official and shall include a conceptual plan showing the entire development site and all phases of the proposed development, and shall graphically express the overall development concept for the site at completion. The master plan shall also include a proposed schedule for completion of the overall development and any individual phases. The master plan shall be drawn to scale by an engineer, architect or landscape architect registered in the State of Alabama and shall include the information listed in appendix 2. 
8.1.3.  Effect of the plan, amendment. Once approved, a master plan shall become a binding condition upon the site, and each phase shall be substantially consistent with the plan. The building inspector may not issue a building permit unless the proposed improvements are substantially as shown in the approved master plan. Minor changes may be approved by the zoning official. Major changes shall require approval by the commission. Any of the following shall constitute a major change: 
1.  Any increase or reduction in the land area of the project site; 
2.  A change of five percent or more in the total number, or in the type, of dwelling units approved; 
3.  A reduction of five percent or more of the approved amount of resource protection area or recreation or open space; 
4.  Any significant addition, removal, or rearrangement of land uses or streets. 
8.1.4.  Effect on prior zoning. Approval of a planned development district by the council replaces the prior zoning of the site. 
8.1.5.  Duration of master plan approval. 
1.  If, within 365 days from the effective date of the master plan approval, the building inspector has not received an application for a building permit, the master plan approval shall become void and the property shall revert to the zoning classification assigned to the property prior to the PDD approval. Upon receipt of a written request from the applicant, the council may extend this period for one year. 
2.  Once a building permit is issued, the improvements set forth in the master plan shall be completed within the time period set forth in the schedule approved as part of the master plan.  
Sec. 8.2. - Planned Unit Development (P-1) District. 
8.2.1.  Intent. The P-1 district is designed to provide flexibility, in contrast with the regulations of conventional zoning districts, for the creation of a variety of residential and mixed-use developments in order to encourage innovation, creativity and efficiency in the use of land and the creation of usable open spaces. 
8.2.2.  Site requirements. Each P-1 district shall contain at least 15 acres. 
8.2.3.  Uses permitted. Residential, institutional and commercial uses shall be allowed. At least 60 percent of the site shall be planned for residential use. Any use not specified above as permitted is prohibited. Any additional uses shall be allowed only through amendment of this ordinance. 
8.2.4.  Off-street parking requirements. Parking standards are determined through the review process, with minimum standards consistent with the normal parking requirements of this ordinance. Joint usage of parking facilities is encouraged and may be, at the option of the commission and council, serve as a basis for the reduction of total parking spaces required. 
8.2.5.  Development criteria. 
1.  Similar uses and densities of uses should face one another across streets, i.e., detached single-family dwellings should face other single-family dwellings. The following relationships are also acceptable: 
a.  Any uses may face recreational or other open spaces. 
b.  High-density residential uses may face nonresidential uses. 
2.  Nonresidential and higher density residential uses should be located on major internal streets and/or near to major external streets. Higher density residential uses should be placed to provide a transition between lower density residential uses and nonresidential uses, if applicable. 
3.  The development should be planned and designed to minimize disruption of flood prone areas, steep slopes, tree canopy, and sensitive plant and animal habitats. As much as possible, such natural spaces should be linked together, which may be in the form of a greenway trail system. 
4.  An interconnected network of pedestrian routes should be, provided, which may consist of sidewalks and off-road paths. Such pedestrian facilities are most critical in areas with high-density residential, retail and mixed-use development. 
5.  At least ten percent of the site shall be retained, improved and maintained as open space for the recreational use of residents. Small remnant spaces and linear strips less than 40 ft. in average width, and other spaces with limited accessibility, shall not be counted toward this criterion. 
6.  Landscaping. Trees, shrubs and other landscaping treatments should be included where buildings are set back from frontages. 
7.  Buffers and screening. Uses within the development that are incompatible with existing adjacent uses shall be buffered and/or screened in a manner consistent with § 11.1, buffers, and § 11.3, screening. Alternative methods for buffering and screening of uses internal to the development may be proposed by the developer. 
8.  Commercial development may not be started until residential development is 25 percent complete and occupied.  
Sec. 8.3. - Planned Neighborhood (P-2) District. 
8.3.1.  Intent. The P-2 district is designed to facilitate the development of neighborhoods that, through the arrangement, proximity and interconnection of varied residential densities and neighborhood-serving nonresidential uses, create an attractive, safe and comfortable neighborhood environment that encourages walking, bicycling, accessibility and community interaction and recreation. A planned neighborhood: 
1.  Is compact and designed for the human scale; 
2.  Provides a mix of uses in close proximity to one another within the neighborhood; 
3.  Provides a mix of housing styles, types, and sizes to accommodate households of all ages, sizes, and incomes; 
4.  Incorporates a system of relatively narrow, interconnected streets with sidewalks and bikeways that offer multiple routes for motorists, pedestrians, and bicyclists and provides for the connections of those streets to existing and future developments; and 
5.  Incorporates significant environmental features into the design. 
8.3.2.  Site requirements. For new development, a planned neighborhood shall include 40 acres or more, or 2) 30 acres or more for development contiguous to existing neighborhoods. 
8.3.3.  Definitions. The following definitions shall be observed, unless otherwise indicated by context: 
1.  Building scale: The relationship between the size of a building and its surroundings, including street width, open space, and surrounding buildings. 
2.  Commons: An open space, predominantly softscape, and enclosed on at least two sides by attached or detached single-family dwellings. 
3.  Plaza: A civic space, predominantly hardscaped, and enclosed on at least two sides by building facades. Plazas may be publicly or privately owned but, in either case, are designed and maintained for public use. 
4.  Square: A common open space that serves as the focal point for a traditional neighborhood. It is typically surrounded by commercial, institutional or mixed-uses. 
8.3.4.  Master plan submittal. In addition to the requirements of § 8.1.2, master plan submittal, applications shall also include: 
1.  A pattern book representing the site design and architectural patterns of typical residential and nonresidential buildings. Design patterns may be conveyed with illustrations of typical proposed elevations including building heights, widths and facade treatments; 
2.  The location of sidewalks, trails, passages and other pedestrian and bicycle circulation elements; and 
3.  A utilities plan showing underground and aboveground lines and structures for sanitary sewers, electricity, gas telecommunications, etc. 
8.3.5.  Ownership and maintenance of open spaces. See § 5.18. 
8.3.6.  Permitted uses and arrangements. A planned neighborhood should consist of a mix of residential areas, one or more neighborhood center(s), and common open space(s). 
1.  Open space. At least ten percent of the gross acreage must be open space. At least 25 percent of the open space shall be common open space or dedicated for public use. All medium- and high-density residential blocks shall be within 1,400 ft. from a common open space or park. 
2.  Residential areas. A mix of the following land uses may be located with flexibility throughout the residential portions of the site. Higher density residential uses should be located nearest a neighborhood center. For infill development, the mix of residential uses may be satisfied by existing residential uses adjacent to the development. 
a.  Residential uses. Single-family detached dwellings, duplexes and row houses; townhouses; multifamily dwellings; independent and assisted living, group care homes, and similar residential care facilities; and accessory buildings (including accessory dwellings). 
b.  Open space uses. The following are permitted: neighborhood parks; commons; playgrounds; and stormwater retention/detention facilities (where incorporated into one of the above). 
3.  Neighborhood centers. A planned neighborhood will include a neighborhood center composed of a mix of the following uses. The development should be laid out such that all residential blocks are within 2,800 ft., measured along pedestrian routes, from a neighborhood center. 
a.  Commercial uses. Individual businesses should generally not exceed 6,000 sf. In addition, the following uses are permitted and encouraged: 
1)  Food services, including, but not limited to, neighborhood grocery stores; butchers and bakeries; restaurants; coffee shops; neighborhood bars. 
2)  Retail uses, including, but not limited to, florists; nurseries; hardware stores; book stores; studios and shops of artists; clothing and home décor stores. 
3)  Services, including, but not limited to, day care centers; music, dance or exercise studios; business and professional offices; barber; hair salon; dry cleaning. 
4)  Bed and breakfasts and other small lodging uses. 
b.  Residential uses. The following are permitted: single-family detached dwellings, duplexes, townhouses and row houses; multifamily dwellings, including independent and assisted living facilities and group living quarters; and upper-story dwellings. 
c.  Civic or institutional uses. The following are permitted: municipal offices, fire stations, libraries, museums, and post offices; places of assembly; and schools. 
d.  Open space uses. The following are permitted: squares; plazas; pocket parks; playgrounds; stormwater retention/detention facilities (where incorporated into one of the above). 
8.3.7.  Density, height and design standards. P-2 developments shall comply with table 8-3 and: 
1.  One accessory dwelling per single-family lot shall be permitted in addition to the permitted densities, provided in table 8-3. 
2.  Nonresidential GFA. The total ground floor area of nonresidential uses, including off-street parking areas, shall not exceed 25 percent of the development, except where the planned Neighborhood is oriented around and integrated with, through the interconnection of vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian ways, adjacent residential development. 
3.  Lot and block standards. 
a.  Blocks shall be 400—800 ft. long. Blocks longer than 600 ft. shall have a permanent pedestrian passage across the depth of the block. The passage shall be located not more than 300 ft. from the nearest cross street and shall be, provided in an easement not less than 12 ft. in width. The walkway shall be no less than eight ft. in width. 
b.  Residential lot sizes should be varied to allow for diverse housing types. 
c.  Lots less than 60 ft. in width shall be rear-accessed. 
4.  Building frontage standards. Setbacks shall be consistent along a block frontage and as follows: 
a.  For single-family detached dwellings, unenclosed porches may extend no closer than eight ft. to the back of [the] sidewalk. 
b.  For any dwellings located closer than ten ft. to the back of sidewalk, the first floor level shall be at least two ft. above or at least three ft. below sidewalk level. 
c.  Nonresidential buildings are not required to be set back from front lot lines, but shall abut directly on a public sidewalk or be set back at the edge of a plaza. Civic or institutional buildings may also be set back at the edges of squares, lawns or similar frontages. 
5.  Side and rear building spacing, except as required in table 8-3, side and rear building spacing shall be proposed in the master plan and in accordance with the city building code. Accessory structures shall be set back from side and rear lot lines as required in § 5.9. 
Table 8-3. Density, Height and Dimensional Standards, P-2 District 
Residential Areas 
Uses 	Single-family detached and duplex dwellings 	Single-family attached dwellings 	Multifamily dwellings 
Max. Density per gross acre 	6 DU/acre 	8 DU/acre 	15 DU/acre 
Front Yard Setback (measured to back of sidewalk) 	12 ft. min. 25 ft. max 	12 ft. min. 18 ft. max. 	12 ft. min. 18 ft. max. 
Min. Side Building Spacing 	ten ft. from any other dwelling 	ten ft. from single-family detached and duplex dwellings 	20 ft. from single-family detached and duplex dwellings 
Min. Rear Building Spacing 	20 ft. from any other principal building 
Max. Building Height 	3 stories of 45 ft. 	3 stories or 45 ft. 	4 stories or 65 ft. 
Neighborhood Centers 
Uses 	Single-family attached dwellings 	Multifamily dwellings 	Nonresidential and Mixed-uses 
Max. Density per gross acre 	10 DU/acre 	20 DU/acre 	na 
Front Yard Setback (measured to back of sidewalk) 	0 ft. min. and 18 ft. max.; see also § 8.3.7.4 
Min. Side Building Spacing 	10 ft. from single-family detached and duplex dwellings 	20 ft. from single-family detached and duplex dwellings 
Min. Rear Building Spacing 	20 ft. from any other principal building 
Max. Building Height 	3 stories or 45 ft. 	4 stories or 65 ft. 	4 stories or 65 ft. 
 
8.3.8.  Circulation standards. The circulation system shall support multi-modal transportation; interconnect residential areas, neighborhood center(s), and open spaces; and shall be connected to existing and proposed external development. The circulation system shall provide adequate traffic capacity, provide access from streets of lesser classification, and promote safe and efficient mobility. 
1.  Pedestrian circulation. Where feasible, any existing pedestrian routes through the site shall be preserved and enhanced. Sidewalks shall be, provided as follows: 
a.  Public sidewalks shall be, provided on both sides of any street within a neighborhood center or medium- or high-density residential area and only on one side of any street within low-density residential areas in accordance with the following: 
1)  Neighborhood centers: Sidewalks shall be at least ten ft. wide with a clear pedestrian zone of at least six ft. in width 
2)  Medium and high density residential areas (four or more DU/acre): Sidewalks shall be at least five ft. wide and buffered from the street by a planting strip at least four ft. wide 
3)  Low density residential areas (less than four DU/acre): Sidewalks shall be at least four ft. wide and buffered from the street by a planting strip or swale at least six ft. wide 
b.  In neighborhood centers, well-lit walkways of at least five ft. in width shall connect building entrances to public sidewalks and to associated parking areas. 
c.  Sidewalks shall comply with the applicable requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
d.  Crosswalks shall be well-lit and clearly marked. 
2.  Vehicular circulation shall be designed to minimize conflicts with pedestrians and bicycles. Traffic calming features such as on-street parking, narrow travel lanes, horizontal curves, curb extensions, roundabouts, and medians may be used to encourage slow traffic speeds. 
3.  The development plan should maintain the existing street grid, where present, and restore any disrupted street grid where feasible. In addition: 
a.  Corner curb radii should be kept to the minimum practicable, given the size of vehicles expected to use the particular intersection and the intended rate of speed at which turns will be taken. 
b.  All streets shall terminate at other streets or at public land, with the following, exceptions: 
1)  Local streets may terminate in stub streets; 
2)  Local streets may terminate at a connection to the pedestrian and bicycle path network. 
3)  Where circumstances prevent the local street from terminating at another street or public land and the, exceptions under items 1) and 2) above are not practical, the local street may terminate in a cul-de-sac or "close" in accordance with the standards contained in the subdivision regulations. 
8.3.9.  Parking standards. Parking areas for shared or community use should be encouraged. In addition: 
1.  In multifamily and nonresidential areas, parking lots shall be located at the rear or side of buildings. 
2.  Off-street parking shall be accessed from an alley or shared driveway, except that single-family dwellings with lots wider than 60 ft. may have individual driveways. 
3.  Parking lots and parking garages should be separated from intersections by a building containing a use other than parking. 
4.  On-street parking, if created as a part of the development, may apply toward minimum parking requirements. 
5.  Parking for residential uses shall be, provided on-site. 
6.  Paving shall be as normally required by the city, except as follows: 
a.  Ribbon driveways may be used for single-family detached dwellings, duplexes, and row houses to reduce impervious surfaces. 
b.  To reduce impervious surfaces, interlocking pavers, grid pavers, or other pervious paving systems may be required for remote parking lots and parking areas for periodic uses. 
8.3.10.  Outdoor lighting. Street lighting shall be, provided along all streets. Generally, a larger number of smaller lights—as opposed to fewer, high-intensity lights—should be used. Streetlights shall be installed on both sides of the street at intervals of no greater than 80 ft. 
8.3.11.  Architectural standards. A variety of architectural features and building materials is encouraged to give each building or group of buildings a distinct character. 
1.  The architectural features, materials, and the articulation of a facade shall be continued on all sides visible from a public street or common area. 
2.  Principal buildings and their main entrances shall face a public street; except, however, that up to five percent of the total number of single-family dwelling units may front directly on a commons. 
3.  Porches, stoops or other architectural elements should define the front entrance to residences. 
4.  For commercial buildings, at least 50 percent of the street level facade shall be window or door openings. 
5.  Buildings on opposite sides of the same street should be similar in scale and setback. 
8.3.12.  Landscaping and screening standards. 
1.  Street trees. A minimum of one canopy street tree per 40 ft. of street frontage shall be, provided and evenly spaced. Street trees shall be located in a continuous planting strip, or in tree wells, adjacent to the curb. In the case of existing overhead utility lines, understory street trees may be substituted. 
2.  Screening shall be, provided as required in § 11.3. 
8.3.13.  Stormwater management. The design and development of the planned neighborhood should minimize off-site stormwater runoff, promote on-site filtration, and minimize the discharge of pollutants to ground and surface water. Natural topography and existing land cover should be protected/maintained to the maximum extent practicable. Planned neighborhood developments shall be subject to the following, in addition to any other applicable regulations: 
1.  Untreated, direct stormwater discharges to wetlands or surface waters are not allowed. 
2.  Post-development peak discharge rates should not exceed predevelopment peak rates. 
3.  Erosion and sediment controls must be implemented to remove 80 percent of the average annual load of total suspended solids. 
4.  Redevelopment stormwater management systems should improve existing conditions and meet standards to the extent practicable. 
5.  All treatment systems or BMPs must have operation and maintenance plans to ensure that systems function as designed. 
8.3.14.  Utilities. Overhead utilities shall only be permitted in easements or alley rights-of-way at the rear of lots. Overhead utilities are permitted to cross streets as necessary to comply with this requirement. Otherwise, utilities shall be located underground.  
Sec. 8.4. - Planned Industrial Development District. 
8.4.1.  Intent. The PID district is designed to facilitate the development of industrial and compatible nonresidential uses within integrally planned, multi-tenant industrial sites. The PID district provides flexibility from normally required Manufacturing district regulations to encourage creative and efficient site planning; to encourage shared and cross access within industrial developments; and to promote the development of stable, high-quality employment centers. Furthermore, provisions for common open spaces and on-site pedestrian circulation are encouraged. 
8.4.2.  Site requirements. Each PID district shall contain a minimum of 15 acres and a minimum frontage of 200 ft. on a public street. 
8.4.3.  Master plan submittal. The master plan shall be prepared in accordance with § 8.1 and shall include the information listed in appendix 2. 
8.4.4.  Ownership and maintenance of open spaces. See § 5.18. 
8.4.5.  Permitted uses. All those uses permitted by right, upon special, exception and as conditional uses in the M-1 and M-2 districts in table 7-1 may be permitted subject to approval of the master plan, including any conditions attached thereto. Additional nonresidential uses, including, but not limited to, dining, meeting facilities and personal service establishments, may be approved as a part of the master plan, provided they are designed and arranged exclusively for the use of businesses within the PID, their employees and visitors. 
8.4.6.  Development criteria. 
1.  Building setbacks shall only be required as follows: 
a.  No front setback shall be required along the developed side of internal streets when a planting strip at the back of curb and a sidewalk, each five ft. in width, are, provided. Otherwise, the minimum front setback shall be 75 ft. 
b.  No side or rear yards are required, except: 
1)  Buildings shall be separated in accordance with city building and fire codes. 
2)  Buffers shall be, provided where normally required by § 11.1. Any uses involving the manufacturing, storage or use, in any manner, of explosives or volatile materials shall be set back from internal and external property lines as required by the commission upon a recommendation from the fire marshal. 
c.  Any vehicular use area located forward of the front building line shall be separated from any public or internal streets by frontage landscaping as normally required by § 11.2.3. 
2.  Building heights. The maximum building height shall be five stories or 75 ft., whichever is less. However, all buildings located within 200 ft. of the nearest boundary line of an R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-5 district shall not exceed three stories or 45 ft. in height, whichever is less. 
3.  Open space. At least 20 percent of the PID acreage shall be, provided as open space and improved for the recreational use of PID tenants, employees and their visitors. Required buffers or other required landscaping shall not be counted toward this requirement. 
4.  Internal streets shall comply with the design requirements of the subdivision regulations and any applicable city specifications. Internal streets may be dedicated to the city or privately maintained. 
5.  Parking, loading and access. 
a.  Off-street parking shall be, provided consistent with the requirements of article 9. Parking may be, provided on individual sites, in common areas, and as on-street parking on internal streets. 
b.  Abutting sites should use shared and/or cross access. Parking and loading areas should be located to the side or rear of buildings. 
6.  Design standards. The master plan shall include design standards consistent with the following: 
a.  All-metal facades are discouraged. One or more masonry materials (i.e., concrete, concrete block, stucco/EIFS, brick, and stone) should be used on all building elevations visible from public and internal streets. 
b.  Building entrances, if not fronting on public or internal streets, should be identifiable from such streets. 
c.  Attached signage is recommended. The master plan shall establish specific height and placement standards on any freestanding signage. 
d.  The master plan shall provide for landscaping, buffers and screening as normally required in article 11, except: 
1)  Landscaping along the perimeter of vehicular use areas shall not be required, except along street frontages. 
2)  Buffers shall not be required between uses internal to the PID. 
7.  Noise standards. PID developments shall comply with the noise standards in § 5.19.  
ARTICLE 9. - SUPPLEMENTARY USE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 9.1. - Automobile wrecking, salvage and junk yards. 
9.1.1.  No operation shall be located nearer than 300 ft. from any established residential district. 
9.1.2.  All outdoor storage of salvage and wrecking operations shall be conducted within an enclosed solid fence or wall as required by § 11.3, screening. 
9.1.3.  The storage of salvaged or junk materials shall not exceed six ft. in height from grade level.  
Sec. 9.2. - Cemetery. 
9.2.1.  All cemeteries hereafter established shall have direct access to major streets with ingress and egress so designed to minimize traffic congestion. 
9.2.2.  Any new cemetery shall be located on a site containing not less than ten acres. Structures shall be set back as required in the applicable district. All grass or burial lots shall be set back no less than 25 ft. from any lot line.  
Sec. 9.3. - Home occupation. 
9.3.1.  A home occupation shall be limited to the gainful occupation or profession conducted by members of the family residing entirely within the dwelling unit. 
9.3.2.  No internal or external alterations shall be made which are not customary to dwellings. In any dwelling unit, all home occupations, collectively, shall not occupy more than 25 percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling nor exceed 500 sf., whichever is more restrictive. 
9.3.3.  The entrance to the space devoted to the home occupation shall be from within the dwelling. 
9.3.4.  No display shall be permitted or goods or services that are visible from the outside of the structure, except for one non-illuminated sign having an area of not more than two sf., which may be placed flat on a door, wall or window only. 
9.3.5.  Home occupations shall be limited to goods and services, provided to individuals or groups not exceeding, at any given time, five in number.  
Sec. 9.4. - Drive-in theater. 
9.4.1.  The site must have direct access to a major street with ingress and egress separated and marked to minimize traffic congestion. 
9.4.2.  The theater screen shall not be visible from any public street within 1,500 ft. 
9.4.3.  Automobile parking in the viewing area shall be effectively screened on all sides consistent with the standards in § 11.3, screening. 
9.4.4.  All accessory structures shall comply with the yard setbacks required for principal structures in the applicable district. 
9.4.5.  Off-street admission waiting space for patrons shall be equal to 20 percent of the capacity of the theater. The sale of refreshments and play area shall be limited to the use of patrons of the theater. 
9.4.6.  No central loudspeaker system is permitted. 
9.4.7.  All parking and access ways shall be adequately lighted; however, all lighting shall be shielded to prevent glare or reflection onto a public street or adjoining property.  
Sec. 9.5. - Service stations. 
9.5.1.  Buildings shall be set back no less than 50 ft. from all street lines, except where pump islands and vehicular areas are located to the side and/or rear of the building, in which cases the normal district setbacks shall apply. 
9.5.2.  Gasoline pumping islands shall not be located closer than 30 ft. to any street line; however, when pump islands are constructed perpendicular to the street, the pump island shall be located no less than 45 ft. from the street line. 
9.5.3.  Attached and detached canopies shall not extend closer than 15 ft. from the street line.  
Sec. 9.6. - Utility stations and substations. 
9.6.1.  All electrical power substations shall be enclosed within a fence or wall or be so designed to be inaccessible to unauthorized persons. Electrical power substations in all zones, except manufacturing districts shall be enclosed by a planting screen with a minimum height of six ft. and otherwise in accordance with § 11.3, screening. 
9.6.2.  Required setbacks for buildings shall apply to power substations and shall be measured from the fencing enclosure, except that setbacks along property lines adjacent to streets and alleys shall not be less than 15 ft. regardless of other setback requirements, and that such enclosures shall not be constructed closer than ten ft. to adjoining properties. 
9.6.3.  Utility lines shall approach the substation from the side opposite the main traffic artery where possible. Distribution lines may be run underground from any orientation. 
9.6.4.  Public or privately owned utility stations other than electrical power substations shall be enclosed by a planting screen of such height, depth and density to screen the structure from view. Fencing shall be required where such structures present hazards to animals or people. Structures extending above the ground in excess of two ft. shall comply with the same regulations as required for power substations. 
9.6.5.  Should the public utility company not be able to comply with the above regulations, it may submit a proposed site plan of the desired installation to the commission for approval and recommendations to the council. The site plan shall include those materials listed in appendix 1, as applicable. 

 
Sec. 9.7. - Conservation subdivision. 
9.7.1.  Intent. 
1.  To provide flexibility to achieve the most effective development on lands constrained by natural hazards or environmental regulations, which may limit the amount or type of development; 
2.  To enhance quality of life by promoting the creation of accessible green space; 
3.  To protect sensitive, environmental land features to protect the health and safety of residents and neighboring property owners; 
4.  To reduce erosion, sedimentation, land disturbance, and removal of vegetation; 
5.  To promote construction of convenient walking trails, bike paths, and greenways within new developments that are connected to adjacent neighborhoods and activity centers to increase accessibility for pedestrians and bicyclists; and 
6.  To reduce perceived density by providing access to and views of open space. 
9.7.2.  Applicability. The conservation subdivision/development option is permitted for detached single-family and duplex development on-sites of at least 15 acres and otherwise in accordance with table 6-1. The applicant shall comply with all other provisions of this ordinance and all other applicable regulations, except those incompatible with the provisions herein. 
9.7.3.  Ownership of development site. If held in multiple ownership, the site shall be developed according to a single plan with common authority and common maintenance responsibility as approved by the city attorney. 
9.7.4.  Density determination. The maximum number of lots shall be determined by dividing the total area of the proposed subdivision by the most restrictive of the following: minimum lot size of the applicable district or by regulations as determined by city and/or county health department standards for septic tanks, or by any regulations applicable to the site that may limit its development density. In making this calculation, the following shall not be included in the total area of the parcel: 
1.  Bodies of open water over 5,000 sf. of contiguous area; and 
2.  Wetlands, as defined by the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act. 
9.7.5.  Application requirements. 
1.  Site analysis map. Concurrent with the submission of a preliminary plat or site plan, the applicant shall prepare and submit a site analysis map. The purpose of the site analysis map is to ensure that important site features have been adequately identified prior to the creation of the site design, and that the proposed open space will meet the requirements herein. The plan shall include the following: 
a.  Property boundaries; 
b.  All streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands, flood hazard boundaries, and other hydrologic features; 
c.  All boundaries of applicable regulated buffer areas, easements, and ROWs; 
d.  Topography at five ft. or smaller intervals; 
e.  All primary and secondary conservation areas labeled by type, as described in § 9.7.6; 
f.  General vegetation characteristics; 
g.  General soil types; 
h.  Planned location of protected open space; 
i.  Existing roads and structures; and 
j.  Potential connections with existing greenspace and trails. 
2.  Conservation subdivision plan. The developer shall prepare a conservation subdivision plan, which yields no more lots than identified under § 9.7.4. The conservation subdivision plan may include lots that do not meet the size and setback requirements of the applicable district. The conservation subdivision plan shall identify all open spaces to be protected and include an open space management plan pursuant to § 9.7.6. The conservation subdivision plan shall be submitted, in full, prior to the issuance of a grading permit. 
3.  Instrument of permanent protection. An instrument of permanent protection, such as a conservation easement or permanent restrictive covenant and as described in § 9.7.7, shall be placed on the open space at the time of issuance of a grading permit. 
4.  Other requirements. The applicant shall adhere to all other applicable requirements of the applicable district and the subdivision regulations. 
9.7.6.  Open space management plan. For the purposes of conservation subdivisions, [the term] "open space" is defined as the portion of the conservation subdivision that has been set aside for permanent protection. Activities within the open space are restricted in perpetuity through the use of a legal instrument approved by the city attorney. Such open spaces shall be in accordance with the following: 
1.  The minimum restricted open space shall comprise at least 25 percent of the gross tract area. 
2.  The following are considered primary conservation areas and are required to be included within the open space, unless the applicant demonstrates that this provision would constitute an unusual hardship and be counter to the purposes of the conservation subdivision: 
a.  The 100-year floodplain; 
b.  Riparian zones of at least 75 ft. [in] width along all perennial and intermittent streams; 
c.  Slopes above 25 percent of at least 10,000 sf. contiguous area; 
d.  Wetlands, as defined by the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; 
e.  Existing trails that connect the site to neighboring areas; and 
f.  Archaeological sites, cemeteries and burial grounds. 
3.  The following are considered secondary conservation areas and should be included within the open space to the maximum extent feasible: 
a.  Important historic sites; 
b.  Existing healthy, native forests of at least one acre [of] contiguous area; 
c.  Individual existing healthy trees greater than eight inches caliper; and 
d.  Other significant natural features and scenic viewsheds, particularly those that can be seen from public roads. 
4.  Utility ROWs and small areas of impervious surface may be included within the protected open space but cannot be counted towards the 25 percent minimum area requirement (exception: historic structures and existing trails may be counted). Large areas of impervious surface shall be excluded from the open space. 
5.  At least 33 percent of the open space shall be suitable for passive recreational use. 
6.  At least 75 percent of the open space shall be in a contiguous tract, which may be divided by a local street whose area shall be excluded from the open space. The open space shall adjoin any neighboring areas of open space, other protected areas, and non-protected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected open space. 
7.  The open space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots and/or buildings within the site. Non-abutting lots shall be, provided with safe, convenient access to the open space. 
8.  Open spaces may contain the following: 
a.  Conservation of natural, archeological or historical resources; 
b.  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas; 
c.  Walking or bicycle trails constructed of porous paving materials; 
d.  Passive recreation areas, such as open fields; 
e.  Active recreation areas, provided that they are limited to no more than ten percent of the total open space and are not located within primary conservation areas. Active recreation areas may include impervious surfaces. Active recreation areas in excess of this limit must be located outside of the protected open space. 
f.  Landscaped stormwater management facilities, community and individual wastewater disposal systems located on soils particularly suited to such uses. Such facilities shall be located outside of primary conservation areas; 
g.  Easements for drainage, access, and underground utility lines; 
h.  Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this section. 
9.  Open spaces may not contain the following: 
a.  Golf courses; 
b.  Roads, parking lots and similar impervious surfaces, except as specifically authorized in the previous subsections; 
c.  Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted best management practices; 
d.  Impoundments; and 
e.  Other activities as determined by the applicant and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent protection. 
10.  Ownership and maintenance of open space. See § 5.18. 
9.7.7.  Legal instrument for protection of open space. The open space shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument recorded with the deed. The instrument for permanent protection shall include clear restrictions on use of the open space, including all restrictions contained in this section, and any restrictions the applicant chooses to place on the open space. The instrument shall be one of the following: 
1.  A permanent conservation easement in favor of either: 
a.  A land trust or similar conservation-oriented nonprofit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence, and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for retransfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; or 
b.  A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this section, and if the entity accepting the easement is not the city, then a third right of enforcement favoring the city shall be included in the easement. 
2.  A permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity. 
3.  An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection, as approved by the city attorney. 
9.7.8.  Tax assessment of open space. Once a legal instrument for permanent protection has been placed upon the open space, the county tax assessor shall be requested to reassess the open space at a lower value to reflect its more limited use.  
Sec. 9.8. - Bed and breakfasts. 
9.8.1.  Bed and breakfasts shall only be permitted in single-family detached dwellings, shall only be operated by the owner and resident of the dwelling, and shall comply with the following provisions: 
9.8.2.  Use regulations. 
1.  All guest rooms shall be located within the principal structure. 
2.  Bed and breakfasts located in residential districts shall be limited to four guest rooms and shall not employ any individuals not residing on the premises. 
3.  Individual guest rooms shall contain no cooking facilities, and no food preparation or cooking shall be allowed. 
9.8.3.  Parking. For each and every approved guest room, there shall be, provided one parking space, in addition to the spaces required for the residence. Such additional required parking spaces shall be screened from adjacent properties and arranged so that each space has direct access to a driveway. No parking shall be permitted forward of the front building line, except upon a driveway. Recreational vehicle parking shall be prohibited.  
Sec. 9.9. - Communication towers. 
9.9.1.  Purpose. The purpose of these guidelines is to establish minimum considerations and criteria for the review of communication towers, hereafter referred to as towers. It is the commission's express intent that the construction of new towers be an option of last resort. To the extent feasible, location of antennas on existing towers, building rooftops, and other suitable structures should first be sought. These guidelines are designed to ensure the compatibility of towers with and avoid adverse impacts to nearby properties and discourage the proliferation of towers throughout the city. 
9.9.2.  Applicability. All communication towers are subject to these guidelines, except the following: 
1.  Amateur radio, receive and transmit, antennas. This section shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is 100 ft. or less in height and is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator from the operator's residence, or used exclusively and incidentally for the purposes to support a commercial business. 
2.  Existing towers and antennas. If an additional antenna is collocated on an existing tower after the adoption of this ordinance, then security fencing and landscaping requirements are applicable as part of the permitting process, except that operating existing towers shall not be subject to this provision if there is no increase in the height of the tower or of the antenna on such towers up to the towers' present structural capability. 
3.  Residential satellite dish less than four ft. in diameter. 
9.9.3.  Definitions. 
1.  Alternative-tower structure: Clock towers, bell towers, church steeples, light/power poles, electric transmission towers, and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. 
2.  Communication tower: Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative communication tower structures, and the like. A tower compound is a tower(s) and other facilities. 
3.  Antenna: An electromagnetic device, which conducts radio signals, through an attached cable or waveguide, to or from a radio transmitter or receiver. Typically this includes whips, panels and parabolic dishes. An electromagnetic device includes any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, or television. 
4.  Antenna support structure: Any structure on which radio antennas and cabling can be attached. Typically this includes steel towers with guy-wires (guy towers), wooden, steel or concrete single poles (monopoles); self-supporting steel towers with three or four leg, (towers); rooftops of existing buildings or structures such as elevated water storage tanks. 
5.  Cellular site: A parcel of land or building (leased or purchased) on which is located one or more transmitter/receiver stations for wireless communication systems, including accessory facilities for equipment storage and operations. In cases involving vacant land, or low-lying existing structures, a support structure for transmitter/receiver antennas are usually required. 
6.  Height: Vertical distance from nominal ground elevation at base of tower to top of antenna or tower, whichever is higher. 
7.  Mini-cellular site: A parcel of land or building (leased or purchased) on which is located one or more transmitter/receiver stations for wireless communication systems, such that towers and/or antennas do not exceed 20 ft. in height above the existing structure, and whips, panels, and parabolic dishes do not exceed 100 sf. A mini-cellular site accommodates the use of existing structures such as buildings, billboards and water towers. 
9.9.4.  Objectives. The proposed locations and designs of all communications towers shall duly consider the following public health, safety, and general welfare objectives: 
1.  Structural safety. The proposed tower will comply with wind loading and other structural standards contained in the city building code or other applicable standards as adopted by the city; so as not to endanger the health and safety of residents, employees, or travelers in the event of structural failure of the tower due to extreme weather conditions or other acts of God. 
2.  View protection. The proposed tower facility will be designed to minimize adverse visual impacts to surrounding properties and the public right-of-way, given the topography of the proposed site and surrounding area. 
3.  Land use compatibility. The proposed tower facility will be compatible with the surrounding land uses, given the character of use and development of the location. 
4.  Design harmony. The proposed tower facility will be designed in harmony with the natural setting and the surrounding development pattern as well as to the highest industry standards 
5.  Existing communication services. The proposed tower facility will comply with FCC and other applicable agency standards so as not to interfere with existing communications services to the area. 
6.  Health effects. The proposed tower will comply with all applicable federal, state and county health standards so as not to cause detrimental health effects to persons in the surrounding area. 
9.9.5.  Development criteria. The zoning official shall review all communications towers requesting permits for compliance with the applicable criteria listed below. Any of these criteria may be waived or adjusted by the commission if the circumstances of a particular case so warrant. In any event, these criteria are considered the minimum necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare; the commission may impose higher standards if it deems necessary to further the objectives of these guidelines. 
1.  Collocation. No new tower shall be established if space is structurally, technically and economically available on an existing tower, which would serve the area that the new tower would serve. Documentation that reasonable efforts have been made to achieve collocation shall be submitted in accordance with § 9.9.6.4, Towers, shall be designed to maximize share use to the extent possible, given the structural and technical limitations of the type of tower proposed. If feasible, each tower shall, at a minimum, be designed to accommodate a minimum of two shared users. 
2.  Removal of obsolete towers. Any tower that is no longer in use for its original communications purpose shall be removed at the owner's expense. The owner shall provide the Opp Planning Department with a copy of the notice to the FCC of intent to cease operations and shall be given 90 days from the date of ceasing operations to remove the obsolete tower and accessory structures. In the case of multiple operators sharing use of single tower, this provision shall not become effective until all users cease operation. In the event an abandoned or unused tower and related facilities are not removed within 12 months of the cessation of operation at a site, the tower and related facilities may be removed by the city and the costs of removal assessed against the property. 
3.  Setbacks. Towers shall be setback from all property lines a distance equal to its height. Guy wires and accessory buildings and facilities shall meet the minimum setback requirements of the zoning district. As an alternative to setback requirement for towers located in nonresidential zoning districts, a statement from a registered engineer may be, provided certifying that, in the event of structural failure, the tower would fall within the boundaries of the property. In all cases, towers shall be set back a distance equal to the height of the tower from a public right-of-way. 
4.  Appearance. 
a.  Towers shall maintain a galvanized steel, concrete finish or similar neutral finish so as to reduce the visibility or camouflage the structure, unless other standards are required by the FAA. 
b.  The design of towers shall be of a type that has the least visual impact on the surrounding area. 
c.  The design of a tower compound shall, to the extent possible, maximize use of building materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that effectively blend the tower facilities with the surrounding natural setting and built environment. These guidelines are also required of roof-mounted towers, antennas, and related equipment collocating on existing towers. 
d.  Where communications towers are deemed appropriate for a given location, the type of tower shall be restricted to monopoles in or within 1,000 ft. of residential areas and areas of special aesthetic concerns such as commercial revitalization areas, historic districts and scenic corridors. 
e.  No signs or other forms of advertising is permitted on an antenna or tower unless for safety/security precautions. 
5.  Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted unless required by the FAA or other authority for safety purposes. Where required, the commission shall review the available lighting alternatives and approve that design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. "Dual lighting" (red at night/strobe during day) shall be preferred unless restricted by the FAA. Security lighting may be permitted in accordance with § 9.9.5.9, Security devices, below. 
6.  Landscaping. 
a.  A landscaped buffer shall effectively screen the view of the tower compound from adjacent public ways and residential properties. 
b.  The standard buffer shall consist of a minimum eight-foot-wide landscaped strip outside the perimeter security fencing. The buffer strip shall be planted with an attractive combination of trees, shrubs, vines, and/or groundcovers that can achieve the full height of the fence at maturity and enhances the outward appearance of the security fence. For sites within 1,000 ft. of a residence, additional buffering may be imposed to include: a decay resistant, solid wood fence, earth berms and brick or masonry walls in addition to the security fencing. All fencing and landscaping shall be maintained by the lessor/owner. The commission shall approve buffer plan and type of plants proposed. 
c.  In isolated nonresidential areas, alternative landscaping methods may be accepted, such as the use of earth tone colored security fencing in combination with evergreen shrubs, trees, and/or other plantings. 
d.  In certain locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, such as remote, agricultural or rural locations or heavy industrial areas, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived. 
e.  Existing mature tree growth and natural landforms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots, preservation of substantial natural growth around the property perimeter may be a sufficient buffer. 
f.  Cellular facilities utilizing underground vaults in lieu of aboveground switching gear buildings shall be exempted from any buffer requirements. 
7.  Roof mounted towers and antennas. 
a.  Rooftop mounted towers and antennas may be located on any nonresidential building. 
b.  Such tower or antenna shall be setback from any residential zoning district a minimum distance equal to two times the full height of the tower and antenna, but in no event less than 100 ft. 
c.  The building on which such tower or antenna is placed shall be at least 50 ft. high and the tower or antenna will add no more than 20 ft. total to the height of the building. 
d.  Antennas shall not be mounted to extend horizontally beyond the face of the building. 
8.  Principal, accessory and joint uses. 
a.  Accessory structures used in direct support of a tower shall be allowed but not for offices, vehicle storage or other outdoor storage. Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a tower facility shall not be stored or parked on the site of the tower, unless repairs to the tower are being made. 
b.  Towers may be located on-sites containing another principal use in the same buildable area. In determining requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may be located on leased parcels within a lot. 
As long as all siting, setback, separation and general requirements of this ordinance are met, towers may occupy a parcel meeting the minimum lot size requirements for the zoning applicable district. 
The minimum distance between a tower and the principal use located on the same lot shall be, for a monopole or lattice tower the greater of 20 percent of the tower height or 25 ft., and for a guy tower, the greater of 100 percent or 25 ft. 
c.  Joint use of a site is prohibited when a proposed or existing principal use includes the storage, distribution or sale of volatile, flammable, explosive or hazardous materials such as propane, gasoline, natural gas and dangerous chemicals. 
d.  Towers constructed or antennas installed in accordance with this ordinance shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or structure. 
9.  Security devices. The facility shall be fully secured. A minimum eight-foot-high fence shall be installed around the perimeter of the compound. Security fencing shall require screening in accordance with § 9.9.5.4, above. Other security measures shall include locks and alarms. 
10.  Access. 
a.  Driveways and parking shall be, provided to ensure the operator's access to the facility for maintenance or emergency services. In some cases, parking/access may be from an adjoining alley, public street, or off-street parking area. 
b.  Equipment at a transmission facility shall be automated to the greatest extent possible to reduce traffic and congestion. Where the site abuts a collector and local street, access for maintenance vehicles shall be exclusively by means of the collector street, except in nonresidential areas, in which case access may be from the local street. 
9.9.6.  Application. Any application submitted for approval shall submit the following items, in addition to any other required items, to show compliance with these review guidelines: 
1.  Statement of impact on health, safety and welfare. A brief written statement shall address conformance with the health, safety and welfare objectives of these guidelines. 
2.  Site plan. A scaled site plan shall show the location and dimensions of all improvements, including setbacks, drives, parking, fencing, landscaping, existing land uses and zoning districts of the surrounding area, and other information necessary to access compliance with the development criteria of these guidelines. 
3.  Rendering. A rendering of the tower, accessory facilities, and compound shall show colors, materials, and treatment. If lighting or other FAA requirement for tower color is proposed, evidence of such requirement shall be submitted. 
4.  Justification for new tower. A proposal for a new tower shall be documented by the applicant stating the planned equipment for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing tower or other alternative structure within the proposed service area. The applicant shall submit a written affidavit showing what attempts have been made to share an existing tower or that no such tower exists. The affidavit shall include evidence from a licensed professional engineer or qualified industry expert supporting such claim. The evidence shall include one or more of the following: 
a.  That no existing towers or suitable alternative tower structures are located within the geographic antenna placement area to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
b.  That existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height or strength to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
c.  That the applicant's proposed antenna or existing towers and/or antennas would cause electromagnetic interference as a result of the installation of the proposed antenna. 
d.  That the costs or contractual provisions required by the tower owner to share an existing tower or structure are unreasonable. 
e.  That the applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable. 
5.  Certification of shared use design. A qualified professional engineer, registered in the State of Alabama, shall certify that the proposed tower's structural design can accommodate a minimum of two shared users, in accordance with § 9.9.5, Development criteria. 
6.  As built survey. A qualified professional engineer, registered in the State of Alabama, shall certify that the completed cellular site was built in accordance with the submitted site plan including the installation of any required buffer strip.  
Sec. 9.10. - Upper-story dwellings. 
9.10.1.  Upper-story dwellings in mixed-use buildings shall be located on a floor level above a use of another type. Emergency egress and fire separation shall comply with all requirements of the building and fire codes. 
9.10.2.  All upper-story dwellings, whether or not intended for occupancy by the owner of the use located below the dwelling, shall have an entrance separate from the associated use. 
9.10.3.  Multifamily dwellings in a mixed-use building. 
1.  No nonresidential use shall be located on the same floor in the same building with any multifamily dwelling units. 
2.  Multifamily dwelling units shall be accessible from a shared exterior entrance or one interior entrance commonly shared between the different uses housed in the upper floors of the building. 
3.  Dwelling units shall not be accessible directly from another unit or use within the building.  
Sec. 9.11. - Mini-warehouses. 
9.11.1.  No storage of volatile, toxic or explosive materials shall be permitted, either inside the structure(s) or on the premises. 
9.11.2.  Storage spaces shall not be used for commercial activities. However, this shall not include periodic auctions, which are held on the premises to dispose of items which have been abandoned and/or for which the lease time has expired. 
9.11.3.  Screen fencing shall be installed around the perimeter of the development meeting the requirements of § 11.3, screening.  
Sec. 9.12. - Day care facilities. 
9.12.1.  Application of regulations. The provisions of this section shall apply to day care facilities providing service for part of a 24-hour day for children under 16 years of age, for the aged, or for persons who are disabled, by persons giving care (excluding care, provided by relatives). Day care facilities shall include family day care homes, group day care homes, and day care centers. This section does not apply to baby-sitting or child day care service furnished in places of worship during religious services or related activities. 
9.12.2.  General provisions. 
1.  State regulation. All day care facilities shall comply with all applicable state regulations. 
2.  Inspections. The building official shall have the right to enter and inspect the premises for compliance purposes after advance notice to the property owner. 
3.  Hours of outside play shall be limited to between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and sunset, as defined by the National Weather Service, and an outdoor play area shall be, provided for child day care facilities and shall not be located in the front yard. 
4.  Sewage facilities. Day care facilities using, or proposing to use, an on-site sewage disposal system shall obtain a written approval from the county health department. 
5.  Fencing shall be, provided to restrict children from hazardous areas, such as open drainage ditches, wells, holes, and adjacent streets. Natural or physical barriers may be used in place of fencing so long as such barriers functionally restrict children from these areas. 
6.  Expansion to day care center. The care of more than 12 individuals at a time constitutes a day care center, which may require, in the case of expansion of a family day care home, to a district in which day care centers are permitted. When applying for rezoning, the applicant shall submit a plan showing any existing or proposed outdoor play areas, outdoor play equipment, fencing, access drives, adjacent streets, adjacent hazardous land uses, on-site hazardous areas (as previously defined), on-lot sewage disposal facilities, parking spaces, and the drop-off circulation pattern. 
7.  Application and permitting procedure. Any individual proposing a family day care home shall submit an application for a day care home permit to the building official. If the application demonstrates compliance with this section, the building official shall grant the permit. Group day care homes shall only be permitted as special, exception uses in accordance with § 13.6 and the provisions of § 9.12.3, below. 
9.12.3.  Family day care homes and group day care homes. Day care facilities, operated within a residence, are not subject to the requirements for home occupations but shall comply with the general provisions of § 9.12.2 and of this § 9.12.3. 
1.  Family day care homes shall: 
a.  Only be permitted in single-family detached dwellings. 
b.  Have a current state registration certificate (proof of registration renewal must be supplied to the city every two years). 
c.  Have no external signage. 
d.  Be limited to the care of no more than six children. 
e.  Not receive children for care before 7:00 a.m. nor continue care after 7:00 p.m. 
2.  Group day care homes shall be limited to no more than 12 individuals receiving care in accordance with applicable state regulations. 
9.12.4.  Day care centers. In addition to the other provisions of this section, day care centers shall comply with the following: 
1.  The facility shall have an approved and currently valid state license. Proof of state annual license renewal must be supplied to the city every year. 
2.  A fence with a minimum height of four ft. shall physically contain the children within the outdoor play area. Natural or physical barriers may be used in place of fencing so long as such barriers functionally contain children. 
3.  On corner lots, access shall only be from the street of lesser classification. 
4.  Play equipment shall be located at least ten ft. from all lot lines. 
5.  All pedestrian pathways shall be adequately lit for safety if utilized during non-daylight hours. Specific areas for lighting are entranceways, pedestrian access to the outdoor play areas, sidewalks, drop-off areas, and all parking lots. Such lighting shall not produce objectionable glare on adjacent properties. 


 
ARTICLE 10. - PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 10.1. - Off-street parking and loading terms. 
10.1.1.  The following off-street parking and loading terms, when used in this article, shall have the meanings defined in this section: 
1.  Employee. The maximum number of persons employed at the facility regardless of the time period during which this occurs or whether the persons are full-time employees. The major shift may be a particular day of the week or a lunch or dinner period in the case of a restaurant. 
2.  Gross leasable area (GLA). The total floor area for which the tenant pays rent and that is designed for the tenant's occupancy and exclusive use. GLA does not include public or common areas, such as utility rooms, stairwells and corridors. 
3.  Loading area. That area used to satisfy the requirements of this ordinance for truck loading and unloading. 
4.  Loading space. An off-street space or berth used for the unloading or loading of commercial vehicles. 
5.  Occupancy load. The maximum number of persons, which may be accommodated by the use as determined by its design or by fire code standards. 
6.  Parking aisle. That portion of the parking area consisting of lanes providing access to parking spaces. 
7.  Parking area. An improved area on a lot exclusively used or designed for use as a temporary storage area for motor vehicles, containing access driveways, parking aisles and parking spaces. 
8.  Parking space. That portion of the parking area set aside for the parking of one vehicle. 
9.  Stacking space. An off-street space for the temporary stacking of vehicles with an aisle intended to serve a drive-in teller window, take-out food window, dry cleaning/laundry pick-up or similar type activity station.  
Sec. 10.2. - Required off-street parking spaces. 
In all zoning districts there shall be, provided, at the time any permitted use is established, enlarged or increased in capacity, off-street parking spaces in accordance with the requirements set forth in this article pursuant to table 10-1. For uses not specifically mentioned in the table, parking requirements shall be determined by the zoning official using the most analogous use in the table. Fractional off-street parking space requirements shall be counted as a whole space if the fraction is greater than one-half. 
Off-street parking areas shall not be considered as loading or unloading areas. No off-street parking facility, in existence at the effective date of these regulations, shall be reduced to less than the amount required for the use involved. 
10.2.1.  Site plan review. All off-street parking areas with six or more parking spaces shall be subject to site plan review by the commission. 
10.2.2.  Off-street parking design requirements. 
1.  The minimum parking space dimensions shall be as shown in table 10-2 and figure 10.2.2. 
2.  In parking areas of 20 or more parking spaces, up to 20 percent of the spaces may be reserved for compact cars. Such spaces shall contain a minimum rectangular area of eight ft. in width and 16 ft. in length. These spaces shall be conspicuously marked for compact cars only. 
3.  Stacking space shall contain a minimum rectangular area of ten ft. in width and 20 ft. in length and be separate from parking aisles and spaces. 
4.  Handicapped parking spaces shall be, provided and designed in accordance with the applicable provisions of the city building code. 
5.  All off-street parking areas shall be so designed and be of such size that no vehicle is required to back into a public street for egress, except for lots devoted to single-family and duplex dwellings. However, backing into arterials shall be prohibited in all cases. 
6.  Parking areas for all developments shall be so designed that sanitation, emergency and other public service vehicles can adequately and safely serve such developments without the necessity of backing unreasonable distances or making other dangerous maneuvers. Fire lanes may be required by the fire code. 
7.  All permanent off-street parking areas shall be of a hard surface or in such a manner that no dust will result from continuous use. All parking areas shall be maintained in good condition, i.e., free of potholes, weeds, trash, refuse, etc. 
8.  Parking spaces, except those serving single-family and duplex dwellings, shall be clearly marked and meet all city specifications. 
9.  Drainage in parking areas shall direct stormwater back into the site from adjacent properties toward adequate drainage channels. Drainage plans shall be subject to approval by the City Planner. 
10.  The area between the street and an off-street parking lot shall have a curb, or similar barrier, as approved by the zoning official, separating the parking lot from the sidewalk to prevent the encroachment of vehicles onto the sidewalk. 
10.2.3.  Location of required parking. 
1.  All required parking spaces shall be located on the same lot as the use served by the parking, except as, provided below: 
a.  Required parking within planned residential developments may be, provided in common parking areas. 
b.  If the number of required parking spaces cannot reasonably be, provided on the same lot as the served use, remote parking may be permitted by a special, exception if within 500 ft. of the concerned lot. Such special, exception requires legal documentation that the applicant has the right to use such remote spaces. 
2.  No off-street parking shall extend beyond any lot line, unless approved by the City Planner for common parking areas with cross access between uses on abutting lots. 
10.2.4.  Joint and shared parking. Joint off-street parking facilities for two or more uses may be established so long as the required number of off-street parking spaces shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the individual uses computed separately. However, subject to approval by the commission, minimum parking requirements for a mixed-use development may be reduced by calculation of shared parking requirements using the shared parking demand information in table 10-3. 
10.2.5.  Parking prohibitions. 
1.  The use of off-street parking in any residential district for nonresidential purposes is prohibited. 
2.  The use of any required parking space for the storage of any motor vehicle for sale or for any purpose other than parking is prohibited. 
Table 10-1. Required Off-Street Parking Spaces by Use 
Agricultural Uses 
Farm 	1 per 1.05 employees 
Farm Stand 	1 per 250 sf. of retail floor area 
Farm Support Business 	1 per 1.05 employees, plus 1 per company vehicle 
Stable 	1 per 3 persons of occupancy load plus 1 per 1.05 employees 
Residential Uses 
Accessory Dwelling 	1 per DU 
Boarding House 	1 per BR 
Duplex 	2 per DU 
Independent Living Facility 	2 per 3 DUs plus 1 space per employee 
Manufactured Home 	2 per Manufactured Home 
Multifamily Developments 	1 per studio, efficiency or 1-BR unit; 1.75 per 2-BR unit; 2.0 per 3+ BR unit 
Single-family Dwelling, attached or detached 	2 per DU 
Institutional Uses 
Assisted Living Facility 	1 per 4 residents plus 1 per employee 
Club 	1 per 100 sf. of non-storage and non-service floor area 
Community Center 	1 per 300 sf. of GLA 
Country Club 	1 per 3 persons of occupancy load 
Day Care Center 	1 per employee, plus 1 stacking or parking space per 8 persons enrolled of occupancy load 
Group Care Home or Rehabilitation Facility 	1 per 4 beds plus 1 per employee 
Hospital 	1 per 2 patient beds plus 1 per emergency room bed plus 1 per employee 
Library 	1 per 500 sf. of GLA 
Nursing Care Facility 	1 per 4 beds plus 1 per employee 
Place of Assembly 	1 per 3 seats in the main assembly space 
Public Facility 	1 per 300 sf. of GLA 
School, Commercial 	1 per 3 students plus 1 per employee 
School, Elementary or Junior High/Middle 	1 per classroom, plus either 1 per employee or 1 per 3 seats in the main assembly space (whichever is greater) 
School, High 	1 per 8 students of occupancy load, plus either 2 spaces per classroom or 1 per 3 seats in the main assembly space (whichever is greater) 
Commercial Uses 
Animal Hospital 	1 per 300 sf. of GLA 
Appliance Store 	1 per 400 sf. of GLA 
Art Gallery 	1 per 350 sf. of GLA 
Automotive Sales 	1 per 200 sf. of interior sales area plus 1 per 4,000 sf. of outdoor display area plus 1 stacking space per service bay 
Automotive Parts Store 	1 per 400 sf. of GLA plus 1 per employee 
Automotive Rental Establishment 	1 per 400 sf. of GLA plus 1 per rental vehicle 
Automotive Repair, Major and Minor 	1 per employee plus 2 stacking spaces per service bay plus 1 per company vehicle 
Bank (no drive-thru) 	1 per 250 sf. of GLA 
Bank (drive-thru only) 	1 per 2 employees plus 3 stacking spaces per teller 
Bank (with drive-thru) 	1 per 350 sf. GLA plus 3 stacking spaces per teller 
Barber or Beauty Shop 	2.5 per chair 
Bed and Breakfast 	1 per guest bedroom plus 2 spaces 
Bowling Alley 	3.5 per bowling lane 
Call Center, Telemarketing Office 	1 per 150 sf. of GLA or 1 per employee, whichever is greater 
Car Wash (full service or automated) 	1 per employee plus 4 stacking spaces per bay 
Car Wash (self-service) 	3 stacking spaces per approach lane plus 2 drying spaces per stall 
Clinic 	6 per practitioner 
Commercial School 	1 per 3 students of occupancy load plus 1 per employee 
Dry Cleaning Pick-Up 	1 per 300 sf. of GLA 
Funeral Home 	1 per 1 employee plus 1 per 3 seats of occupancy load plus 1 per company vehicle 
Furniture Store 	1 per 600 sf. of GLA 
Gas Station/Convenience Store 	1 per 300 sf. of GLA plus 1 stacking space per fuel island 
General Retail Business 	Under 50,000 sf.: 1 per 200 sf. of GLA; 50,000—99,999 sf.: 1 per 250 sf. of GLA; 100,000+ sf.: 1 per 300 sf. of GLA 
Home Improvement Center 	1 per 400 sf. of GLA 
Hotel or Motel 	1 per room plus 1 per employee 
Laundromat 	1 per 2 washing machines 
Liquor Lounge (freestanding) 	1 per 100 sf. of GLA 
Mini-Warehouse 	5 spaces adjacent to leasing office (if any) 
Office, business or professional 	1 per 250 sf. of GLA 
Movie Theater 	1 per 3 seats 
Open Air Market 	1 per 500 sf. of display area plus 1 per employee 
Outdoor Recreation 
Golf Course: 	4 per hole 
Miniature Golf: 	2 per tee 
Golf Driving Range: 	1 per tee 
Other: 	1 per 3 persons of occupancy load 
Pool Hall 	1 per table 
Restaurant, Carry-Out and/or Delivery 	1 per employee plus 1 per 300 sf. of GLA 
Restaurant, Drive-in 	1 per ordering station plus 1 per employee 
Restaurant, Drive-thru 	1 per 100 sf. of GLA plus 4 stacking spaces per drive-thru window 
Restaurant, Standard 	1 per 3 seats of occupancy load 
Service Station 	2 per service bay plus 1 per company vehicle plus 1 per employee plus 1 stacking space per fuel island 
Industrial Uses 
General Industry and Manufacturing, Research Laboratory and similar uses 	1 per 1 employee plus 1 per company vehicle, but not less than 1 per 1,000 sf. of GLA 
Warehouse, distribution and wholesale business 	1 per 1 employee plus 1 per company vehicle, but not less than 1 per 500 sf. of GLA 
 





Table 10-2. Parking Lot Dimensional Requirements 
Parking Angle 	Stall Width (A) 	Stall Length (B) 	Stall Depth (C) 	Curb Length (D) 	Aisle Width (E) 	Interlock (F) 
					One-Way 	Two-Way 	
0° 	8 ft. 	22 ft. 	8 ft. 	22 ft. 	12 ft. 	20 ft. 	na 
30° 	9 ft. 	20 ft. 	17.4 ft. 	17 ft. 	15 ft. 	20 ft. 	3.9 ft. 
45° 	9 ft. 	20 ft. 	20.2 ft. 	12 ft. 	15 ft. 	20 ft. 	3.2 ft. 
60° 	9 ft. 	19 ft. 	21 ft. 	10.4 ft. 	20 ft. 	24 ft. 	2.3 ft. 
90° 	9 ft. 	19 ft. 	19 ft. 	9 ft. 	20 ft. 	24 ft. 	na 
 
 
Table 10-3. Typical Shared Parking Demand by Use and Time of Day 
Parking Demand* by Use 	Weekday 8:00 a.m.—5:00 p.m. 	Weekday 6:00 p.m.—12:00 a.m. 	Weekday 12:00 a.m.—6:00 a.m. 	Weekend 8:00 a.m.—5:00 p.m. 	Weekend 6:00 p.m.—12:00 a.m. 	Weekend 12:00 a.m.—6:00 a.m. 
Residential 	60% 	100% 	100% 	80% 	100% 	100% 
Office 	100% 	20% 	5% 	5% 	5% 	5% 
Commercial 	90% 	80% 	5% 	100% 	70% 	5% 
Lodging 	70% 	100% 	100% 	70% 	100% 	100% 
Restaurant 	70% 	100% 	10% 	70% 	100% 	20% 
Entertainment 	40% 	100% 	10% 	80% 	100% 	50% 
Movie Theater 	40% 	80% 	10% 	80% 	100% 	10% 
Institutional (non-church) 	100% 	20% 	5% 	10% 	10% 	5% 
Institutional (church) 	10% 	5% 	5% 	100% 	50% 	5% 
 
*Different parking demands may be used than the typical shown here if documented in a parking demand study.  
Sec. 10.3. - Off-street loading. 
In all zoning districts where permitted uses require the receipt or distribution of material or merchandize by truck or similar vehicle, off-street loading and unloading space shall be, provided. Such requirements shall apply to new structures or that portion of existing structures that are altered or expanded after the effective date of this ordinance. 
10.3.1.  One space shall be required for the first 20,000 sf. of floor area plus one additional space for each 20,000 sf. of floor area up to 100,000 sf. and one space for each additional 40,000 sf. thereafter. However, the approving authority may waive loading requirements for uses under 8,000 sf. 
10.3.2.  Off-street loading design standards. 
1.  The minimum size of a loading space shall be 15 ft. by 50 ft., exclusive of driveway and maneuvering space. Each space shall allow vertical clearance of 14 ft. 
2.  Joint or combined off-street loading space for two or more buildings on the same lot can be, provided as long as the amount of such combined off-street space is equal in size and capacity to the combined requirements of the buildings to be served. 
3.  No street or alley shall be considered as part of the off-street loading area. 
4.  All loading areas shall be so designed and located to permit traffic to exit facing a street or alley. Off-street loading spaces may occupy required yard areas, provided that no loading space shall be located within ten ft. of the front lot line nor within five ft. of any side or rear lot line. 
5.  No loading space shall be used to meet parking requirements, interfere with the on-site circulation of traffic, nor allow a truck to extend into any right-of-way or over any property line.  
Sec. 10.4. - Driveway spacing. 
The following regulations shall govern ingress and egress to all lots: 
10.4.1.  Within the first 15 ft. of the lot (measured from the front lot line along which a driveway is proposed) driveways shall not exceed the following widths: 
1.  Single-family and duplex dwellings: 13 ft. 
2.  Multifamily dwellings: 25 ft. (for two travel lanes). 
3.  Nonresidential uses: 30 ft. (for two travel lanes). 
10.4.2.  Access points shall be in accordance with table 10-4, driveway spacing, and the following: 
1.  Single-family and duplex dwellings with greater lot frontage may only have a second access if approved by the City Planner after a determination that traffic safety and movement at the particular location will not be adversely impacted by the additional access. 
2.  Corner lots-of-record may have a driveway with less than the above-required distance from the intersecting street, provided the driveway will be located along the street of lesser classification (as applicable) and as far as practicable from the intersection, and that, in the opinion of the City Planner, the driveway will not adversely affect traffic safety and movement on adjoining streets. 
10.4.3.  No two access points on the same lot frontage shall be closer than 50 ft. from their nearest edges. 
10.4.4.  The area between the street and a driveway parallel to the street shall have a curb at least six inches in height and six inches in width separating the drive from the sidewalk to prevent encroachment of vehicles onto the sidewalk area. 
10.4.5.  No curbs on public streets or rights-of-way shall be cut or altered without written approval of the city. 
10.4.6.  Where access to a state or federal highway is controlled by regulations other than those stated herein, those rules and regulations shall prevail. 
Table 10-4. Driveway Spacing Regulations 
	Minimum Spacing 	Max. number of driveways per frontage length 
	From intersections 	From other 
driveways 	
All Uses 
Major Arterial 	250 ft. 	200 ft. 	1 per 200 ft. 
Minor Arterial 	200 ft. 	150 ft. 	1 per 150 ft. 
Single-Family and Duplex Dwellings 
Collector 	125 ft. 	25 ft. 	1 per 100 ft. 
Local 	75 ft. 	ten ft. 	1 per 100 ft. 
All Other Uses 
Collector 	150 ft. 	125 ft. 	1 per 125 ft. 
Local 	100 ft. 	75 ft. 	1 per 75 ft. 
  
ARTICLE 11. - LANDSCAPING, SCREENING AND BUFFERS 
The intent of this article is to require a minimum number of trees in residential areas, to establish standards for buffers required between incompatible land uses and to provide for landscaping surrounding and within vehicular areas in high traffic corridors. For the purposes of this article, [the terms] "fences" and "walls" shall have the same meaning. Landscaping shall not be planted in a manner or location which causes a hazard to vehicles entering or within the public right-of-way. Required landscape plans shall include the information listed in appendix 3. 
 
Sec. 11.1. - Buffers. 
Buffers shall be, provided in accord with the requirements of table 11-1 and as described herein. 
11.1.1.  Applicability. except as otherwise, provided herein, buffer requirements shall be based on the developing land use and the existing, abutting use. 
 
11.1.2.  General standards. To decrease incompatibility between neighboring land uses, the following standards shall apply to all required buffers: 
1.  Required yards, where corresponding with the buffer area, may overlap and may be counted toward a buffer width requirement. 
2.  The buffer requirement, if any, shall be the responsibility of the developing land use. 
3.  Buffer requirements may be modified by the approving authority in certain cases as follows: 
a.  If the land use relationships between two abutting lots changes so that a lesser buffer would be required, the width of the previously, provided buffer may be reduced accordingly. 
b.  Up to one-half of the width of an abutting alley may be counted toward the buffer width requirement, but the landscaping density requirements shall not be reduced. 
c.  Whenever the proposed use abuts vacant land, buffer requirements shall be based on the zoning of the abutting property or the use projected by the comprehensive plan, whichever requires a lesser buffer. 
4.  Buffers shall not be used for parking, recreational use or any other purpose, except as, provided herein. The approving authority may permit a pedestrian access-way through a required buffer where appropriate. Public utilities and storm drainage facilities may be constructed in a required buffer, provided the buffer is otherwise installed in compliance with the approved landscaping plan. The city may require supplemental plantings to mitigate the effect of any such land disturbance in the buffer. 
Table 11-1. Buffer Requirements By Use 
Developing Land Use 	Existing Abutting Uses or Zoning 
	Single-family 	Multifamily 	Lodging 	Institutional 	Business 	Parks & greenways 
	detached 	attached 			low/medium/high 		
Residential and Lodging 	Buffer Class Required 
Detached, Single-family 	na 	na 	na 	na 	na 	na 	na 
Attached, Single-family 	A 	na 	na 	na 	na 	na 	na 
Multifamily 	B 	A 	na 	na 	na 	na 	na 
Lodging 	B 	B 	A 	na 	na 	na 	na 
Manufactured home/RV parks 	B 	B 	B 	B 	A 	B 	A Institutional 
Low Intensity 	A 	A 	na 	na 	na 	na 	na 	na 	na 
Medium Intensity 	A 	A 	A 	na 	na 	na 	na 	na 	A 
High Intensity 	B 	B 	B 	A 	A 	na 	na 	na 	A 
Business/Commercial 									
Offices up to 50,000 sf. 	A 	A 	A 	na 	A 	na 	na 	na 	A 
Offices greater than 50,000 sf. 	B 	B 	B 	A 	B 	A 	na 	na 	A 
Amusement, Outdoor Entertainment 	B 	B 	B 	A 	B 	A 	na 	na 	A 
Retail, Shopping Centers, and Restaurants up to 50,000 sf. 	B 	B 	A 	A 	A 	A 	na 	na 	A 
Retail, Shopping Centers, and Restaurants Greater than 50,000 sf. 	B 	B 	B 	A 	B 	A 	na 	na 	A 
Heavy Commercial, Including Repair, Contractor and Automotive Uses 	B 	B 	B 	A 	B 	A 	na 	na 	A 
Industry 									
Warehousing, Storage, Telecommunications Towers and Public Utility Facilities 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	B 	B 	A 	B 
Other Industrial Uses 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	B 	B 
 
Buffer Class 	Width 	Required trees per 100 linear feet 
	With fence/wall 	Without fence/wall 	
A 	10 ft. 	15 ft. 	8 
B 	15 ft. 	20 ft. 	10 
C 	22 ft. 	30 ft. 	12 
 
11.1.3.  Design standards. 
1.  Prior to occupancy of the premises, the buffer shall provide a visually impervious barrier from the ground to five ft. above grade level throughout the entire length of the buffer through the use of shrubs and trees. Fences may also be used in combination with shrubs and trees (see paragraph 3 below). Within one year after installation, the buffer shall be at least six ft. above grade throughout the entire length of the buffer. 
2.  Required plantings shall be evergreen. 
3.  The required buffer width may be reduced as, provided in table 11-1 when a fence is, provided that is five to seven ft. tall and that meets the requirements in § 11.4. With a fence, maximum shrub spacing may be reduced to not more than eight ft.  
Sec. 11.2. - Landscaping for vehicular areas. 
11.2.1.  Applicability. These regulations apply to areas used for off-street parking and loading; vehicular storage, display, maneuvering and washing; and the dispensing of motor fuels. 
11.2.2.  A landscaping plan shall be required as part of every development application for new construction, which includes vehicular areas as herein described. This section shall apply to new vehicular areas for all uses, except single-family dwellings, duplexes and multiplexes. If the size of an existing, applicable vehicular area is increased by ten percent or ten spaces, whichever is greater, the new vehicular area shall be made to comply with the requirements of this section. 
11.2.3.  Requirements. 
1.  The primary landscaping materials used in vehicular areas shall be canopy trees. Shrubs and other planting materials may be used to complement the required trees. 
2.  Required plantings shall be set back from the edge of the planted area or as otherwise needed to prevent damage by vehicles. 
3.  Interior landscaping. Each vehicular area shall have interior landscaping covering not less than five percent of the total vehicular area. 
4.  Street frontage landscaping. 
a.  A landscaped strip at least ten ft. wide shall be located between the vehicular area and the street line. The width may be reduced to five ft. when a fence, meeting the requirements of § 11.4 and that is between 2.5 to 3.5 ft. tall, is, provided. 
b.  Shrubs shall be evergreen and spaced no more than five ft. on center. If used in combination with a fence meeting the requirements of § 11.4, shrubs, may be deciduous and may be spaced no more than eight ft. on center. 
c.  At least one understory tree for every 40 linear ft. or one canopy tree for every 50 ft. of required landscape strip shall be planted. Only canopy and understory trees, as defined in article 2, shall be counted toward these requirements. 
5.  Perimeter landscaping. A five-foot-wide landscaping strip shall be, provided along the parking lot perimeter and shall be planted with evergreen shrubs and one understory tree per each 40 ft. of frontage (the width of any cross access drives may be discounted). Where this overlaps or conflicts with other landscaping requirements, the greater requirement shall govern.  
Sec. 11.3. - Screening. 
Screening is intended to provide visual separation of certain uses from public areas and adjoining properties. 
11.3.1.  Applicability. For all multifamily, nonresidential and mixed use developments, the following shall require screening: 
1.  Garbage collection, recycling and refuse handling areas. 
2.  Maintenance areas or utility structures associated with a building or development. 
3.  Water meters, gas meters, electric meters and air conditioners/mechanical units. 
4.  Loading areas. 
5.  Outside runs for veterinary clinics, animal shelters, and kennels. 
6.  Outdoor storage of materials, stock, equipment, and vehicles (such as those stored for repair). 
7.  Any other uses for which screening may be required by the reviewing authority. 
11.3.2.  Design requirements. The design of screening shall be in accord with the following and as approved by the reviewing authority: 
1.  Location on-site should be the first consideration in providing screening. The reviewing authority may lessen screening requirements when the location of the use to be screened reduces its visibility to the public and neighboring properties. Uses requiring screening, when collocated, may be screened together. 
 
2.  Screening shall not be placed so as to impede any drainage-way and shall not block access to any aboveground, pad-mounted transformer and shall provide the minimum clear distance required by the utility company. 
3.  The method of screening, including height and materials, shall be that which is sufficient to visually screen the use. The minimum height needed is preferred. 
4.  Fences, berms, or landscaping used for other purposes, but that are proposed as part of a required screen and that meet the requirements of this section, may count toward these requirements. 
5.  Uses that produce objectionable noise or odors shall be located so as to minimize such impacts to the public and abutting properties. 
6.  Shrubs shall be evergreen and spaced no more than five ft. on center. If used in combination with a fence, shrubs may be deciduous and may be spaced no more than eight ft. on center. 
7.  Trees shall be evergreen and, when used in the absence of a fence, shall be used together with shrubs to provide a continuous, opaque screen. 
11.3.3.  Requirements for specific uses. 
1.  Refuse and recycling containers shall not be located forward of the front building line. Such containers shall be screened by a combination of opaque fence and plant material on three sides. Opaque gates shall be installed for access. The fence shall be at least two ft. taller than the container. 
2.  For restaurants, enclosures shall be sized, as needed, to accommodate the storage of grease containers. 
3.  Mechanical equipment on roofs or on-site shall be screened so as to not be visible from public streets or adjacent properties. The screening of building-mounted mechanical equipment shall be an integral component of the building design. Mechanical equipment installed on-site shall be adequately screened by plant materials and/or fences to blend in with site landscaping. 
4.  Outdoor storage, where permitted, shall be screened to a height of six ft. or two ft. taller than the material or equipment to be screened, whichever is greater. 
5.  Service areas, loading docks, work yards, and similar uses should be located to minimize their visibility to the public and to any abutting properties to which such functions would be objectionable. Where their location is insufficient to effectively screen the use, required screening shall be at least six ft. in height.  
Sec. 11.4. - Design standards for fences. 
Fences used as a part of any required buffer, screen, or perimeter landscaping shall comply with the following: 
11.4.1.  No more than 25 percent of the fence surface shall be left open. The finished side of the fence shall face abutting property. 
11.4.2.  Required shrubs and trees shall be planted on the exterior side of the fence. 
The commission shall approve the design of fences to assure their functions, as required by this article, are properly served. In particular, the commission shall not approve a reduced buffer width pursuant to § 11.1.3.3 without also approving the design of the fence.  
Sec. 11.5. - Modifications. 
The planting requirements of this article shall be applied equally to similarly classified and situated properties, but may be modified or waived altogether in certain cases where a building site is subject to any of the following circumstances determined by the commission: 
11.5.1.  Existing natural vegetation, which meets, in whole or in part, buffer or screening requirements, may be applied toward the requirements of this article. Where natural vegetation (trees and/or shrubs) exist on a piece of property, when application is made for a building permit, such natural vegetation shall be left undisturbed until the zoning official has evaluated it for its suitability as a buffer or screen, as applicable. The zoning official may require that the developer retain such natural vegetation. However, additional planting may be required to fully achieve the requirement. 
11.5.2.  Where impending development of adjacent property would make these standards unreasonable or impractical. 
11.5.3.  Where, after inspection by the zoning official, it is found that the view from adjoining properties is blocked by a change in grade or other natural or manmade features. 
11.5.4.  Where planting cannot, in the professional opinion of an expert, be expected to thrive due to poor soil conditions, intense shade or similar conditions.  
Sec. 11.6. - Maintenance and irrigation. 
11.6.1.  All plant material shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition, replaced when dead and kept free of weeds, refuse and debris. 
11.6.2.  All fencing shall be permanently maintained in good condition and, whenever necessary, repaired or replaced by the party required to provide such fence. 
11.6.3.  All required landscaping shall be drought-tolerant, native species or shall be irrigated by an automatic irrigation system.  
ARTICLE 12. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 12.1. - Administration. 
The provisions of this ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the zoning official, except as herein, provided.  
Sec. 12.2. - Administrator. 
The council shall designate a zoning official to administer this ordinance. In addition, the zoning official and/or building official shall have the right to enter upon any premises during a reasonable period of time for the purpose of making inspections of the buildings or premises necessary to administer and enforce this ordinance.  
Sec. 12.3. - Building permit required. 
It shall be unlawful to commence the excavation for or the construction of any building or other structure, including accessory structures, or to store building materials or erect temporary field offices, or to commence the moving, alteration, or repairs (except repairs not changing the character of the structure and not exceeding $1,000.00 in cost, or painting or wallpapering) of any structure, including accessory structures, until the building official has issued for such work a building permit including confirmation by the zoning official that the plans, specifications and intended use of such structure in all respects conform with the provisions of this ordinance., except on the written order of the board, no building permit shall be issued for any building where the construction, addition, alteration or use thereof would be in violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance. Application for a building permit shall be made to the building official on forms, provided for that purpose.  
Sec. 12.4. - Application requirements. 
It shall be unlawful for the building official to approve any plans or issue a building permit for any excavation or construction until such plans have been inspected in detail and have been found to be in conformity with this ordinance. To this end, the building official shall require that every application for a building permit for excavation, construction, use of land, moving or alteration be accompanied by a plan or plat, drawn to an appropriate scale, including those materials listed in appendix 4. 
If the proposed excavation, construction, moving, or alteration, as set forth in the application are in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, the building official shall issue a building permit accordingly. If an application for a building permit is not approved, the building official shall state in writing on the application the cause for such disapproval. Issuance of a building permit shall in no case be construed as waiving any provision of this ordinance.  
Sec. 12.5. - Voiding of building permit. 
Any building permit granted under this section shall become null and void on one year from the date of issuance of the permit. Exceptions may be made if the proposed development or construction has passed the first building inspection. The building official shall make every reasonable effort to notify a holder of a building permit, which is liable for voiding action before voidance is actually declared.  
Sec. 12.6. - Inspection. 
The construction or usage affected by any building permit shall be subject to four inspections: the first, when the foundation has been excavated; the second, when the foundation has been completed and the building lines have been established; the third, when all electrical and mechanical elements are in place; and the fourth, when the building or structure has been completed. 
It shall be the duty of the holder of the permit to properly notify the building official as to the time when the construction will be ready for inspection. Failure to make proper notification of the time for such inspection shall automatically cancel the permit, requiring the issuance of a new permit before construction may proceed or occupancy may be permitted.  
Sec. 12.7. - Certificate of occupancy. 
No land or building or other structure or part thereof hereafter erected, moved, or altered in its use shall be used until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy stating that such land or structure or part thereof is found to be in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. Within three days after the owner or his agent has been properly notified [by] the building official that a building or premises or part thereof is ready for occupancy or use, it shall be the duty of the building official to make a final inspection thereof, and to issue a certificate of occupancy if the building or premises or part thereof is found to conform with the provisions of this ordinance, or if such certificate is refused, to state the refusal in writing with the cause.  
Sec. 12.8. - Unlawful structure. 
Any uses of land or dwellings or construction or alteration of buildings or structures erected, altered, razed or converted in violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be a nuisance per se. The zoning official is hereby authorized to apply to a court of competent jurisdiction to abate the nuisance created by such unlawful use of a structure, land or building. Whenever the zoning official has declared a structure to be in violation of any applicable provisions of this ordinance, the owner or occupant shall, within 72 hours from receipt of notification from the zoning official to vacate such premises, accomplish such vacation of said structure or premises until such structure or premises has been made to conform to the provisions of this ordinance. Such notification shall be: 
12.8.1.  By delivery to the owner personally, or by leaving notice at the owner's residence with a person of suitable age and discretion; or 
12.8.2.  By depositing the notice as first class certified mail; or 
12.8.3.  By posting and keeping posted for 72 hours a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place on the premises to be repaired.  
Sec. 12.9. - Penalties and remedies of violations. 
Any person, firm, corporation, or other organization which violates any provisions of this ordinance shall be fined, upon conviction, not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00 plus court costs for each offense. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. The conviction of a violation and imposition of any fine shall not constitute an exemption from compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. In case any building or other structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained; or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this ordinance, the building official, zoning official or any other appropriate authority or any adjacent or neighboring property owner, who would be especially damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may seek an injunction or writ of mandamus or take other appropriate action or proceedings to stay or prevent occupancy of such building, structure or land.  
Sec. 12.10. - Amendment. 
12.10.1.  Zoning amendment petition. The council may amend, supplement, change, modify, or repeal the regulations, restrictions, boundaries of districts or any provisions of this ordinance. Any member of the council may introduce such amendment; or any official, board, commission or any other person may present an application to the council requesting an amendment to this ordinance. 
12.10.2.  Commission review. No such amendment shall become effective unless such be first submitted to the commission for its approval, disapproval, or recommendation. If the commission disapproves an amendment after such submittal, it shall require the favorable vote of the majority of the council to become effective. Within 30 days of the public hearing on the application, unless an extension of time is agreed to by the applicant, the commission shall issue a recommendation to the council. Failure of the commission to act within this time period shall constitute a positive recommendation. 
The commission upon its own initiative may hold public hearings, public notice of which shall be given, for the consideration of any proposed amendment to the provisions of the ordinance, or to the official zoning map, and then report its approval, disapproval, or recommendations to the council. 
12.10.3.  Public hearing on proposed amendments. Upon the introduction of any amendment to this ordinance or upon the receipt of a petition to amend this ordinance, the council shall publish notice of such request for an amendment, together with a notice of the time and place set for public hearing by the council on the requested change. Said notice shall be published in full, for one insertion, in a newspaper of general circulation. One week after the first insertion, the council shall publish a synopsis of the proposed amendment. Both insertions must be published at least 15 days in advance of passage of the amendment. After the amendment is adopted, it shall be published in the same manner as all municipal ordinances pursuant to section 11-45-8 of the Code of Alabama, 1975, [Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-8] as amended. 
Within 30 days of the public hearing on the application, unless an extension of time is agreed to by the applicant, the council shall approve the request, approve it with conditions or deny the request. Failure of the council to act within this time period shall constitute approval. 
12.10.4.  Time limit. After the council has voted on an application for rezoning or other amendment of the zoning ordinance, another application for rezoning of the same tract or parcel of land, or change of the same portion of the zoning ordinance will not be considered for a period of one year from the date of such action, provided, however, that the council may adjust this time period if, in the opinion of a majority of the council, an unusual situation or circumstance exists.  
Sec. 12.11. - Conditional use procedures. 
Conditional uses are those that have some special effect, which differs from the potential impacts of permitted or special, exception uses or exceeds them in intensity, or have uniqueness such that their effect upon the surrounding environment cannot be determined in advance of a use being proposed in a particular location. As such, conditional uses must be reviewed in terms of existing zoning and land use in the vicinity of the proposed use; whether, and to what extent the use at the proposed location is consistent with the comprehensive plan, the intent of this ordinance, and any other development policies and/or regulations of the city; and whether and to what extent all steps possible have been taken by the developer to minimize any adverse effects of the proposed use on the immediate vicinity and on the public health, welfare and safety in general. 
12.11.1.  All conditional uses require the submission of an application to the commission. Such application shall be filed with the zoning official by the property owner or designee at least 30 days prior to the date on which the application is to be heard, and shall include a site plan including those materials listed in the appendix. At least 15 days prior to the hearing, the zoning official shall give written notice to all adjoining property owners. Such notice shall be deemed given when deposited in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to such property owners at their addresses submitted with the request. Such addresses shall be obtained by the applicant from the most recent records of the county tax assessor and submitted as part of the application. 
12.11.2.  The commission shall review the proposed conditional use for compliance with this ordinance and other applicable codes and ordinances, and for compatibility with the purposes of the applicable district. In particular the commission shall determine that satisfactory provisions have been made concerning the following: 
1.  Access to and from the property and the proposed structure and/or uses, with particular attention to vehicular and pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow and control, and emergency access. 
2.  The location and accessibility of off-street parking and loading areas. 
3.  The location and accessibility of refuse and service areas and their potentially adverse effects upon surrounding properties. 
4.  The screening and buffering of potentially adverse views and activities from surrounding properties. 
5.  Control of noise, glare, odor, surface water runoff, and other potentially disturbing impacts upon surrounding properties. 
6.  The availability, location, and capacity of utilities. 
7.  The location and scale of signs and lighting with particular reference to traffic safety, glare, and visual compatibility with surrounding properties. 
8.  The bulk, density, and lot coverage of structures, and yards and open areas, with reference to their compatibility with the character of the surrounding area. 
12.11.3.  The commission may impose such conditions as it deems necessary in the particular case to protect the public interest and further the purposes of this ordinance, in relation both to the items listed above and to any other factor it deems relevant. Such approval and conditions shall be granted to the property, structure, and/or use for which conditional use is approved and not to a particular person. Violations of conditions attached to any conditional use shall be deemed to be violations of this ordinance. 
12.11.4.  Within 60 days of the public hearing on the conditional use application, unless an extension of time is agreed to by the applicant, the commission shall approve the application for a conditional use, approve it with conditions, or deny it. The failure of the commission to act within this time period shall constitute approval of the conditional use.  
Sec. 12.12. - Fees. 
Every applicant or petitioner seeking an amendment to the zoning ordinance or official zoning map, other than amendments initiated by the city, or seeking approval of a building permit, conditional use, variance or special, exception shall pay to the city clerk at the time of filing of petition or application, a fee as set from time to time by the council to cover the cost of technical study, investigation and publication necessary in connection with such application. No such application shall be filed for consideration until such fee has been paid.  
ARTICLE 13. - BOARD OF ZONING ADJUSTMENT 
 
Sec. 13.1. - Appointments, duties and responsibilities. 
A board of zoning adjustment, hereinafter referred to as "the board," is hereby established. The appointment, procedure, powers and action of said board shall be governed by section 11-52-80 and section 11-52-81, Code of Alabama 1975, as amended [Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-52-80 and 11-52-81]. All members of the board shall be citizens and residents of the city.  
Sec. 13.2. - Meetings, procedures and records. 
Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman at such times and places as the board may determine. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. The board shall adopt and publish its own rules of procedure and keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact; and shall keep records of its examinations and of other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record.  
Sec. 13.3. - Powers and duties. 
The board, in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, shall have the following powers: 
13.3.1.  Interpretation of boundaries. To hear and decide upon interpretation of the boundaries of districts established and shown on the map in accord with criteria specified in § 3.2. 
13.3.2.  Appeals. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by a city official, other than the city council, acting under the authority of this ordinance. 
13.3.3.  Variances. To hear and decide requests for a variance from the provisions of this ordinance where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of such provisions would result in unnecessary hardship as defined in this article, but where the spirit of the ordinance can be observed and substantial justice done. 
13.3.4.  Special, exceptions. To hear and decide special, exceptions, as specified in this ordinance, upon which the board is required to act.  
Sec. 13.4. - Administrative appeals. 
13.4.1.  Appeals to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved or affected by any provision of the ordinance or by any decision of the zoning official relating to this ordinance. Any such appeal shall be filed with the zoning official within 15 days of the date of the action being appealed. The zoning official shall forthwith transmit to the board papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken. 
13.4.2.  An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the zoning official certifies to the board after the notice of the appeal has been filed that by reason of facts cited in such certification a stay would, in the zoning official's opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the board or by a court of record. 
13.4.3.  All appeals shall be filed in writing on forms, provided by the board and made available by the zoning official. At least 15 days prior to the scheduled board hearing the zoning official shall give written notice to all adjacent property owners. Such notice shall be deemed given when deposited in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to such property owners at their addresses submitted with the appeal. The notice shall state the name of the appellant, the location of the property, the decision of the zoning official being appealed, and the time, date, and location of the board hearing. 
13.4.4.  The board may affirm, reverse wholly or in part, or modify the zoning official's decision, order, or determination as, in its opinion, ought to be done, and, to that end, shall have all the powers of the zoning official.  
Sec. 13.5. - Variances. 
Any property owner may file an application for a variance from the requirements of this ordinance where it is claimed that, by reason of, exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape or by reason of, exceptional topographic conditions, or other extraordinary and, exceptional conditions of such piece of property existing at the time of the adoption of this ordinance, the strict application and literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance would result in peculiar, exceptional and unnecessary hardship upon such owner. 
13.5.1.  It is the intent of this ordinance that variances be used only to overcome some physical condition of a parcel of land, which poses a practical difficulty to its development and prevents its owner from using the property in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance. Any variance granted shall be the minimum adjustment necessary for the reasonable use of the land. 
13.5.2.  Applications shall be filed with the zoning official at least 30 days before the scheduled hearing date before the board. The property owner shall file the application on a form made available by the city. At least 15 days prior to the scheduled hearing, the zoning official shall give written notice to all adjacent property owners. Such notice shall be deemed given when deposited in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to such property owners at their addresses as submitted with the application. Such notice shall state the name of the applicant, the location of the property, the nature of the variance requested and the applicable sections of this ordinance, and the time, date, and location of the hearing. 
13.5.3.  The applicant must prove that the variance will not be contrary to the public interest and that practical difficulty and unnecessary hardship will result if it is not granted. In particular, the applicant shall establish and substantiate that the variance, if granted, will conform to all of the following: 
1.  The variance will not permit the establishment of a use not otherwise permitted in the district. 
2.  There must be proof of unique and special circumstances and conditions, fully described in the application, applicable to the land or building for which the variance is sought, which are peculiar to such land or buildings and do not apply generally to land or buildings in the vicinity, and which circumstances or conditions are such that the strict application of the provisions of this ordinance would deprive the applicant of reasonable use of such land or buildings. 
3.  There must be proof of unnecessary hardship. It must result from the application of this ordinance and must be suffered directly by the property in question, and evidence of other variances granted under similar circumstances shall not be considered. It is not sufficient proof of hardship to show that greater value or profit would result if the variance were granted. Furthermore, the hardship claimed cannot be self-created; nor can it be established on this basis by one who purchases the property with or without knowledge of the restrictions. 
4.  The variance will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, substantially increase congestion in the public streets, endanger the public safety, or substantially diminish or impair property values within the adjacent neighborhood. 
5.  The variance will not confer upon the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this ordinance to other land or structures in the same district. 
6.  The variance is necessary for the reasonable use of the land or building, and the variance is the minimum variance that will accomplish this purpose. 
7.  The variance shall be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the regulations imposed by this ordinance on the applicable district, and shall not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
13.5.4.  The board may prescribe any safeguards or conditions that it deems necessary to secure substantially the objectives of the regulations or provisions of this ordinance to which the variance applies.  
Sec. 13.6. - Special, exceptions. 
13.6.1.  All uses permitted by special, exception shall require the submission of an application to the board. Such application shall be filed with the zoning official at least 30 days before the hearing, and shall include a site plan including those materials listed in the appendix. The application shall be filed by the property owner or authorized agent on a form made available by the zoning official. At least 15 days prior to the scheduled hearing, the zoning official shall give written notice to all adjacent property owners. Such notice shall be deemed given when deposited in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to such property owners at their addresses as submitted with the application. Such notice shall state the name of the applicant, the location of the property, the proposed use, and the time, date and location of the board hearing. 
13.6.2.  The board shall review the application for compliance with this ordinance and all other applicable codes and ordinances of the city. In particular, the board shall determine that satisfactory provisions have been made concerning the following, among other considerations of this ordinance: 
1.  Access to and from the property and the proposed structure and/or uses, with particular attention to vehicular and pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow and control, and emergency access. 
2.  The location and accessibility of off-street parking and loading areas. 
3.  The location and accessibility of refuse and service areas and their potentially adverse effects upon surrounding properties. 
4.  The screening and buffering of potentially adverse views and activities from surrounding properties. 
5.  Control of noise, glare, odor, stormwater runoff, and other potentially disturbing impacts upon surrounding properties. 
6.  The availability, location, and capacity of utilities. 
7.  The location and scale of signs and lighting with particular reference to traffic safety, glare, and visual compatibility with surrounding properties. 
8.  The bulk, density, and lot coverage of structures, and yards and open areas, with reference to their compatibility with the character of the surrounding area. 
13.6.3.  The board may impose such conditions that it deems necessary in the particular case to protect the public interest, and the intent of the comprehensive plan, and this ordinance regarding the items listed above and as may otherwise be reasonably necessary. Such conditions shall apply to the land, structure, and use for which the special, exception is granted and not to a particular person. Violations of conditions lawfully attached to any special, exception shall be deemed to be violations of this ordinance. 
13.6.4.  The board may also grant special, exceptions for business use of a manufactured home in a nonresidential district upon showing of catastrophic circumstances created by [an] act of God or casualty damage. Such special, exceptions will be valid for a period not exceeding one year and are not transferable. Such special, exception may be granted only if all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  At the termination of the granted period, the property owner must either remove the manufactured home from this location, or apply for another special, exception. 
2.  Such special, exceptions are not transferable. If there is a change of land ownership, the new property owner must apply for a new special, exception if desired.  
Sec. 13.7. - Abatement of nuisance. 
The board may require the conduct of any use, conforming or nonconforming, which results in unreasonable noise, smoke, vibration, fumes, dust, dire, radio interference, or explosion hazard or nuisance to surrounding property to be modified or changed to abate such hazard to health, comfort and convenience. The board may direct the building official to issue an abatement order, but such order may be directed only after a public hearing by the said board, notice of which shall be sent by registered mail to the owners and/or operators of the property on which the use is conducted in addition to due notice of advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation. A hearing to consider issuance of an abatement order shall be held by the board either upon petition signed by any person affected by the hazard or nuisance or upon the initiative of the board. An abatement order shall be directed by the board of [zoning adjustment] only upon reasonable evidence of hazard or nuisance, and such order shall specify the date by which the hazard or nuisance shall be abated.  
Sec. 13.8. - Rehearings. 
13.8.1.  All decisions rendered by the board shall be final and binding upon all parties. No appeal of an administrative decision, or decision on a request for a variance or a special, exception shall be reheard, and no further application shall be accepted once a decision has been rendered, except under one or more of the following conditions: 
1.  New evidence or information pertinent to the request has been discovered, which was not available to the applicant at the time of the original hearing. 
2.  The decision resulted from an error in procedures required by this ordinance or state law and made by the board, the zoning official, or any other city officials. 
3.  The decision resulted from an error in substantive law under the provisions of this ordinance or the Code of Alabama, 1975, as amended. 
13.8.2.  Where no error is alleged and no new evidence is available, a new presentation by the applicant shall not constitute grounds for rehearing. Any applicant wishing a rehearing shall appear before the board to present one or more of the qualifying conditions listed in this section. 
13.8.3.  If the board finds that one or more of the qualifying conditions exist, the applicant may submit a new application. This new application shall be heard at a subsequent board meeting, subject to all regular posting and procedural requirements. Allowing a new application does not obligate the board to grant the request.  
Sec. 13.9. - Appeals from action of the board. 
Any party aggrieved by any final judgment or decision of the board may, within 15 days thereafter, appeal therefrom to the circuit court or court of like jurisdiction by filing with the board a written notice of appeal specifying the judgment or decision from which the appeal is taken. In case of such appeal, the board shall cause a transcript of the proceedings in the case to be certified to the court to which the appeal is taken, and the cause in such court shall be tried de novo. 
APPENDIX  
APPENDIX 1. - SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS FOR CONDITIONAL AND SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES 
1.  One or more scaled drawings or maps (one inch equals 20 feet unless size dictates a more appropriate scale), clearly showing the following: 
2.  Vicinity map, north arrow, scale, accurate shape proportion and dimensions of the site, name of property owner, developer and person drawing map. 
3.  Existing and proposed topography of the site and the surrounding area [at] at least two-foot contour intervals showing the location of existing woodlands, streams, and other significant features of the land. 
4.  Location and dimensions of existing and proposed buildings, structures, curb cuts, driveways, off-street parking and loading areas, signs, walls, fences, screen planting, landscaping, pedestrian walks, open space, and recreational areas for use by employees, residents, tenants or the general public. 
5.  Proposed storm drainage plan. 
6.  Proposed traffic circulation system where any part of the land is to be used by motor vehicles. 
7.  Proposed dedication of land for public use, including streets, easements, park and school sites. 
8.  The location of all existing and proposed power lines, gas lines, sewer and water lines, and the location of any easements to be granted for these utilities. 
9.  Drawings showing the proposed appearance of the buildings, structures and grounds after the completion of all buildings and structures and the establishment of the uses proposed on the land. 
10.  A statement of the area of land involved in the site, the number of acres and percentage designated for each proposed land use including public facilities, the percentage of the site proposed to be covered by buildings, the total number of dwelling units proposed, the number of dwelling units proposed per acre, the area proposed to be devoted to open space, the area proposed to be paved for parking, driveways, loading space, sidewalks, the total number of parking spaces for the use proposed, the number of employees, excepted per shift, the total floor area of proposed commercial uses (or seating capacity for places of assembly, restaurants, indoor entertainment uses, etc.) and the proposed manner of illumination of signs. 
11.  Restrictions on the use of property including proposed restrictive covenants. 
12.  Plans for the protection of abutting properties. 
13.  Written request for, exceptions to or variations from the requirements of the zoning ordinance, if any are being requested. 
14.  A statement defining the manner in which the city is to be assured that all improvements and protection devices, such as buffers, fences, etc., are to be installed and maintained. 
15.  Such other additional information as may be reasonably required by the commission to accomplish the purpose of the site plan review function.  
APPENDIX 2. - MASTER PLAN REQUIREMENTS FOR PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS 
1.  The outer boundary of the total development site, including a valid legal description; 
2.  A topographic map showing contours at five-foot or smaller intervals as required by the zoning official; 
3.  Description of the existing land uses and development adjoining the project site; 
4.  The rights-of-way and cross sections of all proposed streets, and proposed access to the surrounding public street system; 
5.  The type, number, and location of all structures; 
6.  The location, extent, and approximate acreage of all resources protection, recreation, and open spaces; 
7.  The location and nature of all common amenities such as clubhouses, swimming pools, laundries, etc. 
8.  A conceptual stormwater management plan identifying the proposed patterns of major stormwater runoff, and any proposed stormwater best management practices; 
9.  A written report, illustrated as appropriate, shall accompany the master plan addressing the following: 
a.  A general description of the proposal; 
b.  The proposed standards for the development of the project, including density standards, yard requirements, lot sizes, and restrictive covenants; 
c.  A plan for the provision of utilities and storm drainage facilities; 
d.  Plans for parking, loading, access, signage, and means of protecting adjacent areas from any potential adverse impacts; and 
e.  Presentation of the method for dedicating or reserving land or facilities for public use or for ownership and maintenance of common open spaces.  
APPENDIX 3. - LANDSCAPE PLAN SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS 
The landscape plan shall be drawn to a scale no larger than one inch equals 50 feet and shall contain the following information: 
1.  The location and dimension of all areas proposed for landscaping and planting, including a description of the proposed plant materials. 
2.  All dimensions and distances, property lines, easements, rights-of-way and buffers. 
3.  Existing and proposed buildings and structures, including signs, garbage containers, utility and drainage structures. 
4.  Existing buildings and structures on abutting property adjacent to any required screening or buffers. 
5.  Bodies of water including detention and retention areas. 
6.  Driveways, vehicular areas, existing and proposed parking spaces, access aisles and other vehicular areas. 
7.  Sufficient information and detail to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this section.  
APPENDIX 4. - BUILDING PERMIT SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS 
1.  The location, slope, area and dimensions of the lot. 
2.  The location, dimensions, height and bulk of the structure to be erected, altered, or moved and any building or structures already on the lot. 
3.  The existing and intended use of all such buildings or other structures. 
4.  The proposed number of dwelling units, occupants, employees, or other similar users. 
5.  The setback, side yards, open spaces, parking spaces and other such requirements of the application zoning district. 
6.  Any other information deemed necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of this ordinance.  
APPENDIX 5. - LIGHTING PLAN SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS 
The lighting plan shall be drawn to a scale no larger than one inch equals 50 feet and shall contain the following information: 
1.  The type of lamp to be used in each fixture, including the manufacturer's name and part number, lamp wattage, lumen output, and a copy of the manufacturer's lamp specifications; 
2.  Fixture heights measured from grade and locations of the same; 
3.  The type of fixtures, including the manufacturer's name and model number; wattage; a picture of the fixture; and the IES file name; 
4.  Point-to-point photometric calculations at intervals of not more than ten ft. at ground level demonstrating that the plan will provide a uniform intensity of lighting on vehicular surfaces; 
5.  The area of each photometric calculation, including an extra calculation to identify the light level produced at the property line, and all data used in each calculation; and 
6.  The seal of the qualified Alabama-registered design professional.  
Appendix C - SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
 
ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1.1. - Short title. 
This document shall be known and may be cited as: The subdivision and site plan regulations of the City of Opp, Alabama.  
Sec. 1.2. - Purpose and authority. 
1.2.1.  The purpose of this document is to protect the public health, safety and general welfare by establishing a process and standards for the development of sites and the subdivision of land within the subdivision jurisdiction of the city. 
1.2.2.  The provisions in these regulations shall be administered to ensure orderly growth and development without danger to health, or peril from fire, flood, erosion, excessive noise, air pollution, or any other menace, and facilitate the provisions in the comprehensive plan and zoning ordinance. 
1.2.3.  This regulation is adopted pursuant to the authority of title 11, chapter 52, article 2, sections 30-54 inclusive of the Code of Alabama 1975 [Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-52-30—11-52-54] and its amendments, which sections are hereby made a part of these regulations, the Opp planning commission, at its regular meeting on April 3, 2012, adopted by resolution the following regulations, a copy of which has been certified to the Probate Judge of Covington County. These regulations shall apply only to subdivisions as defined in title 11, chapter 52, article 1 of the Code of Alabama 1975 [Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-1 et seq.] as amended.  
Sec. 1.3. - Jurisdiction. 
From and after the date of adoption, these regulations shall govern all subdivisions of land within the boundary of the city; provided, however, that where the city is authorized to exercise subdivision control outside its municipal boundaries, such areas shall be included in the jurisdiction of these regulations. The site plan review and approval requirements in these regulations shall apply to all multifamily and nonresidential developments proposed within the city regardless of whether the development involves any subdivision of land or not. 
1.3.1.  Any owner of land within the limits of said subdivision jurisdiction wishing to subdivide land shall submit to the commission a plat of the proposed subdivision, which shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in article 3, procedure. 
1.3.2.  No plat or part thereof shall be filed or recorded in the office of the probate judge, and no subdivider may proceed with the sale of lots in a subdivision until such subdivision plat shall have been approved by the commission and such approval entered in writing on the plat by the chairman of the commission (see article 3, procedure). 
1.3.3.  No public officer, authority or county governing body shall accept, layout, open, improve, grade, pave or light any street, lay or authorize the laying of water or sewer mains or lines, or the construction of other facilities or utilities in any street within the city unless such street shall have been accepted, opened, or otherwise received the legal status of a public street prior to the adoption of these regulations, or unless such street corresponds in its location and lines to a street shown on a subdivision plat approved by the commission, or on a street plan adopted by the commission. 
1.3.4.  No building permit shall be issued and no building shall be erected on any lot in a subdivision unless a final plat of such subdivision has been approved and recorded as required by these regulations and unless the property fronts on a public street. 
1.3.5.  No grading, excavation, or other disturbance of land; and no construction of any public or private improvements for the purpose of constructing a subdivision shall take place or be commenced except in conformity with these regulations. 
1.3.6.  Any building or structure erected or to be erected in violation of this section shall be deemed an unlawful building or structure, and the building inspector, city clerk, subdivision official, city attorney or other official designated by the city may bring action to enjoin such erection or cause it to be vacated or removed.  
Sec. 1.4. - Interpretation, conflict and separability. 
1.4.1.  In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these regulations shall be held to be minimum requirements. More stringent provisions may be required if it is demonstrated that different standards are necessary to promote the public health, safety, and welfare. 
1.4.2.  Where any provision of these regulations is in conflict with another provision, regulation or law, the regulations that are more restrictive or impose higher standards shall prevail. 
1.4.3.  The provisions of these regulations are separable. If a section, sentence, clause, or phrase of these regulations is adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the decision shall not affect the remaining portions of these regulations.  
ARTICLE 2. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 2.1. - General. 
2.1.1.  Certain terms used in these regulations shall have the meanings provided herein. Terms not defined herein shall have the meaning provided in the zoning ordinance, the City Code, or sections 11-52-30 through 11-52-36 of the 1975 Code of Alabama [Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-52-30—11-52-36]. Otherwise, they shall have the customary dictionary meaning. Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses and derivative forms. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular. The word "person" includes a firm, corporation, association, organization, trust or partnership. The word "lot" includes "plot" or "parcel." The word "building" includes "structure." The word "shall" is mandatory. The word "may" is permissive. 
2.1.2.  Interpretation. The subdivision official is hereby authorized to make a final determination of any term used in these regulations. In case of a dispute over such interpretation, a written appeal of the subdivision official's determination may be filed with the commission. Such appeal must be filed within 15 days of such determination. 
2.1.3.  In case of any conflict between the text of these regulations and any caption, illustration, figure, or other graphic material, the text shall govern.  
Sec. 2.2. - Specific definitions. 
2.2.1.  Access management: The preservation of level of service, road capacity and safety on public streets through the regulation of intersections and driveways along such streets. 
2.2.2.  Aisle: The traveled way by which cars enter and depart parking spaces. 
2.2.3.  ALDOT standard specifications: The Standard Specifications for Highway Construction of the Alabama Department of Transportation, as amended. 
2.2.4.  Alley: A public way providing access to the side or rear of properties. 
2.2.5.  Applicant: A property owner, including his or her heirs, successors and assignees, or developer authorized to represent a property submitting an application for site plan approval, subdivision, re-subdivision or development. 
2.2.6.  Application: The documents required when seeking approval of a subdivision plat. A complete application includes all information and materials required by these regulations. 
2.2.7.  Approving authority: The commission unless a different agency is designated by the city council by ordinance. 
2.2.8.  Bicycle path: A pathway usually separated from the roadway designed specifically to satisfy the physical requirements of bicycling in accordance with AASHTO standards. 
2.2.9.  Bike lane: An on-street lane designed and intended for use by bicyclists 
2.2.10.  Bioswale: A constructed watercourse shaped or graded in earthen materials and stabilized with specific types of vegetation for the conveyance and filtering of storm runoff. 
2.2.11.  Block: A tract or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public streets other than alleys or a combination of streets, public land, public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, bodies of water or watercourses, or any other barrier to the continuity of development. 
2.2.12.  City: The incorporated community of Opp, Alabama. 
2.2.13.  City clerk: The duly designated clerk of the City of Opp, Alabama. 
2.2.14.  City council: The city council of the City of Opp, Alabama. 
2.2.15.  City specifications: All engineering and construction specifications for public improvements, which have been adopted by the city council, the planning commission, applicable city departments, and utility boards. 
2.2.16.  Comprehensive plan: The official public document prepared in accordance with § 11-52-8 of the Code of Alabama 1975, as amended [Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-8], consisting of maps, charts, and textual material, that constitutes a policy guide to decisions about future development and conservation within the city. 
2.2.17.  Cross access: A driveway providing access between two or more abutting lots so that a driver need not enter the public street to access one of said sites from another. In contrast to an alley, cross access is generally privately owned and maintained. 
2.2.18.  Cul-de-sac: A local street with only one outlet and having a vehicular turnaround at the closed end. 
2.2.19.  Culvert: A structure designed to convey water under a structure, street, driveway or walkway. 
2.2.20.  Curb: A vertical or sloping edge of a roadway intended to prevent encroachments and used in conjunction with gutters to aid in directing the flow of stormwater. 
2.2.21.  Dedication: The act of transmitting property or interest thereto. 
2.2.22.  Detention basin or detention pond: A basin designed to drain completely after retarding stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a predetermined rate. 
2.2.23.  Drainage easement: A right granted by a landowner to a grantee, allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes. 
2.2.24.  Drainage facilities: Structural and nonstructural elements designed to collect stormwater runoff and convey it away from structures and through the street right-of-way or off-street drainageways in a manner which adequately drains sites and streets and minimizes the potential for flooding and erosion. 
2.2.25.  Driveway: A means of access between a street and a property or between two adjacent properties. 
2.2.26.  Easement: Authorization by a property owner of the use by another and for a specified purpose of any designated part of that owner's property. These regulations recognize only those easements created through valid legal instruments and recorded in the office of the probate judge and those established by the city through continuous and historic use. 
2.2.27.  Engineer or registered engineer: A professional engineer registered and in good standing with the State of Alabama Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Surveyors.  
1.  Project engineer: That engineer retained by the applicant. 
2.2.28.  Engineering plan: Plans prepared by the project engineer showing details of the design and construction of required improvements in a proposed subdivision or site plan. 
2.2.29.  Final plat approval: The official action taken by the commission on a preliminarily approved subdivision, after all conditions, engineering plans, and other requirements have been completed or fulfilled and the required improvements have been installed, or guarantees properly posted for the completion, or approval conditioned upon the posting of such guarantee. 
2.2.30.  Final plat: The final map or plan or record of all or a portion of a subdivision, and any accompanying materials, which is presented for final plat approval as required in these regulations. 
2.2.31.  Floodplain: Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any source including, at a minimum, that area subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
2.2.32.  Frontage road: See "Street, frontage road." 
2.2.33.  Grade: The slope of land or a built feature such as a street, specified in percentage terms. 
2.2.34.  Grading plan: A topographic map of a planned subdivision, prepared by a registered engineer, with sufficient perimeter area to provide a clear definition of the initial elevations, watercourses, vegetative cover and drainage patterns and which is sufficient in detail and scale to determine limits and depths of excavations, fills and removal of native vegetation. 
2.2.35.  Gutter: A shallow channel usually set along a curb or the pavement edge of a street for the purpose of catching and carrying off stormwater. 
2.2.36.  Half street: A street parallel and contiguous to a property line and of lesser right-of-way width than is required by these regulations. 
2.2.37.  Hardship: An unusual situation on a property, which prevents the full utilization of the property as enjoyed by others within the city. A hardship exists only when it is not self-created, or when it is not economic in nature. 
2.2.38.  Health department: The Covington County and/or state health department. 
2.2.39.  Improvement bond: Financial security filed by the applicant with the city to ensure the construction of all required improvements at a specified time in the future. 
2.2.40.  Improvements: Those physical additions and changes to the land that may be necessary to produce usable and desirable development, including, but not limited to, driveways, landscaping, streets, sidewalks, and stormwater management and sewer facilities. 
2.2.41.  Lot: A parcel of land in one ownership, used or set aside and available for use as the site of one or more buildings and accessory structures or for any other permitted purpose.. 
2.2.42.  Maintenance bond: Financial security filed by the applicant with the city to secure the functionality and structural integrity of all required improvements for a specified period of time. 
2.2.43.  Major subdivision: A subdivision other than a minor subdivision. 
2.2.44.  Master development plan: A plan for a development within a P-1, P-2 or planned industrial district that has been approved by the council. 
2.2.45.  Median: That portion of a divided street separating lanes of traffic according to direction of travel. 
2.2.46.  Minor subdivision: A subdivision requiring no street improvements, utilities extensions or other public improvements and as otherwise described in § 3.3, minor subdivisions, procedure. 
2.2.47.  Monument: Any permanent object serving to indicate a limit or to mark a boundary. 
2.2.48.  Passage, pedestrian: A pedestrian-only or combined pedestrian and bicycle connector that provides transverse access through a long block or from the bulb of a cul-de-sac to an adjacent street. 
2.2.49.  Planning commission: The duly appointed planning commission of the City of Opp, Alabama. 
2.2.50.  Planned development: An area to be planned, developed, operated, and maintained as a single entity containing one or more structures to accommodate a mixture of uses incidental to each other. Refer also to article 8 of the zoning ordinance. 
2.2.51.  Plat. A map of a subdivision. 
2.2.52.  Pre-application conference. An initial meeting between the applicant and city representatives which affords the applicant the opportunity to present a subdivision or site plan proposal informally. 
2.2.53.  Preliminary plat: A map and related materials indicating the proposed layout of a proposed subdivision submitted to the planning commission for its consideration. 
2.2.54.  Preliminary plat approval: The conferral of certain rights prior to final plat approval after specific elements of a proposed subdivision have been agreed upon by the planning commission and the applicant. 
2.2.55.  Probate judge: The probate judge of Covington County, Alabama. 
2.2.56.  Public improvement: Any improvement, facility, or service, together with customary improvements and appurtenances thereto, necessary to provide for public needs such as: vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems, storm sewers, flood control improvements, water supply and distribution facilities, sanitary sewage disposal and treatment, public utility and energy services. 
2.2.57.  Reserve strip: A strip of land, smaller than a lot, serving as a means of controlling access to land dedicated or intended to be dedicated to street or other public use. 
2.2.58.  Re-subdivision: A combination, recombination, or splitting of previously recorded lots or tracts of contiguous land for the purpose of creating additional lots or enlarging existing ones. 
2.2.59.  Retention basin or retention pond: A basin designed to capture and store stormwater runoff. 
2.2.60.  Right of way: A strip of land occupied by a street, pedestrian or bicycle passage, railroad, electric transmission lines, gas pipelines, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, and/or other special uses and dedicated to the city, state or federal government in fee simple, or by other legal means such as prescription. 
2.2.61.  Runoff: That part of precipitation, which flows over the land. 
2.2.62.  Setback: The distance from the property lines to the building or projections thereof, excluding uncovered steps or other projections specified by the zoning ordinance. Depending on context, setback may refer to a minimum required distance or an as-built distance. 
2.2.63.  Shared access: A driveway, alley or similar accessway connecting two or more contiguous sites to a public street. 
2.2.64.  Shoulder: A reserved, graded portion of the right-of-way, whether paved or unpaved, that lies between the edge of the main pavement and curb line or swale. 
2.2.65.  Sidewalk: A paved path or walkway constructed for use by pedestrians, usually located at the side of the street and inside the right-of-way. 
2.2.66.  Sight distance: The length of street visible to a motorist at a given point when viewing is unobstructed by traffic. 
1.  Intersection sight distance: The length of the line of sight between a motorist, stopped at an intersection, and the nearest intersection, driveway, alley or other signalized or non-signalized access point to the left or to the right of the motorist. 
2.  Stopping sight distance: The distance required by a motorist to stop a vehicle traveling at or near the design speed of a thoroughfare before reaching a traffic-controlled intersection or stationary object in their path. 
2.2.67.  Significant increase in trip generation : A change in the use of a property, including land, structures or facilities, or an expansion of the size of structures or facilities causing an increase in the trip generation of the property exceeding ten percent, either peak or daily, and 100 vehicles per day more than the existing use for all streets under city or county jurisdiction; or exceeding 25 percent, either peak or daily, and 100 vehicles per day more than the existing use for all roads under State of Alabama jurisdiction. 
2.2.68.  Site plan: A development plan of a multifamily residential or nonresidential development, drawn to scale, illustrating existing conditions and details of a proposed development. 
2.2.69.  Sketch plan: A preliminary presentation and attendant documentation of a proposed subdivision to be used for review and discussion prior to application for a preliminary plat. 
2.2.70.  Street: A vehicular way dedicated for public use including all land within the right-of-way. Streets are further classified as: 
1.  Arterial: A major street serving as a primary artery, intended to mainly carry through traffic and to connect major activity centers in the city, and as further classified following: 
a.  Major arterials include US 331, US 84, AL 52, and AL 134.
b.  Minor arterials include Florala Hwy, W Cummings Ave, Business 33, and E Stewart Ave. 
2.  Collector: A street that collects traffic from an area and moves it to the arterial network while providing some access to abutting property, including, but not limited to: Opine Road, Old Perry Store Road, Maloy St, N Jackson St, Cool Springs Road, and Barnes St. 
3.  Frontage road: A minor street that parallels and [is] adjacent to an arterial and that provides access to abutting properties. 
4.  Local street: A minor street used primarily for access to abutting properties. 
2.2.71.  Street stub or stub street: A portion of a street used as an extension to an abutting property that may be developed in the future. 
2.2.72.  Subdivision: The division of a lot, tract, or a parcel of land into two or more parcels, lots, plats, sites or other divisions of land, whether described by metes and bounds or by another description, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of subdividing or re-subdividing or selling. 
2.2.73.  Subdivision official: That official, designated by the city council, to administer and enforce these regulations, including his/her designee. 
2.2.74.  Subdivision regulations or these regulations: The subdivision regulations of the City of Opp, Alabama, together with all applicable design and construction standards of the city. 
2.2.75.  Subgrade: The level layer of rock or earth upon which the foundation of a street is laid. 
2.2.76.  Surveyor or land surveyor: A land surveyor registered by and in good standing with the State of Alabama Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and land surveyors. 
2.2.77.  Swale: A constructed watercourse shaped or graded in earthen materials, grassed, and which conveys storm runoff. 
2.2.78.  Thoroughfare plan: That element of the comprehensive plan of the city which sets forth the freeways, arterials, and major collector streets in the city, provides for their approximate alignment, minimum right-of-way and paving width, and is to be used as a guide for all future development. 
2.2.79.  Travel way: That part of a street between the established curb lines, or that part of the street devoted to vehicular traffic. 
2.2.80.  Variance: A waiver from compliance with a specific provision of these regulations granted by the planning commission because of unnecessary hardships that would be imposed by the strict application of that provision of these regulations. 
2.2.81.  Watercourse: A permanent or intermittent stream, river, brook, run, creek, channel, swale or bioswale, pond, lake or other body of surface water, carrying or holding surface water, whether natural or manmade. 
2.2.82.  Zoning ordinance: The officially adopted ordinance and map of the city which provides for the delineation of districts, permitted uses in each district, and for controls of such factors as lot coverage and density.  
Sec. 2.3. - Abbreviations used in these regulations. 
2.3.1.  AASHTO: American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. 
2.3.2.  ALDOT: Alabama Department of Transportation. 
2.3.3.  CAD: Computer aided drafting. 
2.3.4.  ft.: Feet. 
2.3.5.  lf: Linear feet. 
2.3.6.  max.: Maximum. 
2.3.7.  min.: Minimum. 
2.3.8.  mph: Miles per hour. 
2.3.9.  MUTCD: Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
2.3.10.  NFIP: National Flood Insurance Program. 
2.3.11.  PDF: Portable Document Format. 
2.3.12.  ROW: Right-of-way. 
2.3.13.  sf: Square feet. 
2.3.14.  yd.: Yard.  
ARTICLE 3. - PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 3.1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish an orderly, expeditious procedure for review and action, by the planning commission, on applications for subdivisions and/or site plans. 
Whenever any subdivision is proposed, before any contract is made for the sale of any part thereof, and before any building permit may be granted thereon, the property owner or authorized agent shall apply for and secure approval of such proposed subdivision in accordance with the following procedures: 
3.1.1.  Exempt subdivisions. The following types of subdivisions are exempt from any requirement for approval by the commission in accordance with these regulations. The city may require documentation to substantiate a claim of exemption: 
1.  Subdivision of land by testamentary or in testate provisions; and 
2.  Subdivision of land by court order, including, but not limited to, judgments of foreclosure. 
3.1.2.  For subdivisions, see § 3.2, pre-application, through § 3.7, improvements and bonding. For site plans, refer to § 3.9, site plan approval.  
Sec. 3.2. - Pre-application. 
3.2.1.  Whenever a subdivision or development within the city is proposed, the applicant is urged to consult early and informally with city staff and, as appropriate, a designated member of the planning commission. This informal consultation will usually save time and money as the application proceeds through preliminary and final approvals, as applicable. No formal application is required. 
3.2.2.  Following such consultation, the applicant may proceed to prepare the preliminary plat. Neither the applicant nor the planning commission shall be bound by the pre-application review; and it is expressly understood that favorable consideration at the pre-application stage of the process shall not be construed as preliminary or tentative approval, nor bind either party. 
3.2.3.  Submittal of a sketch plan prior to the preliminary plat application is encouraged and may be required by the subdivision official for planned unit developments and similar large-scale developments. This shall not be required of minor subdivision as defined in § 3.3, minor subdivision, procedure. Following submission to the subdivision official and tentative approval, the applicant may then apply for preliminary plat review and approval. The sketch plan shall be prepared at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet and shall include the following, at a minimum: 
1.  A vicinity map at one inch equals 400 feet or as otherwise approved by the subdivision official. 
2.  Name of the proposed subdivision and adjoining subdivisions. 
3.  Boundary of the subdivision with approximate tie points accepted corner based upon the public land survey system. 
4.  Topography at five ft. contour or smaller intervals. 
5.  Location of existing and proposed improvements within 200 ft. of the proposed subdivision. 
6.  Approximate locations and widths of all existing and proposed rights-of-way. 
7.  Approximate locations and dimension of all proposed lots. 
8.  Approximate locations of all parcels of land to be set aside for public uses and common areas.  
Sec. 3.3. - Minor subdivisions, procedure. 
3.3.1.  The following types of subdivisions shall be considered minor subdivisions and shall be subject to a streamlined review and approval process as described in this § 3.3: 
1.  The division of a tract of land of legal record into lots of not less than ten acres each, for the purpose of selling said lots but not for development of the same, and involving no street improvements, utilities extensions or other public improvements; 
2.  The division of a tract of land into no more than five lots all fronting on an existing paved public street and not requiring the construction or extension of any new streets, municipal facilities or public improvements; 
3.  The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining property in which no additional lots are created and where the resulting lots or tracts are not reduced below the minimum requirements of the zoning ordinance; or 
4.  Instruments correcting surveying data or other details of a previously recorded subdivision plat. 
3.3.2.  Procedure. Applications shall be submitted to the subdivision official 21 days in advance of the next regularly scheduled planning commission meeting. Incomplete applications shall be denied by the subdivision official, and the reasons for such denial shall be provided to the applicant. Following review of a completed application, the subdivision official shall report his findings and recommendations to the planning commission, which shall afford a public hearing on the plat. Notice of the hearing shall be provided by registered or certified mail to the applicant and owners of land adjoining the proposed subdivision at least five days in advance of the hearing. Minor subdivision applications may include a request for final approval as provided in § 3.8, combined preliminary and final plat approval. 
3.3.3.  The plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor and shall be drawn at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet and shall provide, at a minimum, the following: 
1.  The name of the proposed subdivision or the words "re-subdivision of," as applicable; 
2.  The name, address and deed book and page of record of the legal owner and the name and address of the agent(s) acting for the legal owner, if any; 
3.  The name, address and seal of the project land surveyor or project engineer; 
4.  The names and addresses of owners of adjoining parcels of land as they appear on current tax records, including deed book and page; 
5.  Date, north point, graphic scale and the total acreage of the subdivision; 
6.  The location of the subdivision by public land survey system legal description including sufficient description to clearly define the lands; and lot, block, subdivision name, parcel numbers and legal deed book and page of all portions that are part of previously approved subdivision of legal record; 
7.  A vicinity map showing the location of the proposed subdivision and all existing and approved streets within 1,200 ft. of the perimeter of the proposed plat; 
8.  The exact length (to the nearest hundredth of a foot) and bearing (to the nearest tenth of a second of arc) of the exterior boundaries of the proposed plat; 
9.  Dimensions and areas of all lots and other land areas and the bearings of the respective sides with all lots and blocks numbered where applicable; 
10.  Approximate radii, central angle, arc distance, chord lengths and points of tangency of all curves; 
11.  Zoning classification of the subject land and all adjoining tracts; 
12.  The location, widths and names of all existing and platted streets, alleys, pedestrian ways or other public ways and easements, railroad and utility rights-of-way, parks, cemeteries, drainage ditches, water courses, bridges, and other permanent or temporary buildings or structures, and other public places on or adjacent to the subject land; 
13.  Private property to be held in common and land intended to be dedicated to public use, or to be reserved by deed covenant for use of all property owners in the subdivision with conditions, if any, of such dedication or reservations; 
14.  Floodplain boundaries, including the contour line of the floodway, the flood profile elevation (100-year flood) and the contour line two feet above the flood profile elevation. 
3.3.4.  The application shall also be accompanied by the following executed endorsements: 
1.  Project surveyor's or engineer's certificate and description of land platted; 
2.  Notarized dedication; 
3.  Any restrictions or special notations that may be required by these subdivision regulations; 
4.  Certification by the City Planner that the property and the plat has been inspected and reviewed and that it is found in compliance with applicable city regulations; 
5.  Certificate of approval from the electric, water, gas, and sanitary sewer providers, and any other interested city, county or state departments; 
6.  Certificate of approval form for execution following approval by the planning commission; and 
7.  Any additional certificates or endorsements as may be required. 
3.3.5.  Planning commission action. The planning commission shall approve, approve conditionally, or disapprove the plat within 30 days after the submission thereof at its regular meeting. If approved conditionally, the conditions and reasons therefor shall be stated, and if necessary, the planning commission may require the applicant to submit a revised plat. If any of the requirements are modified or waived, the reasons for such shall be specified. If the planning commission should disapprove the plat, the reasons for such action shall be stated and if possible, recommendations be made on the basis of which the subdivision may be approved. One copy of the plat as acted upon by the planning commission shall be retained at city hall, one copy forwarded to the City Planner, and one copy returned to the applicant.  
Sec. 3.4. - Major subdivisions, procedure. 
For approval of a subdivision not otherwise classified as a minor subdivision, the following procedure shall apply: 
3.4.1.  The applicant shall first submit an application for preliminary plat approval in accordance with § 3.5, preliminary plat approval. Approval of the preliminary plat is authorization that the subdivider may proceed with the staking of streets and lots in preparation for construction of improvements and for final platting pursuant to the bonding requirements set forth in § 3.7, improvements and bonding. 
3.4.2.  Where the site of a proposed subdivision is believed to include natural or manmade hazards or sensitive environmental features, the subdivision official may require a site assessment be prepared as part of the preliminary plat application. Site assessments shall be prepared and submitted with the preliminary plat application as follows: 
1.  A site assessment map shall be prepared at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet and shall include the approximate locations and indication of size and condition of all natural and manmade hazards and sensitive environmental features found within the site, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Geologic formations, soil classifications, colluvium, caves, sinkholes, landslides (active or inactive), and lineaments. 
b.  Springs, streams (perennial, intermittent and wet weather), wetlands, seeps and ground water recharge points. 
c.  Endangered or threatened species habitats as determined by the subdivision official from U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service documents. 
d.  Evidence of above or below ground mining or quarry operations. 
e.  Spoils and other dumping areas, fill and excavation areas. 
f.  Wells, above or below ground storage tanks. 
g.  Historic or archaeological features. 
2.  A written and illustrated report shall clearly describe: 
a.  Names and qualifications of those performing the site assessment. 
b.  Methods used in the site assessment. 
c.  Findings for all features, including, where appropriate, descriptive lists of features, illustrations and photographs. 
d.  Conclusions as to how the findings may impact development of the site. 
e.  Recommendations for mitigating hazards and sensitive environmental features. 
3.  Site assessment certification, as provided in [the] appendix. 
4.  Geotechnical investigation and testing plan. Where construction is proposed on lands or portions of land where colluvium, evidence of mine operations, dump sites, existing fill and excavation areas and similar hazards are present or when in the professional opinion of the geotechnical engineer of record, geotechnical testing should be performed, a geotechnical investigation and testing plan shall be prepared and submitted. 
3.4.3.  Clearing, grubbing, erosion control, and rough grading may be subject to permitting by the Alabama Department of Environmental Management or other agencies and, if performed prior to preliminary plat approval, shall be at the owner's risk and may require re-work. Installation of any permanent structures such as storm pipe, utility pipe, storm structures, etc., shall not be permitted without prior approval of the city. 
3.4.4.  Preliminary plat approval is revocable and is to be considered only as tentative approval of the design, with the understanding that the planning commission, the City Planner, utility providers, and health department will examine the grades of streets, the types of improvements, the layout of drainage and sewerage systems and the water system, and may modify any engineering or construction details submitted by the applicant when required for the protection of the public interest. 
3.4.5.  Upon approval of the preliminary plat, the applicant shall then submit an application for final plat approval in accordance with § 3.6, final plat approval.  
Sec. 3.5. - Preliminary plat approval. 
The planning commission review of the preliminary plat for major subdivisions shall be governed by the procedure set forth in section 11-52-31 and 32, Code of Alabama 1975 [Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-52-31 and 11-52-32], as amended. Prior to the cutting or grading of any street or the making of any street improvement or the installation of utilities, the applicant shall submit a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision in accordance with the following procedure: 
3.5.1.  Following pre-application review and/or sketch plan review, if applicable, the applicant shall submit to the subdivision official, at least 30 days prior to the next regular meeting of the planning commission, a preliminary plat application. The application shall include four print copies and an electronic version (in a format acceptable to the subdivision official) of the preliminary plat and other documents, as specified herein. The applicant shall consult with and request preliminary approval from all concerned utility providers and shall include documentation of such preliminary approval with the application. 
For multi-phase subdivisions, the preliminary plat shall include all proposed phases of [the] subdivision, which shall include a phasing plan. The phasing plan shall show the order of the phases and the requirements to be satisfied in each phase. The phasing plan must show that the degree and extent of streets, water supply, sewage disposal, stormwater management, and other required improvements must be sufficient to serve or handle all development within each phase, in the event that subsequent phases are abandoned or remain undeveloped for an extended period of time. After preliminary plat approval, an individual phase may be modified, if approved by the planning commission, at the time of final plat approval for that phase as provided in § 3.8, combined preliminary and final plat approval. 
3.5.2.  The subdivision official shall check the proposed plat for conformance with applicable city regulations. Incomplete applications shall be denied by the subdivision official, and the reasons for such denial shall be provided to the applicant. Following review of a completed application, the subdivision official shall report his findings and recommendations to the planning commission, which shall afford a public hearing on the preliminary plat. Notice of the hearing shall be provided by registered or certified mail to the applicant and owners of land adjoining the proposed subdivision at least five days in advance of the hearing. 
3.5.3.  Planning commission action. The planning commission shall approve, approve conditionally, or disapprove a preliminary plat within 30 days after the submission thereof at its regular meeting unless the applicant agrees to an extension of that time. If approved conditionally, the conditions and reasons therefor shall be stated, and if necessary, the planning commission may require the applicant to submit a revised preliminary plat. If any of the requirements are modified or waived, the reasons for such shall be specified. If the planning commission should disapprove the preliminary plat, the reasons for such action shall be stated and if possible, recommendations be made on the basis of which the proposed subdivision may be approved. One copy of the preliminary plat as acted upon by the planning commission shall be retained at city hall, one copy forwarded to the City Planner, and one copy returned to the applicant. The approval of the preliminary plat shall not be deemed final acceptance, but rather an expression of approval of the subdivision layout as proposed on the preliminary plat. 
3.5.4.  Time limit. Preliminary plat approval shall be null and void if the final plat is not approved by the planning commission within 12 months after the date of approval, unless application for an extension of time is made in writing during said period to the planning commission and granted. If the final plat is not submitted within this time limit, the preliminary plat must be resubmitted for approval as a new application. However, if a final plat of a part of the subdivision has been approved within said period, approval of the preliminary plat shall automatically be extended for 12 months from the date of final plat approval of that part of the subdivision, and the same automatic extension shall apply in subsequent cases of submission of a final plat of part of the subdivision. In such cases and at any time after the initial 12 months during which the preliminary plat approval is effective, the planning commission may notify the applicant of changes it may require to meet new or changed conditions. A corrected preliminary plat with all conditions fulfilled shall be submitted prior to the construction or installation of any improvements. 
3.5.5.  The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor or engineer and shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
1.  A vicinity map showing the location of the proposed subdivision and all existing and approved streets within 1,200 ft. of the perimeter of the proposed plat. 
2.  The name of the proposed subdivision or the words "re-subdivision of," as applicable. 
3.  The location of the subdivision by public land survey system legal description including sufficient description to clearly define the lands; and lot, block, subdivision name; parcel numbers and legal deed book and page of all portions that are part of [the] previously approved subdivision of legal record. 
4.  The name, address and deed book and page of record of the legal owner and the name and address of the agent(s) acting for the legal owner, if any. 
5.  The name, address and seal of the project land surveyor or engineer. 
6.  Date, north point, a graphic scale and the total amount of acreage in the subdivision. 
7.  The exact length (to the nearest hundredth of a foot) and bearing (to the nearest tenth of a second of arc) of the exterior boundaries of the proposed plat. 
8.  The location of existing platted property lines, streets, driveways, buildings, watercourses, railroads, sewers, bridges, culverts, drain pipes, water mains, and any public utility easements, both on the land subdivided and on the adjoining land. 
9.  The names of adjacent subdivisions and the names and addresses of owners of adjoining parcels of land as they appear on the current tax records, including deed book and page. 
10.  The names, locations, widths, and other dimensions of proposed streets, alleys, easements, parks and other open spaces, reservations, lot lines, and buildings. Dimensions, bearings and area in acres shall be provided for each lot and other land area. 
11.  Profiles of all streets showing natural and finished grades to a scale of not more than one inch equals 100 feet horizontal and one inch equals ten feet vertical when required by the planning commission, and such plans as may be specifically required under another section of these regulations. 
12.  Proposed plans or utility layouts (sewer, water, gas, electricity and street lights) showing connections to existing and proposed systems. 
13.  If the proposed subdivision does not lie within the jurisdiction of the zoning ordinance, the preliminary plat shall be accompanied by a plan which indicates the restrictions and proposed use of the lots. 
14.  Minimum building front, rear, and side yard setbacks. 
15.  The present and proposed (if applicable) zoning classification on the land to be subdivided and on adjoining properties. 
16.  Contour lines shown at five-foot intervals, except that where deemed necessary, the planning commission may require contour lines at two-foot intervals. 
17.  Drainage plan showing existing drainage conditions and proposed improvements and including engineering calculations on which the drainage design is based. 
18.  Street cross sections with right-of-way and pavement widths. 
19.  Approximate radii, central angles, arc distances, chord lengths and points of tangency of all curves. 
20.  The boundaries of any regulatory floodplain on the site with FIRM panel number and effective date. If the property is overlaid by a special flood hazard district A (unstudied), the applicant shall conduct a flood study delineating a floodway and base flood elevations. Minimum finished floor elevations shall be provided for all lots located within a 100-year floodplain 
21.  Lot numbers and block letters. 
22.  Inscription stating "NOT FOR FINAL RECORDING." 
23.  Certificates. The following certificates and any additional endorsements as may be required (refer to samples provided in the appendix): 
a.  If the proposed subdivision will not be served by municipal sewer facilities, a certificate from the state and/or county health department indicating their approval 
b.  Certificate of approval from the electric, water, gas, and sanitary sewer providers, and any other interested city, county or state departments 
c.  Certificates of approval shall be inscribed on the plat, (refer to samples provided in the appendix), which shall be signed by the planning commission chairperson, subdivision official, City Planner and others as may be required. 
3.5.6.  One copy of the preliminary plat shall be retained in the planning commission files.  
Sec. 3.6. - Final plat approval. 
3.6.1.  Following preliminary plat approval of a major subdivision, the subdivider shall submit to the subdivision official an application requesting review and approval of a final plat of the proposed subdivision. The request for final plat approval shall be submitted within one year of preliminary plat approval and 30 days prior to the next regular meeting of the planning commission. The final plat shall consist of the original plat and five printed copies with signed certifications, one copy of the final plat in reproducible form and any other documents specified herein. Submission of electronic copies of the proposed final plat in CAD, PDF or similar formats is encouraged as well. 
3.6.2.  The subdivision official shall review the plat for conformance with the approved preliminary plat and these regulations and report his findings and recommendations to the planning commission. The planning commission shall afford a public hearing on the final plat notice of the time and place shall be sent by registered or certified mail to the applicant, not less than five days prior to the date of the hearing. 
3.6.3.  Improvements. Prior to the approval of the final plat, an agreement shall be reached between the applicant and the city with regard to the installation of any street improvements or utility construction called for on the subdivision plat. The applicant shall be required to have installed at his expense the improvements specified in article 5, Improvements standards, except as otherwise approved in accordance with § 3.7, improvements and bonding. 
3.6.4.  Planning commission action. The planning commission shall approve or disapprove of the final plat within 30 days after the date of submission unless the applicant agrees to an extension of that time. If the final plat is disapproved, the grounds for disapproval shall be stated in the records of the planning commission. The action of the planning commission shall be shown on the final plat with the date of action shown over the signature of the person authorized by the planning commission to sign such plats. 
Final plat approval carries with it the condition that the planning commission must be notified in writing by the subdivision official that either: (1) all required improvements have been satisfactorily installed and completed by the applicant, or (2) a bond has been posted to secure the same, before such final plat is signed as approved by the planning commission and before any public ways or lands are accepted by the city. 
3.6.5.  Time limit. Final plat approval shall be null and void if the plat is not recorded in the office of the probate judge within 60 days after the date of approval, unless application for an extension of time is made in writing during said period to the planning commission and granted. 
3.6.6.  Final plat specifications. The final plat shall conform to and meet the specifications of the preliminary plat with the following additions, which shall be sufficient to readily determine and reproduce on the ground the location, bearing and length of every street line, lot line, boundary line, block line, easement line and building setback line whether straight or curved. Curves shall be described by radius, central angle, point of tangency, tangent distance, arc and chord: 
1.  Bearings and distances to the nearest existing street lines or benchmarks or other permanent monuments (not less than three shall be accurately described on the plat). 
2.  Exact boundary lines of the tract, determined by a survey, giving distances to the nearest second, which shall be balanced and closed with an error closure not to exceed one to 10,000. 
3.  Exact location, widths and names of all streets and alleys, including those within adjoining tracts. 
4.  Street centerlines showing angles of deflection, angles of intersection, radii, and lengths of tangents. 
5.  Lot lines with dimensions, to the nearest 1/100 of a foot, and bearings. 
6.  Lots numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically. 
7.  Locations, dimensions and purposes of easements and any areas to be reserved or dedicated for common or public use. 
8.  Accurate location, material and description of existing and proposed monuments and markers. 
9.  A statement, either directly on the plat or in an identified attached document, concerning any private covenants. 
10.  If any portion of the land being subdivided is subject to flooding, as defined in the flood damage prevention ordinance, the limit of such area(s) and minimum finished floor elevations for all lots within a 100-year floodplain. 
11.  Any modifications, limitations and approval by the health department. 
12.  Certificates. The following endorsements, certificates and dedications shall be placed on the final plat: 
a.  Certification of title showing that applicant is the landowner. 
b.  Certificate of land surveyor and description of plat. 
c.  Mortgage holder's certificate. 
d.  Where a street or alley has been vacated, a note shall be shown on the plat indicating such and referring to the recorded instruments of vacation by deed book and page number. 
e.  Notary's acknowledgment of dedication certificates, surveyor's certificate and mortgage holder's certificate. 
f.  Certification from project engineer that all public improvements, including streets and drainage improvements, have been designed in accordance with these and all other applicable regulations and have been constructed in accordance with the approved plans. 
g.  Certificate of approval by the planning commission. 
h.  Certificates of approval by the City Planner and streets superintendent. 
i.  Certificate for utility providers. 
j.  Certificate of approval for recording by probate judge. 
k.  Certificate of dedication, indicating whether there is a dedication of property for public purposes or not. 
l.  Where an improvement bond is posted, a certificate of bond approval signed by the City Planner and city clerk. 
3.6.7.  As-built engineering plan. At the time of final plat approval, if applicable, the applicant shall also submit an as-built engineering plan, along with copies of all required permits, inspections and test data (including compaction test data for subgrade, base and core thickness), giving details of construction and locations of the improvements which have been installed. The as-built engineering plan provides the city with a record of the location, size, and design of streets, drainage facilities, utilities and other improvements for the city's use in the course of maintaining such improvements. Said as-built plan shall be presented in an electronic file format acceptable to the subdivision official and a paper hard copy. If the installation of improvements is completed under an improvement bond, the plan shall be submitted to the city upon request of release of the improvement bond by the applicant and/or the developer's request for city acceptance of the improvements. No improvements shall be accepted for city maintenance until all such materials have been received. 
3.6.8.  Recording of final plat. Planning commission approval of the final plat shall be null and void if the final plat is not recorded in the office of the probate judge within 60 days after approval, unless a request for extension is made in writing and is granted by the planning commission during said period. No lot in the subdivision shall be sold prior to recording of the final plat with the probate judge. Five copies of the final plat as recorded with the probate judge and a copy of any protective covenants or deed restrictions shall be provided by the applicant to the city for the records of the planning commission. An electronic copy of the final plat, covenants and deed restrictions, in a format acceptable to the subdivision official, shall also be provided.  
Sec. 3.7. - Improvements and bonding. 
3.7.1.  Improvements. No final plat shall be approved by the planning commission or accepted for recording by the probate judge until one of the following conditions has been met and certified by the city clerk: 
1.  All required improvements have been constructed or installed in a manner satisfactory to the appropriate department and approved by the planning commission; or 
2.  The planning commission has accepted an improvement bond in the form of a cashier's check, or irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or lending institution, or an escrow account with the City of Opp in accordance with the following: 
a.  The bond method shall be approved by the city attorney and city council. 
b.  The applicant and any guarantor(s) shall be severally and jointly liable for completing the improvements according to specifications. 
c.  The request to post an improvements bond shall be made in writing at least 30 days prior to the planning commission meeting at which the final plat is to be considered. 
d.  Improvement bonds shall be equal to 125 percent of the estimated cost of the installation of the required improvements. 
e.  A schedule of estimated costs for all items to be bonded shall be submitted by the project engineer for review by the City Planner. This schedule shall clearly describe the items, quantities, unit cost and total cost of the remaining improvements. 
f.  Bonds shall be retained by the city clerk until the council accepts dedication of the improvements and maintenance bonds have been filed. 
g.  All improvement bonds required to be posted must be posted and accepted within 30 days after the date of final plat approval or the final plat shall automatically be voided. 
3.7.2.  Completion and acceptance of improvements. 
1.  Upon completion of required improvements, the City Planner and utilities providers shall file with the planning commission a statement either certifying that the improvements have been completed in the specific manner or listing the defects in those improvements. 
2.  Upon completion of the improvements, the applicant shall file with the planning commission a statement stipulating the following: 
a.  That all required improvements are complete. 
b.  That the improvements are in compliance with the standards specified for their construction. 
c.  That the applicant knows of no defects from any cause in those improvements. 
d.  That the improvements are free and clear of any encumbrances or liens. 
3.  If the project engineer has certified that the contracted improvements are complete and free from defect, and said improvements have passed inspection, then upon receipt of the other statements and agreements detailed above, the city shall accept the dedication of those improvements. The city may, at its discretion, accept the dedication of any portion of the improvements, provided that all statements and agreements specified above have been received for that portion of the improvements. Improvements to be dedicated to the Opp Utilities shall be accepted by the board according to its rules. In no instance, however, shall the city accept improvements within any subdivision or part thereof until after water and sanitary sewer improvements have been accepted by said board. 
4.  Failure to be accepted. If any portion of required improvements fails to be accepted for dedication within the allocated time period, either for reason of incompletion or for reason of substandard construction, then the planning commission shall take the following action: 
Where improvements have been guaranteed, the planning commission shall declare whatever bond has been pledged to be forfeit. Where the planning commission is not already in possession of said bond, it shall immediately take the actions necessary to obtain it. Upon receipt, the planning commission shall use them, or receipts from their sale if necessary, to finance the completion of contracted improvements or the rebuilding of such improvements to the proper specifications. Unused portions of these securities shall be returned to the applicant, bonding company, or crediting institution, as appropriate. 
3.7.3.  Maintenance bond. In the event the subdivider has constructed all of the required improvements and no improvement agreement is required, the subdivider shall execute a maintenance agreement. Such agreement shall be on a form furnished by the planning commission and shall warrant all materials and workmanship on the requirements and shall provide for maintenance on the requirements for a period of one year after the acceptance of such improvements by the city, provided that for major streets and subdivision entrance streets, a longer period may be required by the planning commission. 
A bond shall be required to ensure the fulfillment of such agreement and shall be in the form provided by the planning commission. Such maintenance bond shall be in an amount of $5,000.00 or 25 percent of the total cost of all improvements, whichever is greater. A schedule of costs for all items to be bonded shall be submitted by the project engineer for review and approval by the subdivision official. This schedule shall clearly describe the items, quantities, unit cost and total cost of the required improvements.  
Sec. 3.8. - Combined preliminary and final plat approval. 
An applicant may submit a combined request for both preliminary plat and final plat approval. In such cases all requirements for both preliminary and final plat approval shall be met.  
Sec. 3.9. - Site plan approval. 
3.9.1.  Whenever any multifamily or nonresidential development or change or expansion of such uses of a site is proposed or whenever any changes are proposed that differ from an existing approved site plan before any construction, land clearing, building development or change in use is begun and before any building permit or authorization for development on such site shall be granted, the property owner or his authorized agent shall apply for and secure from the planning commission site plan approval in accordance with the procedures outlined herein. 
1.  The following shall require site plan approval (Where there is any doubt as to whether or not site plan review is required, the affected party should request a determination from the subdivision official.): 
a.  New construction of nonresidential or multifamily development. 
b.  Any change of an existing use to multifamily or nonresidential. 
c.  A development proposal involving external modifications or construction, including parking lots (except for single-family or duplex residential). 
d.  A development proposal involving expansion of a building or intensification of multifamily or nonresidential uses that would result in a change in traffic volume or patterns in the area, noise, parking, lighting, etc. 
e.  A development involving a property that has never received site plan approval for previous nonresidential or multifamily use. 
2.  The following shall not require site plan approval: 
a.  Single-family and duplex residential developments. 
b.  Proposals that involve no change in use or level of activity. 
c.  Internal building modifications that do not affect the scale or impact of the existing use. 
d.  Re-use of a premises with an approved site plan, provided the new use is not different in type or impact. 
3.9.2.  Procedure, planning commission action. 
1.  The subdivision official shall review the plan for conformance with applicable regulations and report his findings and recommendations to the planning commission. 
2.  The planning commission shall approve or disapprove of the site plan within 30 days after the date of submission unless the applicant agrees to an extension of that time. If the site plan is disapproved, the grounds for disapproval shall be stated in the records of the planning commission. The action of the planning commission shall be shown on the approved site plan with the date of action shown over the signature of the person authorized by the planning commission to sign such plans. 
3.  Site plan approval shall become null and void if within one year from the date of approval, a building permit has not been applied for, unless a request for extension is made in writing and is granted by the planning commission during said period. 
3.9.3.  Clearing, grubbing, erosion control, and rough grading may be subject to permitting by the Alabama Department of Environmental Management or other agencies and, if performed prior to site plan approval, shall be at the owner's risk and may require re-work. Installation of any permanent structures such as storm pipe, utility pipe, storm structures, etc., shall not be permitted without prior approval of the city. 
3.9.4.  Submittal requirements. A site plan application shall contain the following, at a minimum: 
1.  The name, address and deed book and page of record of the legal owner and the name and address of the authorized agent, if any. 
2.  The name, address and seal of the project land surveyor, engineer, or other designer as applicable. 
3.  Names and addresses of all owners of abutting property as they appear on current tax records. 
4.  Names and addresses of all holders of restrictions and easements on the property. 
5.  A vicinity map showing the location of the development and all existing and proposed streets within 1,200 ft. of the perimeter of the development site. 
6.  Date, north point, a graphic scale and the area of the premises in square feet and acres. 
7.  Locations of property lines, streets, driveways, sidewalks, buildings, watercourses, railroads, sewers, bridges, culverts, drain pipes, and water mains on the site and on abutting property. 
8.  The names, locations, widths, and other dimensions of proposed drives, lot lines, buildings and other improvements. 
9.  Location, dimensions, and design of garbage collection areas. 
10.  Grading plan including existing and proposed contour lines shown at one ft. intervals, unless otherwise permitted by the subdivision official. 
11.  Drainage plan showing existing drainage conditions and proposed improvements and including engineering calculations on which the drainage design is based. 
12.  Identification of all accesses to the site, sight distance at access points, dimensions of curb cuts and distances from intersections and driveways on adjacent properties. 
13.  Proposed utility layouts. 
14.  If not to be served by municipal sewer facilities, a certificate or letter from the state and/or county health department indicating their approval 
15.  Certificate of approval from the electric, water, gas, and sanitary sewer providers, and any other interested city, county or state departments. 
16.  All existing and proposed easements, deed restrictions, and reservations on the site. 
17.  Minimum building front, rear, and side yard setbacks. 
18.  The zoning classification of the site and on abutting properties. 
19.  Location and total number of parking and loading spaces. 
20.  A landscape plan, describing the number, location, types and size of all landscape elements, buffers and screening. 
21.  The location, type and nature of all exterior lighting and signage. 
22.  Base flood elevations and flood hazard areas, based on available FEMA maps. 
For multi-phase developments, grading, drainage and similar plans for each phase may be required by the subdivision official for review and approval by the planning commission.  
ARTICLE 4. - SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS 
All proposed subdivisions shall conform to all applicable state and local regulations, including the zoning ordinance where in effect. The design standards of this article shall be the minimum standards allowable for development. Standards above the minimum may be required by the planning commission or the subdivision official. Detailed construction specifications and engineering requirements may be obtained from the subdivision official. Prior to the planning commission's consideration of any request for a variance, modification, or waiver of the requirements of this article, the subdivision official shall provide its recommendation to the planning commission regarding such request. 
 
Sec. 4.1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of good subdivision and site design is to ensure functional and attractive developments, to minimize adverse impacts, and make projects assets to the community. To promote this purpose, the subdivision and/or site plan shall conform to the following standards, which are designed to result in a well-planned community without adding unnecessarily to development costs.  
Sec. 4.2. - General subdivision design standards. 
4.2.1.  Site analysis. An analysis shall be made of characteristics of the proposed site, such as site context; geology and soil; topography; existing vegetation; structures and street networks; visual features; and use of the site. Development of the site shall be based on the site analysis. To the maximum extent practicable, development shall be located so as to preserve the natural features of the site, to avoid or protect areas of environmental sensitivity, and to minimize negative impacts and alteration of natural features. 
4.2.2.  Suitability of the land. The planning commission may not approve the subdivision of land, if from adequate investigation conducted by all public agencies concerned, it has been determined that in the best interest of public health, safety and welfare, the site is not suitable for platting and development as proposed. However, an applicant may nonetheless propose a new plat with a different layout, change in use or intensity, or other change in response to the issues raised by the applicable public agencies during review of a previous plat proposal. 
4.2.3.  Stormwater drainage design. The rate of stormwater runoff from any development resulting from the 25-year rainfall occurring within the space of one hour shall not exceed the predevelopment stormwater runoff rate for a 25-year rainfall occurring within the space of one hour. 
4.2.4.  Development in flood zones. The development of land, subject to flooding, shall be done in accordance with the flood damage prevention ordinance and the applicable regulations of the national flood insurance program (NFIP). Development in a designated floodway is prohibited unless certification by the project engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
4.2.5.  Conformity with other plans and regulations. Design of the development shall take into consideration all existing local and regional plans and shall conform to the zoning ordinance where in effect. 
1.  No final plat of land within the force and effect of the zoning ordinance shall be approved unless the building restrictions to be established conform to the applicable regulations of the zoning ordinance. 
2.  Public uses. If public sites are shown in the comprehensive plan to be set aside or if such sites are recommended as essential by the planning commission or city council, such sites shall be reserved for such purpose for a period of two years from the date the subdivision is recorded. If at the end of two years the city has not taken action to acquire the property, the applicant may request a hearing before the planning commission to waive the reservation or to otherwise determine the fate of said site. 
4.2.6.  Preservation areas. The following specific areas should be preserved as undeveloped open space, to the extent consistent with the reasonable use of the land and in accordance with applicable state or local regulations: 
1.  Significant trees or stands of trees; 
2.  Lands in the flood plain, as defined and or depicted on the flood maps provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, and as outlined in the flood damage prevention ordinance. 
3.  Steep slopes in excess of 20 percent as measured over a ten-foot interval unless appropriate engineering measures concerning slope stability, erosion, and resident safety are taken. 
4.  Habitats of endangered wildlife. 
5.  Historically significant structures and sites, as listed on federal, state or local registers of historic places. 
4.2.7.  The development shall be laid out to avoid adversely affecting ground water; to reduce cutting and filling; to avoid unnecessary impervious cover; to prevent flooding; to provide adequate access to lots and sites; and mitigate adverse effects of noise, odor, traffic, drainage, and utilities on neighboring properties. 
4.2.8.  The street, parcel and block pattern of all proposed developments shall be adapted appropriately to the uses anticipated. 
4.2.9.  Where applicable, a proposed phasing plan shall provide for continuity of development through phases of reasonable proportions. 
4.2.10.  Lot and block size, shape and orientation shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision, its environmental systems and for the type of development anticipated. 
4.2.11.  When land is subdivided into parcels larger than ordinary building lots, such parcels should be arranged and designed so as to allow for future resubdivision and extension of future streets. 
4.2.12.  The proposed street layout shall be appropriate for the type of development proposed and appropriately integrated with the surrounding street system. 
4.2.13.  The proposed street layout shall conform substantially to a development pattern for the subject and surrounding area that will be in accord with the comprehensive plan, as interpreted by the planning commission. 
4.2.14.  Where community or public facilities, existing or as proposed in the comprehensive plan, are to be located in whole or in part in a proposed subdivision or development, such area(s) necessary to accommodate these facilities shall be reserved.  
Sec. 4.3. - Residential subdivision design standards. 
4.3.1.  All residential lots shall abut a public street unless otherwise permitted for planned developments in accordance with the zoning ordinance. 
4.3.2.  Every lot shall have sufficient access to it for emergency vehicles, as required by the adopted fire code. 
4.3.3.  The placement of dwelling units shall take into consideration topography, privacy, building height, orientation, drainage, and aesthetics. 
4.3.4.  Buildings shall be spaced so that adequate privacy is provided for units. 
For the purposes of applying subdivision standards in a manner that is sensitive to the type of development proposed, residential subdivisions are hereby classified as: low density (R-1 zoning or minimum average lot size of 15,000 sf.); medium density (R-2 zoning or a minimum average lot size between 10,500 and 15,000 sf.) and high density (all other residential zoning classifications or any multifamily or townhouse development or single-family lots less than 10,500 sf.).  
Sec. 4.4. - Nonresidential subdivision design standards. 
Except as otherwise specified, all commercial and industrial subdivisions shall be subject to all design standards in this article 4 and shall be designed according to the same principles governing the design of residential developments; namely, that buildings and streets shall be located according to topography, with environmentally sensitive areas avoided to the maximum extent practicable; factors such as drainage, noise, odor, and surrounding land uses shall be considered in citing buildings; sufficient access shall be provided; and adverse impacts buffered or otherwise mitigated. 
Following subdivision of the land, nonresidential developments shall also be reviewed in accordance with § 3.9, site plan approval, and the site design standards in article 6 to ensure that the subdivision will accommodate the requirements of the uses contemplated and the requirements of the zoning ordinance.  
Sec. 4.5. - Circulation system design. 
The street system shall be designed to permit the safe, efficient, and orderly movement of traffic; to meet the needs of the present and future population served; to have a simple and logical pattern; to respect natural features and topography; and to present an attractive streetscape. 
4.5.1.  Streets. 
1.  Whenever land to be subdivided embraces any part of a highway or street so designated on any county or regional plan, such part of the proposed public way shall be platted by the same width as indicated on the county or regional plan. 
2.  All streets shall be platted along contour elevations, which will result in minimum grades and greater visibility wherever practical, with consideration given to the anticipated use of the land. 
3.  The proposed street layout shall be made according to good land planning practices for the type development proposed and shall be coordinated with the street systems of the surrounding areas. 
4.  Proposed new streets shall extend existing streets or their projections at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the minimum required width. 
5.  To ensure proper circulation and emergency response, all residential subdivisions containing 50 or more lots shall have a minimum of two access points on external streets. 
6.  To ensure future street connections where a proposed development abuts unplatted land or a future development phase of the same development, street stubs shall be provided for access to abutting properties or to logically extend the street system as determined by the planning commission. 
a.  All street stubs shall be provided with temporary turnarounds except where the street stub is 200 feet or less in length. The area necessary for the temporary turnaround outside the normal right-of-way shall be contained within a temporary easement, which shall automatically dissolve when the street is extended and approved by the city. The length of the turnaround shall be in accordance with § 4.5.4.4, dead end streets. 
b.  Street improvements shall extend to within five ft. of the boundary of the property. Rights-of-way shall extend to the boundary. 
c.  Paving and utilities shall be extended far enough to serve the developing lots and, unless approved otherwise by the City Planner, shall be extended the same distance. 
d.  The restoration and extension of the street shall be the responsibility of the future developer of the abutting land. 
The planning commission may waive this provision if in their determination, there is no feasible way to continue the street in the foreseeable future. 
4.5.2.  The platting of any land, the purpose of which is to deny access to rights-of-way, is prohibited, except as otherwise provided herein. There shall be no reserve strips controlling access to streets, except where the control of such strips is specifically placed with the city and under conditions approved by the planning commission. 
4.5.3.  Private streets. There shall be no private streets platted in any subdivision. 
4.5.4.  Street design requirements. Minimum street right-of-way, pavement width, and cross section elements shall be as provided in table 4-1 and as illustrated in figure 4.1. All streets shall include curb and gutter. 
1.  Additional widths on half streets. Subdivisions that adjoin existing half streets shall dedicate additional right-of-way to meet the minimum street width requirements. The entire right-of-way shall be dedicated where any part of the subdivision is on both sides of the half street; and where the subdivision is located on only one side of a half street, the amount of right-of-way to be dedicated is as follows: 
a.  If the land across the roadway from the proposed subdivision has not been subdivided or developed, the subdivider is only required to dedicate one-half of the required right-of-way, measured from the center line of the existing roadway. 
b.  If the land across the roadway has been subdivided or developed, the subdivider is required to provide enough additional right-of-way on his side of the roadway to bring the total right-of-way to the required width. 
2.  Topographic conditions and street grades. In general, streets shall be planned to conform to existing topographic conditions. Unless a steeper grade is approved by the Fire marshal, maximum street grades shall be: six percent on arterials and ten percent on collectors, local streets and alleys, with no grades exceeding the maximum for any length of street. Grades of dead-end streets shall not exceed five percent for the cul-de-sac bulb or hammerhead. To allow for proper drainage, no tangent street grade shall be less than one percent. 
3.  Street intersections. Insofar as practical, acute angles at street intersections shall be avoided. Where an acute angle of less than 75 degrees occurs between streets at their intersections, the planning commission may require the property lines to be rounded or otherwise setback to permit curb construction of desirable radius without curtailing the sidewalk at the street corner to less than normal width. Submission of a grading plan showing existing and proposed contours at intervals of one foot and a detailed design for the intersection may be required by the subdivision official. 
4.  Dead end streets. Streets designed to have one end permanently closed (cul-de-sac) shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround with a minimum right-of-way radius of 50 feet, and a minimum driving surface radius of 40 feet. The maximum permitted length of a cul-de-sac is 600 feet. 
5.  Medians. Medians, where provided, shall have a minimum width of five ft. to allow for planting. 
6.  On-street parking. Lanes for on-street parking shall be provided on streets as required or as approved by the planning commission in accordance with the requirements in table 4-1 and the following: 
a.  Generally, on-street parking is appropriate along local streets serving nonresidential, mixed-use, and high density residential uses. 
b.  Parking lane width shall be measured from the face of curb. 
7.  Planting strips. Planting strips shall be provided between the curb and sidewalk, or in the absence of sidewalk, between the curb and right-of-way line. Along residential streets, the planting strip shall be grassed or otherwise vegetative. Along nonresidential streets, the planting strip may include regularly spaced street tree wells and an extension of the sidewalk to the curb. On nonresidential streets with minimal pedestrian traffic expected, the planning commission may approve a continuous grassed or vegetative planting strip between the curb and sidewalk. 
8.  Street elevations. The planning commission may require, where necessary, profiles and elevations of streets in areas subject to flood, as defined in these regulations and the flood damage prevention ordinance and as identified on the flood maps provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). Fill may be used, except within identified floodways, where such fill does not increase flood heights. 
4.5.5.  Street names. Proposed street names shall be subject to approval of the planning commission. Proposed streets obviously in alignment with existing and named streets shall bear the names of the existing streets. In no case shall the name for the proposed streets duplicate existing street names. 
4.5.6.  Horizontal curvature. The minimum radii of centerline curvature shall be as provided in table 4-2 and as necessary to meet the applicable minimum sight distance. See also figure 4.2. Between reverse curves there shall be a tangent having a length of not less than 100 feet. 
4.5.7.  Vertical alignment. Vertical alignment shall be such that the minimum stopping and intersection sight distances in table 4-2 are met. Stopping sight distance shall be determined using a height of eye of 3.5 feet and two feet object height. The intersection sight distance shall be determined using a height of eye of 3.5 feet and 4.25 feet object height. See also figure 4.2. 
Table 4-1. Street Design Standards 
Specifications are based on two-lane road sections. The planning commission, upon a recommendation by the city planner, may require a median, turn lanes, acceleration and deceleration lanes, or additional travel lanes where trips generated by anticipated uses or where city, county, or regional plans require increased design improvements (see also figure 4.1). 
Street Type 	Residential Local 	Residential Collector 
Posted Speed 	15-25 	25-35 
Design Speed 	20-30 mph 	30-40 mph 
Drainage Facility Width/Type 	18 inches; curb/gutter 	18 inches; curb/gutter 
Min. Planting Strip 	4 ft. both sides 	4 ft. both sides 
Parking Lane Width 1 	7 ft. 	7 ft. 
Actual Curb Radius 	15-18 ft. 	20-24 ft. 
Effective Turning Radius 2 	20-24 ft. 	20-24 ft. 
Travel way Width 3 	26 ft. 	26 ft. 
Min. ROW 4 	50 ft. 	60 ft. 
Travel Lane Width 5 	10-12 ft. 	11-12 ft. 
 
1 On-street parking, where required or approved by the planning commission, shall be parallel and may be placed on one or both sides as determined by the planning commission. 
2 Effective turning radius is determined by adding the width of an adjacent parking lane, if present, to the corner curb radius. Where a bulb-out is provided, the effective turning radius is the radius of the bulb-out. 
3 Travel way width is measured from face-of-curb to face-of-curb. Widths shown do not include on-street parking. Where on-street parking, medians or additional travel lanes (including turn, acceleration, and deceleration lanes) are approved or required by the planning commission, travel way widths shall be calculated based on the minimum requirements for each cross section element to be included. 
4 Additional ROW width may be required when parking lanes, medians, or additional travel lanes (including turn, acceleration or deceleration lanes) are included, or when other design elements require a greater width. 
5 Lane widths shall be within the range specified, except that lanes of up to 13 ft. on local streets and 14 ft. on collectors may be required in areas of steeper topography where horizontal curves are more frequent. This may require additional right-of-way width. Lane striping is not required on local residential streets but may be required by the City Planner on residential collectors and for any street segment with more than two lanes. 
Street Type 	Mixed-Use or Nonresidential Local 	Mixed-Use or Nonresidential Collector 	Frontage Road 	Industrial Access Road 
Posted Speed 	20—25 mph 	25—35 mph 	20—35 mph 	20—30 mph 
Design Speed 	25—30 mph 	30—40 mph 	25—40 mph 	25—35 mph 
Curb Width/Type 	18 inches; curb/gutter 	18 inches; curb/gutter 	18 inches; curb/gutter 	18 inches; curb/gutter 
Min. Planting Strip 	4 ft.; both sides 	4 ft.; both sides 	4 ft.; developed side 	4 ft.; developed side 
Parking Lane Width 1 	7 ft. 	7 ft. 	n/a 	n/a 
Actual Curb Radius 	12—15 ft. 	15—18 ft. 	18—21 ft. 	25—30 ft. 
Effective Turning Radius 2 	19—22 ft. 	22—25 ft. 	25—28 ft. 	25—30 ft. 
Min. Travel Way 3 	26 ft. 	26 ft. 	26 ft. 	30 ft. 
Min. ROW 4 	50 ft. 	60 ft. 	50 ft. 	60 ft. 
Travel Lane Width 5 	10—12 ft. 	11—12 ft. 	11—12 ft. 	11—13 ft. 
 
1 On-street parking, where required or approved by the planning commission, shall be parallel and may be placed on one or both sides. Angled parking may be permitted by the planning commission on mixed-use and nonresidential streets. In such cases, minimum parking lane width shall be 18 ft. and the travel way and ROW widths increased accordingly. 
2 Effective turning radius is determined by adding the width of an adjacent parking lane, if present, to the corner curb radius. Where a bulb-out is provided, the effective turning radius is the radius of the bulb-out. 
3 Travel way width is measured from face-of-curb to face-of-curb. Widths shown do not include on-street parking. Where on-street parking, medians or additional travel lanes (including turn, acceleration, and deceleration lanes) are approved or required by the planning commission, travel way widths shall be calculated based on the minimum requirements for each cross section element to be included. 
4 Additional ROW width may be required when parking lanes, medians, or additional travel lanes (including turn, acceleration or deceleration lanes) are included, or when other design elements require a greater width. 
5 Lane widths shall be within the range specified, except that lanes of up to 13 ft. on local streets and 14 ft. on collectors may be required in areas of steeper topography where horizontal curves are more frequent. This may require additional right-of-way width. 
Table 4-2. Sight Distance and Street Curvature 
Street Design Speed (mph) 	Minimum centerline radius (ft.) 	Stopping Sight Distance (ft.) 	Intersection Sight Distance (ft.) 
20 	125 	115 	225 
25 	150 	155 	280 
30 	275 	200 	335 
35 	300 	250 	390 
40 	500 	305 	445 
45 	650 	360 	500 
50 	820 	425 	555 
 
Distances are intended as a minimum guideline. Site conditions, such as grades, traffic volumes, additional lanes, signalization types, etc., may warrant increases in desired sight distances. 
 
4.5.8.  Alleys. The planning commission may, at its discretion, require that alleys be provided for any or a combination of the following: alternative access to lots, placement of and access to aboveground utilities, garbage collection, loading and unloading, and mail service. Where alleys are to be provided, they shall be designed in accordance with the requirements in table 4-3 and paved as required by the City Planner. Where an alley is designated as a fire apparatus access road by the fire marshal, the minimum pavement width shall be 20 ft. 
Table 4-3. Alley Requirements 
	Min. ROW Width 	Min. Pavement Width 	Curb Radius at Street 
			Local 	Collector 
Single-family 	20 ft. 	12 ft. 	10—13 ft. 	13—16 ft. 
Multifamily and Nonresidential 	24 ft. 	20 ft. 	10—13 ft. 	13—16 ft. 
 
4.5.9.  Roadside drainage facilities. Roadside drainage facilities shall be used as needed to channel stormwater runoff away from private property and away from streets. The type of drainage facility shall be as required in table 4-1. 
1.  The planning commission may approve the use of "bioswales" as an alternative to conventional drainage techniques in accordance with § 4.10, experimental subdivisions. 
2.  Owing to unique topographic and soil characteristics, roadside drainage improvements may not be required for stormwater runoff in some medium and low density residential developments. In such cases the planning commission may modify these requirements upon a recommendation by the City Planner.  
Sec. 4.6. - Access management. 
The purposes of this section are to promote the overall safety of motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians; to reduce interference with through traffic by other vehicles entering, leaving, and crossing streets; to ensure safe access to and from streets by emergency vehicles; and to preserve the traffic capacity of streets. 
4.6.1.  General conditions and requirements. The location and design of vehicular accesses from arterial, collector, and local streets proposed with a subdivision shall be specified in an access plan submitted to the subdivision official for review and recommendation to the planning commission for action. No curbs or rights-of-way shall be cut, paved, or otherwise altered until a permit for the access has been secured from the city and/or any other governmental agency owning or controlling the street right-of-way. 
 
4.6.2.  Approval for specific use. Accesses existing as of the effective date of these standards are approved for the existing use only. Accesses approved under these standards shall be approved for the use specified in the access plan. Changes in use that would increase traffic or change the types of vehicles accessing the site shall require a new approval of access. When a site existing at the time of these standards is redeveloped so as to create a significant increase in trip generation, the existing driveways shall be brought into conformity with these requirements. 
4.6.3.  Expiration of approval. Access plans, including related off-site street improvements, shall be constructed within two years of approval, or the approval shall terminate. 
4.6.4.  Prohibition of unsafe access. Notwithstanding any other provisions of these standards, an access, which demonstrates a potential threat or danger to the public and/or which could affect the safe, efficient flow of traffic, may be denied, based on commonly accepted and applied traffic engineering principles. 
4.6.5.  Access plan. The access plan shall be submitted as part of the preliminary plat or site plan. 
4.6.6.  Traffic impact study. The subdivision official may require a traffic impact study by an engineer, using the standard format specified by the latest edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) publication Traffic Access and Impact Studies for Site Development to assess the traffic impacts of a proposed access to adjacent and nearby streets and intersections when the expected number of trips generated by the proposed use exceeds an estimated 1,000 vehicle trips per day or 100 peak hour vehicle trips per day. In addition, the subdivision official may require a traffic impact study for sites that generate less than 1,000 vehicle trips per day, or 100 peak hour vehicle trips per day, if the sites are located at or near high-volume intersections or other locations where the use may constitute a threat or danger to the safe and efficient flow of traffic. The subdivision official may waive this provision if a recent, valid traffic study has been completed from which needed traffic data can be extrapolated. 
Unless otherwise specified by the subdivision official, the study shall address trip generation and directional distribution, traffic assignment to streets and access locations, 24-hour and a.m. and p.m. peak hour traffic forecasting (on-site and off-site), capacity analysis and level of service for adjacent streets and nearby intersections before and after the proposed full development, and recommendations for street improvements and traffic control installation and/or modifications to existing signals. The traffic data used in the study shall be consistent with the use and density data as referenced in the latest edition of trip generation, published by ITE; current city and state traffic counts for surrounding streets; and the marketing study for the proposed use. 
4.6.7.  Guidelines. For all developments, redevelopments, and changes in use, the City Planner shall provide a recommendation to the planning commission regarding requests for access: 
1.  Access to a corner lot should be permitted only from the street of lesser classification or lower average daily traffic, except as otherwise specified herein. Where the classification of both streets is the same, access may be provided along either or both subject to table 4-4. 
2.  Access to streets shall be provided to lots by means of shared access (alleys or shared driveways), frontage roads, or direct access (non-shared driveways). The number and location of access points shall be in accordance with table 4-4 and measured as shown in figure 4.5. 
3.  Frontage roads shall normally only be required along major arterials and only when they can be designed properly to provide safe and efficient access for properties. 
4.  Single-family and duplex lots: 
a.  Should not front on nor have direct access from a major arterial; 
b.  May have frontage along minor arterials though access should generally be from a local street, frontage road or alley; 
c.  May have frontage and access along a collector subject to table 4-4. 
5.  For local streets, minimum separation distance may be reduced, provided that, if approved by the City Planner, the following conditions exist, based on commonly accepted and applied traffic engineering principles: 
a.  Shared access is not possible; 
b.  Exceptional topographic or site conditions exist at the driveway location (such as in-place utility or drainage features) which would make strict application of the standard exceptionally and/or practically difficult or unduly harsh; 
c.  Application of these requirements would conflict with other provisions of these regulations; and 
d.  The reduction would not constitute a threat or danger to the safe and efficient flow of traffic. 
 
Table 4-4. Access Management Criteria 
Use and Street Type 	Number of Accesses Permitted 	Minimum Required Spacing 
		From intersection 	Between driveways on same lot 	Between driveways on separate lots 
Major Arterials regardless of use 	1 access for lots with street frontage < 600 ft. 1 	250 ft. 	200 ft. 	200 ft. 
Minor Arterials regardless of use 	1 access for lots with street frontage < 400 ft. 	200 ft. 	150 ft. 	150 ft. 
Nonresidential and Multifamily uses on Collectors 	1 access for lots with street frontage < 125 ft. 1 	150 ft. 	125 ft. 	125 ft. 
Single-family and duplex dwellings on Collectors 	1 access for lots with street frontage < 100 ft. 1 	125 ft. 2 	50 ft. 	25 ft. 
Nonresidential and Multifamily uses on Local Streets 	1 access for lots with street frontage < 75 ft. 1 	100 ft. 	75 ft. 	75 ft. 
Single-family and duplex dwellings on Local Streets 	1 access per lot with street frontage < 100 ft. or 2 access per lot with street frontage &gte;100 ft. 	75 ft. 2 	50 ft. 	10 ft. 
 
1 Lots with greater street frontage may have a second driveway, provided that the planning commission may approve additional driveways based on trip generation or topography, and it is determined that the impact to traffic safety and movement on the street will be minimal. 
2 A corner lot abutting two local streets may have a driveway with less than the above-required distance from the intersecting street, if, in the opinion of the City Planner, the driveway will not adversely affect traffic safety and movement on the streets. 
4.6.8.  Access easements. The planning commission may require shared access easements or other conditions that require multiple lots to have shared access to arterials or collector streets such as through the use of alleys, shared driveways, or marginal access roads. Such requirements shall be considered for both residential and nonresidential subdivisions where application of the access spacing standards of this subsection would prevent direct access along arterials and collector streets. 
1.  Shared access easements should be provided wherever it is possible to construct a continuous access drive or alley connecting one street to another. In such cases, the shared access drive shall be constructed by the developer and may be considered for maintenance by the city. Where it is not feasible to create such an easement, the planning commission may require a private access easement as described below. 
2.  Where private access easements are used, the subdivision plat shall state that the transfer of lots shall be subject to the provision of such easements, which shall provide for a guaranteed, unrestricted, right of access to all other owners providing such easements and that the owners of lots subject to private access easements shall be required to execute an agreement specifying responsibility for construction and perpetual maintenance of the easements and drives in accordance with the approved access plan. The agreement shall specify that the parties thereto shall hold the city harmless from liabilities resulting from unsafe conditions on private access easements. Copies of the agreements shall be filed with the city clerk. Construction on private access easements shall not be commenced until all agreements are filed. Copies of all subsequent amendments to the agreements shall also be filed with the city clerk. 
4.6.9.  Throat length. At access points, adequate throat length shall be provided for stacking space. Driveways for nonresidential uses should extend a minimum of 60 feet into the property from the front lot line before the edge of the driveway is crossed by an aisle or another drive and 30 feet before the edge of the driveway intersects an off-street parking space. See figure 4.6 below. 
 
4.6.10.  Acceleration and deceleration lanes, storage and turn lanes. 
1.  Acceleration lanes for nonresidential uses. In instances of unusual topography or for traffic safety considerations, the City Planner may require the construction of an acceleration lane for nonresidential uses. The length of taper and total length shall be determined based on commonly accepted and applied traffic engineering principles. 
2.  Deceleration lanes. Deceleration lanes shall be required for each access to arterial or collector streets where the proposed use will increase traffic volumes on the existing street to a total in excess of 1,000 vehicle trips per day or 100 peak-hour vehicle trips per day. 
a.  The deceleration lane, a minimum of 11 feet wide, measured from the face of the curb (for curb sections without a monolithic gutter), the edge of the gutter (for a monolithic curb and gutter section), or the edge of the shoulder line (for a non-curbed section to the center of the lane line), shall be constructed with the length measured from the centerline of the access point according to the criteria in table 4-5. 
b.  The minimum dimensions of the deceleration lane may be reduced, provided that it is determined by the City Planner that the following conditions exist, based on commonly accepted and applied traffic engineering principles: exceptional topographic constraints or unusual site conditions at the driveway location (such as in-place utility or drainage features) which would make strict application of the standard exceptionally and/or practically difficult or unduly harsh; and the reduction would not constitute a threat or danger to the safe and efficient flow of traffic. 
Table 4-5 Minimum Deceleration Lane 
Speed Limit 	Length of Taper 	Total Length 
35 mph or less 	75 ft. 	200 ft. 
40 to 45 mph 	110 ft. 	250 ft. 
50 to 55 mph 	150 ft. 	300 ft. 
 
3.  Left-turn storage lanes. Approval of access to an arterial or to a collector may be conditioned upon the provision of a left-turn storage lane. The requirement and design of each storage lane, including the paved approach, bay, and departure tapers, shall be determined from the recommendations of a traffic study and approved by the City Planner based on commonly accepted and applied traffic engineering principles. 
4.  Turn lanes on collectors and local streets. Right and left-turn lanes at intersections may be required by the City Planner based upon existing or required traffic studies. Such lanes shall be accommodated in the dedication of additional right-of-[way] widths on existing streets or in the planned right-of-way of proposed streets. Design requirements, including width and storage length, shall be determined from the recommendations of the applicable traffic study and approved by the City Planner based on commonly accepted and applied traffic engineering principles. Continuous two-way left-turn lanes shall be discouraged, and a median shall be provided to control access between intersections on collector streets.  
Sec. 4.7. - Blocks and lots. 
4.7.1.  Blocks. Blocks shall not be more than 1,200 feet in length. In blocks over 800 feet in length the planning commission may require one or more public pedestrian passages with not less than a ten-foot right-of-way. The planning commission may require a minimum block length of 400 feet. 
4.7.2.  Lot arrangement. 
1.  Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines. 
2.  Each lot shall front a public street for a consecutive distance as required by the zoning ordinance. 
3.  Lots shall not be platted such that they, by virtue of topography, flooding, or other environmental hazards, may not reasonably be built upon without variance from dimensional and other requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
4.7.3.  Double and reverse frontage lots. Double frontage lots in residential developments should be avoided, except where essential to separate residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. Reverse frontage lots shall have a depth of not less than 150 feet. A planted evergreen buffer and easement at least ten feet wide, across which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the line of lots abutting the street right-of-way or other incompatible land use.  
Sec. 4.8. - Sidewalks, pedestrian facilities. 
Sidewalks and pedestrian facilities shall be provided as determined by the planning commission in accordance with the following. Where not required, such facilities may be provided at the option of the applicant, provided minimum design and construction requirements are satisfied: 
4.8.1.  Guidelines. 
1.  Whenever land to be subdivided embraces any part of a sidewalk or pedestrian facility so designated on a city sidewalk master plan, such facility shall be provided as part of the subdivision. 
2.  Sidewalks should be provided on at least one side of streets within 1,000 ft. of an existing or planned school, library, park, place of assembly or commercial area. 
3.  Sidewalks should be provided along streets that presently or in the future will contain uses that are specifically intended to serve children or the aged. 
4.  Pedestrian facilities should be placed along collector streets to provide a safe walking environment, adequately separated from higher speed vehicular traffic, connecting one or more subdivisions to nearby destinations. 
5.  Sidewalks shall not be required where the proposed grade of a street frontage is steeper than would be reasonable for pedestrian use. 
6.  A permanently dedicated greenway, walking trail, pedestrian passage or similar pedestrian facility may be required as an alternative to sidewalks to provide pedestrian access to nearby commercial centers, schools, parks, or places of assembly. In such cases, the pedestrian facility should be located so as to be accessible to the greatest number of users within the proposed development. 
7.  Where the planning commission determines there is a need to provide pedestrian access, pedestrian passages may be required to provide access across the depth of a block that exceeds 800 feet in length. 
8.  Cul-de-sacs within medium or high density residential subdivisions or districts may be required to provide a permanent pedestrian passage to nearby destinations. Such passage may be an alternative to or in addition to sidewalks within the subdivision. In determining whether a passage should be required, the planning commission shall consider the degree to which the passage would increase the safety and convenience of pedestrians in reaching such destinations compared to other feasible routes within the subdivision. 
4.8.2.  A planting strip shall be provided between the back of curb and sidewalk, except where the planning commission determines that topography; tree preservation or conservation; right-of-way characteristics; or other conditions dictate that this requirement be modified or waived. 
4.8.3.  Pedestrian ramps in accordance with the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) shall be provided at intersections of streets requiring sidewalks. 
4.8.4.  Pedestrian passages. Where required, pedestrian passages shall be provided as follows: 
1.  The easement or right-of-way shall not be less than ten ft. and the minimum width of the walkway shall be four ft. in residential areas and five in nonresidential areas. The design and surfacing of the passage shall be as approved by the subdivision official. 
2.  If located in a right-of-way, the passage shall be subject to acceptance by the city. 
3.  If located within an easement, maintenance shall be the responsibility of the developer or property owners' association consistent with the provisions of § 4.9.4, deed restrictions and ownership.  
Sec. 4.9. - Open space and recreation in residential developments. 
4.9.1.  Open space. Planned unit developments, conservation subdivisions and multifamily housing developments shall provide open space as required the zoning ordinance and as specified herein. Developed open space shall be designed to provide active recreational facilities to serve the residents of the development. Undeveloped open space shall be designed to preserve important site amenities and environmentally sensitive areas, usually left in its natural state. 
4.9.2.  Multifamily subdivision, size of open space. For multifamily subdivisions, unless otherwise specified in the zoning ordinance, at least five percent of the site shall be set aside for developed and undeveloped open space, adjusted, as appropriate, for conditions such as population density, existing municipal facilities, topography, socioeconomic characteristics of the prospective population, and other appropriate site- and development-specific factors. The area of each parcel of open space designed for active recreational purposes shall be no less than 40 ft. wide at any point or other such minimum dimensions as to be functionally useable for the type of recreation proposed. 
4.9.3.  Location of open space. Open spaces shall be convenient to the dwelling units they are intended to serve. However, because of the possibility for noise generation, they may be sited with consideration given to such impacts on surrounding residential development. 
4.9.4.  Deed restrictions and ownership. 
1.  Lands dedicated for open space purposes shall contain appropriate covenants and deed restrictions approved by the city attorney ensuring that: 
a.  The open space area will not be further subdivided in the future; 
b.  The use of the space will continue in perpetuity for the purpose specified; 
c.  Appropriate provisions will be made for the maintenance of the open space; and 
d.  Common undeveloped open space shall not be turned into a commercial enterprise which charges an admittance fee. 
2.  Open space ownership. The type of ownership of land dedicated for open space purposes shall be selected by the applicant, subject to the approval of the planning commission. Types of ownership may include, but not necessarily [be] limited to, the following: 
a.  Shared, undivided interest by an owners association of all property owners in the subdivision, i.e., a homeowner, condominium, group, or cooperative association of organization; 
b.  The City of Opp, subject to acceptance by the city council; or 
c.  Other public or quasi-public jurisdiction, organization or agencies, subject to their acceptance. 
3.  The provisions of § 5.18, ownership and maintenance of common open spaces and facilities of the zoning ordinance are hereby made a part of these regulations and shall apply throughout their jurisdiction.  
Sec. 4.10. - Experimental subdivisions. 
The planning commission may waive, vary or modify the standards and requirements of these regulations if, in its judgment, an unusual experimental subdivision might prove of considerable merit toward: 
4.10.1.  The use of unusual materials in constructing required improvements; or 
4.10.2.  A new or untried design concept in the Opp area, which appears promising. The planning commission may require that the applicant provide a written proposal stating the nature of the project, and a cost-benefit study on the implementation of the project. 
In granting approval for experimental subdivisions, the planning commission may require such conditions as will in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied, modified, or approved. These may include, but not be limited to: personal, surety, performance, or maintenance bonds; affidavits; covenants; or other legal instrument. 

 
Sec. 4.11. - Name of development. 
The name of the subdivision or development must have the approval of the planning commission. The name shall not duplicate or closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision or development in the county.  
ARTICLE 5. - IMPROVEMENTS STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 5.1. - Utility easements. 
There shall be an easement a minimum of ten ft. wide along the front and rear lot line of each lot for poles, wires, conduits, storm and sanitary sewers, gas, water, and heat mains, telephone lines, television cables, and/or other utility lines and drainage ditches. The planning commission may also require easements along side lot lines. If the utilities are underground, the utility plans must include design location for all utilities, including light poles and street lights. Final plat approval signatures must include all utilities, including cable and telephone. Although not mandatory, it is recommended that all utilities be installed in the required rear utility easements.  
Sec. 5.2. - Monuments. 
Monuments, the type of which shall be in accordance with current surveying practice, shall be placed at all points where the street ROW lines intersect the exterior boundaries of the subdivision, and at all angle points of curves in each street. All lot corners shall be marked with reinforcing bar not less than one-half inches in diameter and 18 inches long. All monuments and markers shall be set flush with the finished grade and detectable with conventional instruments for finding ferrous or magnetic objects.  
Sec. 5.3. - Streets. 
5.3.1.  A geotechnical investigation of soil conditions shall be required for all streets serving nonresidential uses and as may otherwise be required by the City Planner. Such report shall be prepared by a registered geotechnical engineer and shall ensure adequate bearing capacity and quality of subgrade materials. 
5.3.2.  Grading. All streets and alleys shall be graded to the required cross section and in accordance with city specifications. Except as specified otherwise by the City Planner, where streets are to be constructed under or adjacent to existing major electric transmission lines, the nearest edge of the roadway surface shall be set back from any transmission line structure as may be required by the electric utility provider, and all grading for the street shall be done in a manner that will not disturb the structure or result in erosion endangering the structure. The clearance from the street to the nearest conductor of electricity shall meet the requirements of the National Electric Safety Code. 
1.  Preparation. Before grading is started, the entire right-of-way area shall be first cleared of all stumps, roots, brush, and other objectionable materials and all trees not intended for preservation. 
2.  Cuts. All tree stumps, boulders and other obstructions shall be removed to a depth of two feet below the subgrade. Rock, when encountered, shall be scarified to a depth of 12 inches below the subgrade. This provision applies to the roadway and not necessarily to the entire right-of-way width. 
5.3.3.  Subgrade. 
1.  All subgrade shall be cut to the grade as shown on the plan and profile. 
2.  Soil deeper than six inches below subgrade shall be compacted to 95 percent standard proctor density. The top six inches shall be compacted to 100 percent standard proctor density. 
3.  A test shall be made on all fill sections by a testing agency satisfactory to the City Planner. Additional tests shall be performed at the rate of not less than one test per 500 linear feet of street. 
4.  Tests shall be performed on all lifts. 
5.  The top six inches shall be modified, with the work being performed under section 230, Roadbed processing, of the ALDOT standard specifications. It shall be compacted to 100 percent standard proctor density for the full width of the roadway section. 
6.  The road bed shall be proof rolled after placement of final subgrade and the final base layer. 
7.  A copy of all lab reports shall be submitted to the City Planner. 
5.3.4.  Base material, paving. 
1.  Base. Base course shall meet the requirements for crushed aggregate as set forth in section 301, Soil, soil aggregate, and aggregate, base and subbases, Type 825 A or B, plant mixed with water, of the ALDOT standard specifications. Base course shall have a minimum thickness of eight inches for local streets and ten inches for major, commercial and industrial streets compacted thickness and extend 12 inches outside of curb sections. The density requirements for compaction shall be in accordance with section 306, Density requirements for compaction, of the ALDOT standard specifications. The project engineer may submit an alternate base design method for approval by the City Planner. Design should be based on a proven and accepted engineering test or method. 
2.  Roadway pavement. All streets shall be paved and comply with the following: 
a.  Prior to the placement of pavement, a bituminous treatment A (Prime) shall be placed in accordance with section 401, Bituminous surface treatments, of the ALDOT standard specifications and be approved by the City Planner. 
b.  Bituminous pavement requirements shall be a minimum of 225 pounds per square yard (two-inch depth) of bituminous concrete binder and 100 pounds per square yard (one-inch depth) of bituminous concrete wearing surface. All design mixes shall meet the requirements of section 424, Superpave bituminous concrete base, binder, and wearing surface layers, of the ALDOT standard specifications. 
5.3.5.  Fill. All suitable material for the roadway cuts may be used in the construction of fills, approaches, or at other places as needed. Excess materials, including organic materials, soft clays, etc., shall be removed from the development site. The fill shall be spread in layers not to exceed eight inches loose depth, and compacted by a sheep's foot roller. The filling of utility trenches and other areas not accessible to a roller shall be mechanically tamped. Compaction test results must be provided to the streets superintendent before paving can begin. 
5.3.6.  Fire apparatus access roads. Any street, alley or other access designated by the fire marshal as a fire apparatus access road shall meet the load requirements of the fire code. Such shall be certified by the project engineer. 
5.3.7.  Culverts and bridges. Culverts, bridges and all materials shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the ALDOT Standard Specifications. 
5.3.8.  Sidewalks and pedestrian passages. 
1.  Where required, all sidewalks shall be four inches thick with a minimum width of four feet. Sidewalks shall generally run parallel to the street, however, the planning commission may approve an alternate location to preserve topographical or natural features or to provide visual interest, if the developer shows that an alternate arrangement provides safe and convenient circulation. 
2.  Pedestrian passages, where required, shall be designed and constructed in a manner acceptable to the City Planner.  
Sec. 5.4. - Storm drainage. 
An adequate drainage system, including necessary curbs and gutters, pipes, culverts, drop inlets, intersectional drains, bridges, etc., shall be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water in accordance with table 5-1. See appendix for specifications. 
Table 5-1. Drainage Design Criteria 
Structure Type 	Flood Event 	Overtopping Analysis 
Bridge 	100-yr. 	Yes 
Roadway Culvert 	25-yr. 	Yes 
Open Channel 	25-yr. 100-yr. 	Floodplain delineation 
Storm Sewer System Arterials, Collectors Local, Frontage 	25-yr. 10-yr. 	Max. Spread -½ lane + gutter Max. Spread -½ lane + gutter 
Detention/Retention Primary, Secondary 	25-yr. 100-yr. 	
 
5.4.1.  Water will be taken from the street via drop inlets in accordance with city specifications. In no case will the water be allowed to drain across the sidewalk. The exposed ends of all drain tile shall be finished with concrete headwalls. 
5.4.2.  For curb and gutter systems, drop inlets shall be spaced frequently enough to adequately remove water from the street. The location and design must be approved by the planning commission. 
5.4.3.  Corrugated steel pipe shall not be used in any swale, driveway or other stormwater drainage culvert. All street cross drains shall be reinforced concrete pipe. All other pipes installed in any swale, driveway, or stormwater drainage culvert shall be reinforced concrete pipe, HDPE type "S" drainage pipe or corrugated aluminum pipe as approved by the City Planner and streets superintendent. All pipe shall meet applicable AASHTO requirements. 
Installation shall be in accordance with city specifications. Prior to installation, approval shall be obtained from the streets superintendent and City Planner.  
Sec. 5.5. - Utilities. 
5.5.1.  Water supply system. 
1.  The water supply system must be connected to the community water supply system and shall be designed and constructed in such a manner as to adequately serve required uses for all lots shown on the subdivision plat or development site plan, including reasonably anticipated future needs. The system shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the Opp Utilities Standard Water Specifications and regulatory requirements, and the design and installation must be approved by the Opp Utilities Board. 
2.  Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed along each street at intervals of 500 feet, or at the ends and center, of each block and tied to the water system. Dwellings shall not be located more than 400 ft. from the nearest fire hydrant and nonresidential buildings shall not be located more than 250 ft. from the nearest fire hydrant. The water supply and pressure shall be sufficient to adequately serve the potential needs of the intended land use and have the approval of the Opp Waterworks, Sewer, and Gas Board and the Opp Fire Department. 
5.5.2.  Sanitary sewer. 
1.  The sanitary sewer system must be connected to the community sanitary sewerage system and shall be designed and constructed in such a manner as to adequately serve required uses for all lots shown on the subdivision plat or development site plan, including reasonably anticipated future needs. The system shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the Opp Utilities Standard Sanitary Sewer Specifications and regulatory requirements, and the design and installation must be approved by the Opp Utilities Board. 
2.  Where lots cannot be economically connected to the Opp Utilities Board's sanitary sewerage system, individual on-site wastewater disposal systems shall be permitted, provided the disposal plan for each lot has written approval of the Covington County health department, as evidenced by the health department official's signature on the final plat. 
5.5.3.  Natural gas system. 
When gas mains are connected with the community natural gas distribution system, the system shall be designed and constructed in such a manner as to adequately serve required uses for all lots shown on the subdivision plat or development site plan. The system shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the 
Southeast Gas Board Standard Natural Gas Specifications and regulatory requirements, and the design and installation must be approved by the Southeast Gas. 
5.5.4.  Electricity. 
1.  The applicant is encouraged to place all electrical lines under ground and utilize pad mounted transformers. All plans for electrical utilities must be approved by the Opp Utilities Board. 
2.  Street lighting. For reasons of safety and convenience the applicant shall provide street lights at each street intersection. Where blocks exceed 800 feet in length, the planning commission may require additional lighting. All street lighting plans must be approved by the Opp Utilities Board and City Planner.  
Sec. 5.6. - Signs. 
5.6.1.  Street name signs. All streets shall be designated by name on a metal street sign post, in accordance with city specifications, with name plates of metal set one above the other with a minimum clearance of seven feet from grade to the lowest edge of the sign. The post shall be so located as to be visible for both pedestrian and vehicular traffic. At four-way intersections, two street sign posts shall be located diagonally across the intersection from each other. One street sign post shall be required at "T" street intersections. 
5.6.2.  Traffic control signs. The developer shall install, at his cost, all necessary traffic control signs and devices as shown on the approved preliminary plat, which shall be in compliance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices as adopted by the State of Alabama.  
ARTICLE 6. - SITE DESIGN STANDARDS 
For developments subject to site plan review, the following standards shall be considered by the planning commission: 
 
Sec. 6.1. - General site design standards. 
6.1.1.  Access management. Generally, driveways should be fewer and farther apart on major streets while a larger number of driveways spaced more closely together are more tolerable on local streets. 
1.  Site plans shall conform with the access management requirements in § 4.6, access management. 
2.  Shared driveways, alleys and cross access drives are encouraged where appropriate. 
3.  For corner lots, access should be provided along the street of lesser classification and any driveways should be located as far from the intersection as possible. 
6.1.2.  Sight lines. Structures and landscaping should be placed to ensure clear sight lines for motorists that allow safe ingress and egress to properties and safe movements within the site. 
6.1.3.  Building location. 
1.  Buildings should be located on site in keeping with adjacent buildings on the same side of the street and to create useable exterior spaces. 
2.  Buildings should be oriented such that entrances face the street. 
6.1.4.  Parking location. 
1.  Parking areas for multifamily developments should be located internally to the site rather than between buildings and the street. 
2.  Large surface parking lots should be broken up into multiple spaces through landscaping. 
3.  Some parking should be placed to the sides and rear of the building to avoid oversized parking in front of the building. This strategy can be helpful in matching shallower setbacks of adjacent buildings. 
6.1.5.  Storage, service and loading areas. 
1.  Storage, service and loading areas should be located so as to minimize their visibility to the public and/or shall be screened as required by the planning commission. 
2.  Storage, service and loading areas should be located to so as not to disrupt the efficient flow of on-site and off-site traffic. 
6.1.6.  Refuse collection areas (multifamily and nonresidential). 
1.  Refuse collection areas should be located to minimize their visibility to the public and/or screened as required by the planning commission in accordance with the zoning ordinance. 
2.  Refuse collection areas shall be designed and of a size to contain all refuse (and recycling, if applicable) generated on-site and deposited between collections. 
6.1.7.  Mechanical and electrical equipment. Mechanical and electrical equipment should be located to minimize their visibility to the public and/or screened as required by the planning commission.  
Sec. 6.2. - Landscaping standards. 
6.2.1.  Buffering. Buffers shall be provided as required in the zoning ordinance wherever a use of higher intensity is developed abutting a use of lower intensity (i.e., a commercial use is developed next to a residential use or a multifamily use is developed next to a single-family use). 
6.2.2.  Parking lot landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided within and at the perimeter of parking lots and other vehicular areas as required by § 11.2, landscaping, for vehicular areas of the zoning ordinance. 
6.2.3.  Screening. Location on-site, plant materials, fences, walls, berms or a combination thereof shall be used to visually screen certain site elements and activities, including, but not limited to outdoor storage and garbage collection areas, from public view as required in § 11.3, screening, of the zoning ordinance.  
ARTICLE 7. - VARIANCES, ENFORCEMENT, LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 7.1. - Variances. 
Where an applicant can show that a provision of these regulations would cause an unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to and where, because of topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site, in the opinion of the planning commission a departure may be made without destroying the intent of such provision, the planning commission may authorize a variance. Any variance thus authorized is required to be entered in writing in the official minutes of the planning commission and the reason which justified the departure to be set forth. In determining whether a modification, reduction or waiver of a requirement of these regulations is warranted, the planning commission must find that all of the following criteria are met: 
7.1.1.  Owing to extraordinary circumstances, literal enforcement of the provisions of this resolution will result in undesirable characteristics, including, but not limited to, poor traffic movement, unsuitable lot design, or unnecessarily expensive utility extensions. 
7.1.2.  That the variance, if granted, will not cause any off-site problems such as traffic, utilities, drainage, water, and sanitation on other properties. 
7.1.3.  That the variance, if granted, will not substantially or permanently injure any adjacent conforming property. 
7.1.4.  That the variance, if granted, is the minimum variance and the least modification that will afford the relief sought. 
7.1.5.  That the variance, if granted, will be in harmony with the spirit of these regulations and will not adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare.  
Sec. 7.2. - Transferring lots in unapproved subdivisions, penalties. 
Whoever, being the agent of the owner or owner of any land located within a subdivision, transfers or sells or agrees to sell any land by reference to or exhibition of or by other use of a part of a subdivision, before such plat has been approved by the planning commission and recorded in the office of the probate judge, shall forfeit and pay a penalty of $100.00 for each lot or parcel so transferred or sold or agreed or negotiated to be sold. The description of such lot or parcel by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties or from the remedies herein provided. 
The city may enjoin such transfer or sale or agreement by action for injunction brought in any court of equity jurisdiction or may recover the same penalty by a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction. 


 
Sec. 7.3. - Fees, fines. 
7.3.1.  Fees. All applicants shall pay a $150.00 fee to the City of Opp at the time of submission of any request for minor plat, preliminary plat, or final approval of a proposed subdivision. 
7.3.2.  Fines. Any person violating any provisions of this regulation shall be charged a fine, upon conviction, of not more than $100.00 and court costs for each offense. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.  
Sec. 7.4. - Conflict with other laws. 
Wherever the requirements of this regulation conflict with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted statutes, rules, regulations, ordinances, the most restrictive, or that imposing higher standards, shall govern.  
Sec. 7.5. - Validity. 
Each phrase, sentence, paragraph, section or other provision of this regulation is severable from all other such phrases, sentences, paragraph, sections and provisions. Should any phrase, sentence, paragraph, section or provision of these regulations be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration shall not affect any other portion or provision of these regulations.  
Sec. 7.6. - Effective date. 
These regulations shall take effect and be in force from and after the date of adoption. 
Sample Certificates and Acknowledgments 
Surveyor's Certificate. 
Sketch Plan Certificate (City Planner). 
Site Assessment Certificate (City Planner). 
Certificate of Approval, preliminary plat (subdivision official). 
Certificate of Approval, preliminary plat (planning commission). 
Certificate of Approval, preliminary plat (City Planner). 
Certificate of Approval, preliminary plat (streets superintendent). 
Certificate of Approval of Water Distribution System, preliminary plat (waterworks, sewer and gas board). 
Certificate of Approval of Sewer Distribution System, preliminary plat (waterworks, sewer and gas board). 
Certificate of Approval of Gas Distribution System, preliminary plat (waterworks, sewer and gas board). 
Certificate of Approval of Electric Distribution System, preliminary plat  (Opp Utilities Board). 
Certificate of Approval, preliminary plat (county health department). 
Dedication. 
Notary's Acknowledgment. 
Notary's Acknowledgment. 
Mortgage Holder's Certificate. 
Certificate of Approval, final plat (planning commission). 
Certificate of Approval, final plat (City Planner). 
Certificate of Approval, final plat (streets superintendent). 
Certificate of Approval, final plat (Opp Utilities Board). 
Certificate of Approval, final plat (Southeast Gas). 
Certificate of Approval, final plat (county health department). 
Subdivision Procedural Flowchart 
PLAT CHECKLISTS 
Minor Subdivision Plat Checklist. 
Preliminary Plat Checklist. 
Final Plat Checklist. 
SPECIFICATIONS 
Standard Street Cross Sections (local street, collector, industrial access road). 
Surveyor's Certificate 
Surveyor's Certificate and Description of Land Platted 
State of Alabama 
County of Covington 
I, (name of surveyor), an Alabama registered Surveyor, hereby certify that I have surveyed the property of the (name of company of proprietor), a (corporation or proprietor), situated in the city of Opp, Covington County, Alabama and described as follows: 
(Insert Legal Description) 
And that the plat or map contained hereon is a true and correct map, meeting the current standards of practice set forth by the Alabama State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and land surveyors, showing the subdivision into which the property described is divided giving the length and bearings of the boundaries of each lot and its number and showing the streets, alleys and public grounds and giving the bearings, length, width, and name of the streets, said map further shows the relation of the land so platted to the Government Survey, and that permanent monuments have been placed at points marked thus (0) as hereon shown. 
WITNESS my hand this ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
____________ 	____________ 
(Name of Surveyor) 	Registration Number 
 
Sketch Plan Certificate (City Planner). 
The sketch plan for ____________ has been reviewed by the City Planner for the city of Opp. 
____________ 	____________ 
Date 	City Planner 
	City of Opp, Alabama 
 
Site Assessment Certificate. 
I, ____________ , the project engineer, do hereby certify that the information shown hereon is complete and in compliance with all applicable regulations of the City of Opp, Alabama to the best of my knowledge. 
____________ 	____________ 
Date 	Project Engineer 
 
Certificate of Approval, preliminary plat (subdivision official). 
In that all the requirements of Preliminary Approval have been fulfilled, this subdivision plat was given Preliminary Approval by the Opp planning commission on ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
____________ 
Subdivision Official 
City of Opp, Alabama 
Certificate of Approval, preliminary plat (planning commission) 
In that all the requirements of Preliminary Approval have been fulfilled, this subdivision plat was given Preliminary Approval by the Opp planning commission on ____________ , 20 ____________ . Preliminary Approval does not constitute approval of the final plat. 
____________ 
Chairperson 
Opp Planning Commission 
Certificate of Approval, preliminary plat (City Planner) 
In that all the requirements of Preliminary Approval have been fulfilled, this subdivision plat was given Preliminary Approval by the Opp planning commission on ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
____________ 
City Planner 
City of Opp, Alabama 
Certificate of Approval, preliminary plat (streets superintendent) 
In that all the requirements of Preliminary Approval have been fulfilled, this subdivision plat was given Preliminary Approval by the Opp planning commission on ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
____________ 
Streets Superintendent 
City of Opp, Alabama 
Certificate of Approval of Water Distribution System, preliminary plat (waterworks, sewer and gas board) 
The undersigned, as authorized by the Opp Utilities Board, hereby approved the water distribution system design as shown on this preliminary plat on ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
____________ 
Opp Utilties
Certificate of Approval of Sewer Distribution System, preliminary plat (waterworks, sewer and gas board) 
The undersigned, as authorized by the Opp Utilities Board, hereby approved the sewer distribution system design as shown on this preliminary plat on ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
____________ 
Opp Utilities
Certificate of Approval of Gas Distribution System, preliminary plat (waterworks, sewer and gas board) 
The undersigned, as authorized by the Opp Utilities Board, hereby approved the gas distribution system design as shown on this preliminary plat on ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
____________ 
Opp Utilities
Certificate of Approval of Electric Distribution System, preliminary plat (Opp Utilities Board) 
The undersigned, as authorized by the Opp Utilities Board, hereby approved the electric distribution system design as shown on this preliminary plat on ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
____________ 
Opp Utilities Board 
Certificate for Lots with On-Site Septic Systems, preliminary plat (county health department) 
The lot(s) on this plat are subject to approval or deletion by the Covington County health department. The approvals may contain certain conditions pertaining to the onsite wastewater treatment system(s) that could restrict the use of the lot(s) or obligate owners to special maintenance and reporting requirements. These conditions are on file with said health department and are made a part of this plat as if set out hereon. The undersigned, as authorized by the Covington County health department, Alabama, hereby approved the onsite wastewater treatment system for this plat, on ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
____________ 
Health Officer, Covington County, Alabama 
Dedication 
I/We (Land Owner or developer, address), as proprietor(s), have caused the land embraced in the within plat to be surveyed, laid out and platted to be known as (Subdivision Name), a part of (Section Call Out), City of Opp, Covington County, Alabama, and that the (Streets, Drives, Alleys, etc.) as shown on said plat are hereby dedicated to the use of the public. 
Signed and sealed in the presence of: 
____________ 	____________ 
Witness 	Property Owner 
____________ 	____________ 
Witness 	Property Owner 
 
Notary's Acknowledgment 
Acknowledgment 
State of Alabama 
County of Covington 
I, ____________ , a Notary Public in and for said County, in said State, hereby certify that (individual's name), whose name as (title) of the (corporation name), is signed to the foregoing instrument, and who is known to me, acknowledged before me on this day that, being informed of the contents of the instrument, he as such officer and with full authority, executed the same voluntarily for and as the act of said corporation. 
GIVEN under my hand and official seal this ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
NOTARY PUBLIC 
Notary's Acknowledgment 
Acknowledgment 
State of Alabama 
County of Covington 
I, ____________ , a Notary Public in and for said County, in said State, hereby certify that (owner's name), whose name is signed to the foregoing instrument, and who is known to me, acknowledged before me on this day that, being informed of the contents of the instrument, executed the same voluntarily. 
GIVEN under my hand and official seal this ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
NOTARY PUBLIC 
Mortgage Holder's Certificate 
We, (name of institution and location), by (name and title of officer), holders of a mortgage on the above described property do hereby consent to the plat of (name of plat), in the City of Opp, Covington County, Alabama on ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
(Name of Institution and Location) 
____________ 
Name and Title, Mortgagee Representative 
Certificate of Approval, final plat (planning commission) 
In that all the requirements of final approval have been fulfilled, this subdivision plat was given final approval for recording of same in the Probate Office of Covington County, Alabama by the Opp planning commission on ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
____________ 
Chairperson 
Opp Planning Commission 
Certificate of Approval, final plat (City Planner) 
In that all the requirements of final approval have been fulfilled, this subdivision plat was given final approval for recording of same in the Probate Office of Covington County, Alabama by the Opp planning commission on ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
____________ 
City Planner 
City of Opp, Alabama 
Certificate of Approval, final plat (streets superintendent) 
In that all the requirements of final approval have been fulfilled, this subdivision plat was given final approval for recording of same in the Probate Office of Covington County, Alabama by the Opp planning commission on ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
____________ 
Streets Superintendent 
City of Opp, Alabama 
Certificate of Approval, final plat (Opp Utilities Board) 
The undersigned, as authorized by the Opp Utilities Board, hereby approved this plat for recording of same in the Probate Office of Covington County, Alabama on ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
____________ 
Opp Utilities Board 
Certificate of Approval of Water System, final plat (waterworks, sewer and gas board) 
The undersigned, as authorized by the Opp Utilities Board, hereby approved the water distribution system for this plat for recording of same in the Probate Office of Covington County, Alabama on ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
____________ 
Opp Utilities
Certificate of Approval of Sewer System, final plat (waterworks, sewer and gas board) 
The undersigned, as authorized by the Opp Utilities Board, hereby approved the sewer distribution system for this plat for recording of same in the Probate Office of Covington County, Alabama on ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
____________ 
Opp Utilities
Certificate of Approval, final plat (waterworks, sewer and gas board) 
The undersigned, as authorized by the Opp Utilities Board, hereby approved the gas distribution system for this plat for recording of same in the Probate Office of Covington County, Alabama on ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
____________ 
Opp Utilities
Certificate for Lots with On-Site Septic Systems, final plat (county health department) 
The lot(s) on this plat are subject to approval or deletion by the Covington County health department. The approvals may contain certain conditions pertaining to the onsite wastewater treatment system(s) that could restrict the use of the lot(s) or obligate owners to special maintenance and reporting requirements. These conditions are on file with said health department and are made a part of this plat as if set out hereon. The undersigned, as authorized by the Covington County health department, Alabama, hereby approved the within plat for recording of same in the Probate Office of Covington County, Alabama, on ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
____________ 
Health Officer, Covington County, Alabama 
Subdivision and Site Plan Procedure Flowchart 
 
MINOR SUBDIVISION PLAT CHECKLIST 
□  Name of subdivision. 
□  Graphic scale (not less than on inch equals 100 feet). 
□  North point. 
□  Date. 
□  Total acreage. 
□  Name, address and seal/registration no. of surveyor. 
□  Location (legal description, lot, block, subdivision name, parcel numbers, deed book and page). 
□  Vicinity map. 
□  Name of adjacent subdivisions. 
□  Name, address and deed book and page of record of owners and adjoining owners. 
□  Name, address of agents, if applicable. 
□  Location of existing property lines. 
□  Location and width of existing rights-of-way and easements. 
□  Name, location and widths of existing streets, alleys and driveways. 
□  Length (1/100 ft.) and bearing (one-tenth sec. of arc) of exterior boundaries. 
□  Location of existing buildings, watercourses, railroads, sewers, bridges, culverts, drain pipes, water mains (on-site and adjoining). 
□  Dimensions and area of lot lines, reservations, open spaces and parks. 
□  Approximate radii, central angle, arc distance, chord lengths and points of tangency of all curves. 
□  Restrictions and proposed use of lots (as required). 
□  Certificate of approval (water, sewer, gas, electric, and health dept. if not on sanitary sewer). 
□  Additional certificates as required. 
□  Present and proposed zoning (as applicable). 
□  Regulatory floodplain boundaries with FIRM panel number and effective date. 
□  Flood study with floodway and base flood elevations (if in Special Flood Hazard District A). 
□  Minimum finished floor elevations for all lots in 100-year floodplain. 
□  Inscription: "NOT FOR FINAL RECORDING" (except for combined Preliminary/final approval). 
PRELIMINARY PLAT CHECKLIST 
□  Name of subdivision. 
□  Graphic scale. 
□  North point. 
□  Date. 
□  Total acreage. 
□  Name, address and seal/registration no. of surveyor. 
□  Location (legal description, lot, block, subdivision name, parcel numbers, deed book and page). 
□  Vicinity Map. 
□  Name of adjacent subdivisions. 
□  Name, address and deed book and page of record of owners and adjoining owners. 
□  Name, address of agents, if applicable. 
□  Topography (USGS, geodetic Survey Sea Level Datum, etc.). 
□  Five foot intervals (two foot may be required). 
□  Source of Topography. 
□  Location of existing property lines. 
□  Location and width of existing rights-of-way and easements. 
□  Name, location and widths of existing streets, alleys and driveways. 
□  Length (1/100 ft.) and bearing (one-tenth sec. of arc) of exterior boundaries. 
□  Location of existing buildings, watercourses, railroads, sewers, bridges, culverts, drain pipes, water mains (on-site and adjoining). 
□  Location and dimensions of proposed rights-of-way, streets, alleys, easements; lot and block numbers. 
□  Dimensions and area of lot lines, reservations, open spaces and parks. 
□  Street profiles (natural and finished grade; scale 1=100' H, 1'=10' V as required). 
□  Street cross sections. 
□  Approximate radii, central angle, arc distance, chord lengths and points of tangency of all curves. 
□  Proposed utility layout. 
□  Restrictions and proposed use of lots (as required). 
□  Certificate of approval (water, sewer, gas, electric, and health dept. if not on sanitary sewer). 
□  Additional certificates as required. 
□  Present and proposed zoning (as applicable). 
□  Minimum building front, rear and side yard setback lines. 
□  Drainage plan. 
□  Regulatory floodplain boundaries with FIRM panel number and effective date. 
□  Flood study with floodway and base flood elevations (if in Special Flood Hazard District A). 
□  Minimum finished floor elevations for all lots in 100-year floodplain. 
□  Inscription: "NOT FOR FINAL RECORDING." 
FINAL PLAT CHECKLIST 
□  Name of subdivision. 
□  Graphic scale. 
□  North point. 
□  Date. 
□  Total acreage. 
□  Name, address and seal/registration no. of surveyor. 
□  Location (legal description, lot, block, subdivision name, parcel numbers, deed book and page). 
□  Name of adjacent subdivisions. 
□  Name, address and deed book and page of record of owners. 
□  Name, address of agents, if applicable. 
□  Bearings and distances to nearest street lines, benchmarks, monuments (at least three). 
□  Boundary lines from survey (to one sec.; error closure 1:10,000). 
□  Location and dimensions of rights-of-way, streets, alleys, including on adjoining tracts. 
□  Dimensions and area of lot lines, reservations, open spaces and parks. 
□  Street centerlines with angles of deflection and intersection, radii, lengths, tangents. 
□  Dimensions of lot lines (to 1:100 ft. and bearings); lot and block numbers. 
□  Location, dimension and purpose of easements, reservations, common or public use spaces. 
□  Location, material and description of monuments. 
□  Statement of covenants (on or attached to plat). 
□  Regulatory floodplain boundaries with FIRM panel number and effective date. 
□  Flood study with floodway and base flood elevations (if in Special Flood Hazard District A). 
□  Minimum finished floor elevations for all lots in 100-year floodplain. 
□  Dedication for public lands. 
□  Notary's Acknowledgment (where developer and owner are not the same). 
□  Certificate of Approval of final plat (planning commission). 
□  Certificate of Approval of final plat (City Planner). 
□  Certificate of Approval of final plat (streets superintendent). 
□  Certificate of Approval of final plat (Opp Opp Utilities BoardBoard). 
□  Certificates of Approval of final plat (waterworks, sewer and gas board). 
□  Certificate of Approval (county health department). 
STANDARD STREET CROSS SECTIONS 
 
 
  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Code of Alabama, 1975. 
Code of Ala. 1975 
Section 	Section 

this Code 
1-1-1 et seq. 	1-2 
1-1-14 	1-3 
1-1-15 	1-3 
3-1-1 et seq. 	Ch. 6 (note) 
3-5-14 	Ch. 6 (note) 
3-7A-1 et seq. 	Ch. 6, Art. II 
4-4-1 et seq. 	App. B, intro. ¶ 
4-6-1—4-6-15 	App. B, intro. ¶ 
4-6-1 et seq. 	App. B (note) 
— 	App. B, intro. ¶ 
5-19A-1 	22-260 
7-2-104 	22-257 
11-19-1 et seq. 	16-20 
11-40-1 et seq. 	Ch. 2 (note) 
11-40-30 et seq. 	28-2 (note) 
11-43-6 et seq. 	2-77 
11-43-40 et seq. 	Ch. 2, Art. II 
11-43-40 	2-46 
11-43-49 	2-47 
11-43-50 	2-45 
11-43-52 	Ch. 2, Art. II, 
Div. 2 
11-43-59 	Ch. 8 (note) 
— 	Ch. 14 (note) 
11-45-1 et seq. 	16-20 
11-45-7 	1-1 
11-45-8 	Ch. 8, Art. II 
— 	App. A, § 12.10 
11-45-9 	1-7 
11-46-1 et seq. 	Ch. 10 (note) 
11-46-2 	10-1 
11-46-24(b) 	10-2 
11-47-110 	Ch. 6 (note) 
11-47-117 et seq. 	Ch. 28 (note) 
11-47-130 	Ch. 12 (note) 
— 	Ch. 18 (note) 
11-47-131 	Ch. 12 (note) 
— 	Ch. 18 (note) 
11-51-44 	22-193 
11-51-90 	22-1 
— 	22-85 
11-51-90(a)(1) 	Ch. 22, Art. VII 
11-51-90(a)(2) 	22-86 
11-51-90.2 	22-182 
11-51-91 	22-27 
— 	22-204 
11-51-122 	22-183 
11-51-129 	22-182 
11-51-150 et seq. 	22-195 
11-51-180 et seq. 	22-182 
11-51-192 	22-200 
11-51-200 	22-57 
— 	22-148 
11-51-202 	22-60 
— 	22-150 
11-51-206 	22-58 
— 	22-60 
— 	22-149, 22-150 
11-52-1 et seq. 	16-20 
— 	App. A, § 1.3 
— 	App. C, § 1.2 
11-52-8 	App. C, § 2.2 
11-52-30—11-52-36 	App. C, § 2.1 
11-52-30—11-52-54 	App. C, § 1.2 
11-52-31 	App. C, § 3.5 
11-52-32 	App. C, § 3.5 
11-52-70 et seq. 	App. A (note) 
11-67-80 et seq. 	30-1 
11-52-80 	App. A, § 13.1 
11-52-81 	App. A, § 13.1 
12-14-1 et seq. 	Ch. 26 (note) 
12-14-14 	26-4, 26-5 
12-14-30 et seq. 	26-2 
12-14-33 	26-3 
13A-1-2 	24-1 
13A-7-22 	1-7 
13A-7-23 	1-7 
13A-7-29 	Ch. 30 (note) 
13A-8-5 	1-7 
13A-8-9 	1-7 
13A-8-10.3 	1-7 
13A-8-19 	1-7 
13A-8-23 	1-7 
13A-8-71 	1-7 
13A-8-72 	1-7 
13A-8-102 	1-7 
13A-8-140—13A-8-144 	1-7 
13A-9-75 	1-7 
13A-9-91 	1-7 
13A-11-230 et seq. 	Ch. 6, Art. II 
13A-11-240 et seq. 	Ch. 6, Art. II 
13A-11-260 et seq. 	Ch. 6 (note) 
15-23-17 	26-6 
20-3A-20.1 	4-37 
22-1-1 et seq. 	Ch. 12 (note) 
— 	Ch. 18 (note) 
22-15A-10 	18-1 
22-27-1 et seq. 	Ch. 30 (note) 
22-27-47 	Ch. 30 (note) 
24-5-30 et seq. 	App. A, § 6.7 
28-1-1 et seq. 	Ch. 4 (note) 
28-1-5 	Ch. 4 (note) 
28-3-1 	4-4 
28-3-190 et seq. 	4-72 
28-3A-1 et seq. 	4-67 
28-3A-1 	4-72 
28-3A-6 	4-72 
28-3A-7 et seq. 	4-72 
28-3A-8—28-3A-11 	4-72 
28-3A-11 et seq. 	Ch. 4, Art. III 
28-3A-15 	4-72 
28-3A-17 	4-72 
28-3A-20 	4-72 
28-3A-25(a)(3) 	Ch. 4 (note) 
28-3A-25(a)(18) 	Ch. 4 (note) 
28-7-1 et seq. 	4-72 
28-10-1 et seq. 	4-74 
tit. 32 	Ch. 34 (note) 
32-1-4 	26-10 
32-5A-191 	1-7 
32-6-19 	34-2 
32-13-1 et seq. 	28-1 
32-13-1—32-13-8 	34-2 
32-13-1 	34-88 
34-8-1 et seq. 	Ch. 8 (note) 
34-14A-1 et seq. 	Ch. 8 (note) 
36-19-1 et seq. 	Ch. 14 (note) 
36-25A-1 et seq. 	2-47 
— 	2-54 
— 	2-57 
tit. 40 	22-201 
40-2A-3 	22-182 
40-12-224 	22-203 
40-21-50 et seq. 	22-182 
40-21-80 et seq. 	22-182 
40-23-1 et seq. 	22-59 
— 	22-113, 22-114 
— 	22-151 
— 	22-284, 22-285 
40-23-25 	22-203 
40-23-60 et seq. 	22-61 
40-23-82 	22-203 
40-26-1 et seq. 	Ch. 22, Art. V 
— 	Ch. 22, Art. X 
41-9-160 et seq. 	Ch. 8 (note) 
41-9-166 	16-20 
45-36A-100 	Ch. 4 (note) 
45-36A-100.01 	Ch. 4 (note) 
45-36A-101 	10-1 
45-36A-102 	Ch. 20 (note) 
— 	20-4 
46-36A-102 	20-2 
 
