CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF SCOTTSBORO, ALABAMA 
____________ 
Published in 2018 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

MUNICIPALITY OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Robin Shelton 
Mayor 
____________ 
Jessica Butler 
Patrick Stewart 
Tony Wallingsford 
Keith Smith 
Gary Stewart 
City Council 
____________ 
Stephen Kennamer 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Whitney Phillips 
Council Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Scottsboro, Alabama. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance included herein. 
    The Code has been divided into chapters, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the Code. With this system, the Code will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this Code up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the Code. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This Code was prepared under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Amy Norton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Mayor Robin Sheton, City Attorney Stephen Kennamer and City Clerk Whitney Phillips for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Scottsboro, Alabama. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Scottsboro, Alabama. 
(c)  Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Scottsboro, Alabama. 2018. 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Scottsboro, Alabama" and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Scottsboro Code." 
State Law reference- Codification of ordinances, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-7. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    The following definitions and rules of construction shall apply to this Code and to all ordinances unless the context requires otherwise: 
    Generally. 
(1)  When provisions conflict, the specific shall prevail over the general. 
(2)  All provisions shall be liberally construed so that the intent of the city council may be effectuated. 
(3)  Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words, technical phrases and words and phrases that have acquired peculiar and appropriate meanings in law shall be construed according to such meanings. 
(4)  Provisions shall be interpreted and applied so as to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. 
    Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be required. 
    City, municipality. The term "city" or "municipality" means the City of Scottsboro, Alabama. 
    City council, council. The term "city council" or "council" mean the city council of the City of Scottsboro, Alabama. 
    Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Ordinances of the City of Scottsboro, Alabama, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Code of Ala. 1975. The abbreviation "Code of Ala. 1975" means the Code of Alabama, 1975, as now or hereafter amended. 
    Computation of time. The time within which any act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day; however, if the last day is a Sunday or a legal holiday, or a day on which the city office in which the act must be done is closed, the last day shall also be excluded. 
    Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either ... or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, except that in appropriate cases, the terms "or" and "and" are interchangeable: 
(1)  "And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)  "Or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  "Either ... or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination. 
    County. The term "county" means Jackson County, Alabama. 
    Delegation of authority. A provision that authorizes or requires a city officer or city employee to perform an act or make a decision authorizes such officer or employee to act or make a decision through subordinates. 
    Gender. Words of one gender include all other genders. 
    Health department, board of health and health officer. References to the term "health department" are to the county health department or any designee thereof. References to the term "board of health" are to the county board of health or any designee thereof. References to the term "health officer" are to the county health officer or any designee thereof. 
    Includes. The term "includes" does not limit a term to a specified example. 
    Joint authority. Words giving a joint authority to three or more persons give such authority to a majority of such persons. 
    May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive and not mandatory. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Must. The term "must" is mandatory. 
    Number. Words in the singular include the plural. Words in the plural include the singular. 
    Oath. A solemn affirmation is the equivalent to an oath, and a person shall be deemed to have sworn if such person makes such an affirmation. 
    Officers, departments, etc. References to officers, departments, boards, commissions or employees are to city officers, city departments, city boards, city commissions and city employees. 
    Owner. The term "owner," as applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or part of such property. 
    Person. The term "person" means any human being, any governmental or political subdivision or public agency, any public or private corporation, any partnership, any firm, association or other organization, any receiver, trustee, assignee, agent or other legal representative of any of the foregoing or any other legal entity. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" means any property other than real property. 
    Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Premises. The term "premises," as applied to real property, includes land and structures. 
    Property. The term "property" includes real property, personal property and mixed property. 
    Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means that portion of the street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature or subscription by mark. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The term "state" means the State of Alabama. 
    Street. The term "street" includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, bridge, viaduct, trestle and the approaches to any bridge, viaduct or trestle within the city. 
    Tenant or occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," as applied to premises, include any person holding a written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of such premises, alone or with others. 
    Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses. The future tense includes the present tense. 
    Week. The term "week" means a period of seven consecutive days. 
    Writing. The term "writing" includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
State Law reference- Similar rules of statutory construction, Code of Ala. 1975, § 1-1-1 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes; references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and are not titles of such sections, or of any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any such section, including the catchline, is amended or reenacted. 
(b)  History notes, editor's notes, cross references and state law references that appear in this Code after sections or subsections or that otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  Unless specified otherwise, all references to chapters or sections are to chapters or sections of this Code. 
State Law reference- Similar rules of statutory construction, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 1-1-14, 1-1-15. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  Unless specifically provided otherwise, the repeal of an ordinance does not revive any previously repealed ordinance. 
(b)  The repeal or amendment of an ordinance does not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor does such repeal or amendment affect any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the amendment or repeal. 
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of the Code and printed for inclusion in the Code. Portions of this Code repealed by subsequent ordinances may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. 
(b)  Amendments to provisions of this Code may be made with the following language: "Section (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) of the Scottsboro Code is hereby amended to read as follows:...." 
(c)  If a new section, subdivision, division, article or chapter is to be added to the Code, the following language may be used: "Section (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) of the Scottsboro Code is hereby created to read as follows:...." 
(d)  All provisions desired to be repealed should be repealed specially by section, subdivision, division, article or chapter number, as appropriate, or by setting out the repealed provisions in full in the repealing ordinance. 
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of the supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as necessary to do so in order to embody them into a unified code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Arrange the material into appropriate organizational units. 
(2)  Supply appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be included in the Code and make changes in any such catchlines, headings and titles or in any such catchlines, headings and titles already in the Code. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be added to the Code. 
(4)  Where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing numbers assigned to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections. 
(5)  Change the words "this ordinance" or similar words to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," "this subdivision," "this section" or "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in the Code). 
(6)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinances inserted in the Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means any of the following: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, a person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or by any combination thereof; provided, however, that: 
(1)  A corporation convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00, plus costs of court. 
(2)  In the enforcement of the penalties prescribed in Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-191, the fine shall not exceed $5,000.00, and the sentence of imprisonment or hard labor shall not exceed one year. 
(3)  In the enforcement of a Class A misdemeanor, including a domestic violence offense, the fine may not exceed $5,000.00, and the sentence of imprisonment may not exceed one year. 
(4)  The maximum fine for every person either convicted for violating any of the following misdemeanor offenses adopted as a violation of this Code or adjudicated as a youthful offender shall be $1,000.00: 
a.  Criminal mischief in the second degree, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-7-22. 
b.  Criminal mischief in the third degree, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-7-23. 
c.  Theft of property in the third degree, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-8-5. 
d.  Theft of lost property in the third degree, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-8-9. 
e.  Theft of services in the third degree, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-8-10.3. 
f.  Receiving stolen property in the third degree, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-8-19. 
g.  Tampering with availability of gas, electricity, or water, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-8-23. 
h.  Possession of traffic sign; notification; destruction, defacement, etc., of traffic sign or traffic control device; defacement of public building or property, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 13A-8-71 and 13A-8-72. 
i.  Offenses against intellectual property, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-8-102. 
j.  Theft by fraudulent leasing or rental, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 13A-8-140 through 13A-8-144. 
k.  Charitable fraud in the third degree, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-9-75. 
l.  Illegal possession of food stamps in the third degree, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-9-91. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance: 
(1)  As to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, such violations are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief, and each day that the violation continues constitutes a separate offense. 
(2)  As to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each act of violation constitutes a separate offense. 
(e)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent suspension or revocation of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
State Law reference- Limitations on penalties, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-9. 
Sec. 1-8. - Severability. 
    The sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code and all provisions adopted by reference in this Code are severable so that if any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause and phrase of this Code or of any provision adopted by reference in this Code is declared unconstitutional or invalid by a valid judgement of a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgement shall not affect the validity of any other section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause and phrase of this Code or of any provision adopted by reference in this Code, for the council declares that it is its intent that it would have enacted this Code and all provisions adopted by reference in this Code without such invalid or unconstitutional provisions. 
Sec. 1-9. - Provisions deemed continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as legislation previously adopted by the city relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-10. - Code does not affect prior offenses or rights. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects any offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code does not authorize any use or the continuation of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any city ordinance on the effective date of this Code. 
Sec. 1-11. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any ordinance or portion of an ordinance: 
(1)  Annexing property into the city. 
(2)  Deannexing property or excluding property from the city. 
(3)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(4)  Authorizing or approving any contract, deed or agreement. 
(5)  Making or approving any appropriation or budget. 
(6)  Granting any right or franchise. 
(7)  Providing or establishing personnel policies. 
(8)  Providing for salaries or other officer or employee benefits. 
(9)  Adopting or amending a comprehensive plan. 
(10)  Levying or imposing any special assessment. 
(11)  Dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision or providing subdivision regulations. 
(12)  Dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street. 
(13)  Levying or imposing taxes not codified in this Code. 
(14)  Establishing traffic or parking restrictions or regulations for specific locations in the city. 
(15)  Rezoning specific property, approving a planned unit development or granting a variance or otherwise pertaining to zoning. 
(16)  That is temporary, although general in effect. 
(17)  That is special, although permanent in effect. 
(18)  The purpose of which has been accomplished. 
(b)  The ordinances designated in subsection (a) of this section continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipalities generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-40-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1-2-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- City council generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-40 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-19-2-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RULES OF ORDER AND PROCEDURE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Council rules authorized, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-52. 

Sec. 2-40. - Generally. 
    The rules or order of procedure herein contained shall govern deliberations and meetings of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 471, § 3, 10-28-2002) 
Sec. 2-41. - Amendment or suspension. 
    The rules of the city council may be altered, amended or temporarily suspended by a vote of two-thirds of the members present. 
(Ord. No. 471, § 17, 10-28-2002) 
Sec. 2-42. - Robert's Rules. 
    Roberts Rules of Order, Newly Revised, 11th edition is hereby adopted as the rules of procedure for this council in those situations which cannot be resolved by the rules set out in this division. 
(Ord. No. 505, § 1(24), 9-26-2005) 
Sec. 2-43. - Deciding questions of order. 
    All questions of order shall be decided by the presiding officer of the city council with the right of appeal to the city council by any member. 
(Ord. No. 471, § 12, 10-28-2002) 
Sec. 2-44. - Order of business. 
    The order of business in all instances for meetings of the city council shall be as follows: 
(1)  A call to order. 
(2)  Invocation. 
(3)  Pledge of allegiance to the flag. 
(4)  Roll call. 
(5)  Adoption of agenda. 
(6)  Approval of minutes. 
(7)  Old business. 
(8)  New business. 
(9)  Reports of standing committees. 
(10)  Reports of special committees. 
(11)  Reports of officers. 
(12)  Presentation of petitions, delegations, applications, complaints, appeals, communications, and transaction of other business. 
(Ord. No. 471, § 2, 10-28-2002) 
Sec. 2-45. - Regular meetings. 
    Regular meetings of the city council shall be held on the following dates: 
(1)  The second and fourth Monday of each month. 
(2)  Work sessions shall be held on the first and third Monday of each month or any other time properly called for a special work session. 
(3)  Council committee meetings shall be held on the third Monday of each month or any other time properly called for said committee meetings. 
(Ord. No. 471, § 4, 10-28-2002; Ord. No. 521, § 1, 12-11-2006; Ord. No. 547, § 1, 4-3-2009) 
State Law reference- Regular meetings, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-50. 
Sec. 2-46. - Special meetings. 
    Special meeting may be held by serving notice on each member of the city council not less than 24 hours before the time set for such special meetings. 
(Ord. No. 471, § 5, 10-28-2002) 
State Law reference- Special meetings, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-40. 
Sec. 2-47. - Hour of meetings; adjourned meetings; open to public; notice to news media. 
    All regular meetings of the council shall convene at 6:00 p.m. at the city hall, except that adjourned regular meetings shall convene at the time and place specified in the minutes providing for and authorizing such adjourned meeting. All meetings, regular and special, shall be open to the public except as may be otherwise provided by law. The city clerk shall give reasonable advance notice of all city council meetings to those of the local news media who request such notice. 
(Ord. No. 471, § 7, 10-28-2002) 
State Law reference- Time and place of meetings, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-49; public meeting requirements, Code of Ala. 1975, § 36-25A-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-48. - Public addressing council. 
    No person not a member of the city council shall be allowed to address the same while in session without permission of the presiding officer. 
(Ord. No. 471, § 8, 10-28-2002) 
Sec. 2-49. - When motions, ordinances and resolutions to be written. 
    Motions shall be reduced to writing when required by the presiding officer of the city council or any member of the city council. All resolutions and ordinances shall be in writing. 
(Ord. No. 471, § 9, 10-28-2002) 
Sec. 2-50. - Motions to reconsider. 
    Motions to reconsider must be by a member who voted with a majority, and at the same or next succeeding meeting of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 471, § 10, 10-28-2002) 
Sec. 2-51. - Yeas and nays. 
    Whenever it shall be required by one or more members, the "yeas" and "nays" shall be recorded; and any member may call for a division on any question. 
(Ord. No. 471, § 11, 10-28-2002) 
Sec. 2-52. - Presiding officer addressing council, etc. 
    The presiding officer of the city council may, at his discretion, call any member to take the chair, to allow him to address the city council, make a motion, or discuss any other matter at issue. 
(Ord. No. 471, § 13, 10-28-2002) 
Sec. 2-53. - Order of motions. 
    Motions to lay any matter on the table shall be first in order; and on all questions, the last amendment, the most distant day, and the largest sum shall be first put. 
(Ord. No. 471, § 14, 10-28-2002) 
Sec. 2-54. - Meetings to be public. 
    All meetings of the city council shall be public, except as may be otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 471, § 15, 10-28-2002) 
State Law reference- Public meeting requirements, Code of Ala. 1975, § 36-25A-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-55. - Adjournment. 
    A motion for adjournment shall always be in order. 
(Ord. No. 471, § 16, 10-28-2002) 
Sec. 2-56. - Reports to the city council. 
    The chairperson of each respective committee, or the alderman acting for him in his place, shall submit or make all reports to the city council when so requested by the presiding officer or any member of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 471, § 18, 10-28-2002) 
Sec. 2-57. - Public meetings; public addressing council. 
    All official actions of the city council shall be taken in open meetings except as otherwise provide by law. The public is invited to attend council meetings and shall be given limited time to voice opinions, present petitions and express concerns through the following procedure: 
(1)  An item entitled delegations will be added to the agenda of each regular council meeting and work session. A delegation may consist of one or more concerned citizens. Citizens desiring to address the council will be given an opportunity to do so at this time on the agenda. 
(2)  If the delegation consists of more than one concerned citizen, a spokesperson will be designated by the group to represent the group. 
(3)  Each delegation will be given five minutes to express their concern to the council. 
(4)  Delegations will not be allowed to make slanderous nor libelous statements concerning employees of the city nor members of the community; the good name and character of individuals will not be addressed at this open meeting. 
(5)  The council will not take any action at the end of any delegation report but may ask the mayor to look into the concern expressed by citizens. The council may also suggest that the delegation contact the mayor or appropriate department head. 
(6)  A sign-in sheet will be provided for delegations to indicate that they wish to address the council for 30 minutes before the council meets and shall be closed when the meeting is called to order. Each delegation shall list the topic of the citizen/group concern. 
(7)  A maximum of 30 minutes shall be allowed for delegations at any meeting. 
(Ord. No. 471, § 19, 10-28-2002) 
State Law reference- Public meeting requirements, Code of Ala. 1975, § 36-25A-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-58. - Expenditures. 
    All ordinances, resolutions or propositions submitted to the city council which require the expenditure of money shall lie over until the next meeting, provided that such ordinances, resolutions or propositions may be considered earlier by unanimous consent of the city council; and provided, further, that this rule shall not apply to the current expenses of, or contracts previously made with, or regular salaries of officers, or wages of employees of the city. 
(Ord. No. 471, § 20, 10-28-2002) 
Sec. 2-59. - Designated staff to attend meetings. 
    The city clerk, engineer, attorney, and chief of police, and such other officers or employees shall, when requested, attend all meetings of the city council and shall remain in the council room for such length of time as the city council may direct. 
(Ord. No. 471, § 21, 10-28-2002) 
Secs. 2-60-2-76. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 2-77. - Salary of mayor and councilmembers. 
(a)  The salary of the mayor shall be as follows: 
(1)  Beginning November 1, 2016: $76,000.00. 
(2)  Beginning November 1, 2017: $78,000.00. 
(3)  Beginning November 1, 2018: $80,000.00. 
(4)  Beginning November 1, 2019: $82,000.00. 
And thereafter until changed by the city council in accordance with state law. 
(b)  Councilmembers shall each receive as an annual salary 15 percent of the salary of the mayor, payable in equal monthly installments. Provided, however, that compensation for any councilmember who shall serve as president of the council shall be an additional $50.00 per month and that compensation for any councilmember who shall serve as president pro tempore of the council shall be an additional $25.00 per month. 
(Ord. No. 589, §§ 1, 2, 2-22-2016) 
State Law reference- Salary authorized, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-6 et seq. 
Sec. 2-78. - Employee handbook. 
    The city council does hereby adopt by reference thereto the rules and regulations which have been printed as a code in book form, the same being the 2004 edition of the city. 
(Ord. No. 492, § 1, 10-1-2004) 
Sec. 2-79. - Appointment and removal of officers and department heads. 
(a)  The following officers of the city shall be appointed by a majority vote of the city council and said officers' terms shall be consecutive and coextensive with that of the mayor. Said officers shall continue to serve until their successors are elected: 
(1)  City clerk. 
(2)  City attorney. 
(3)  Chief, police department. 
(4)  Chief, fire department. 
(5)  Human resources director. 
(6)  Finance director. 
(7)  Director of public works. 
(8)  Director of recreation. 
(b)  All officers set out in subsection (a) of this section shall be directed by the mayor and report to the mayor but shall, when requested, report to the designated council committee chair to keep the council advised of the situation in their departments. 
(c)  All officers set out in subsection (a) of this section are exempt employees of the city and may be removed prior to their term of office for incompetency, malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or conduct detrimental to the order and discipline which indicates habitual neglect of duty pursuant to the statutes of the state. 
(d)  Any new hiree in any of the above officer positions shall be interviewed by the mayor and council committee for that particular department which shall make a recommendation to the full council to fill said position. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 1, 10-12-2015) 
Secs. 2-80-2-101. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-102-2-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TREE COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-131. - Findings. 
    The city council finds and determines as follows: That trees are recognized as a valid asset providing a more healthful and beautiful environment in which to live, they provide oxygen, shade, aesthetics, and a priceless psychological counterpoint to the manmade urban setting, and they are economically beneficial in attracting new industry, residents, and visitors; when the proper varieties are grown in the right places, they enhance the value and marketability of property and promote the stability of desirable neighborhoods; that valuable advice and guidance to the mayor and city council will result from the appointment of a tree commission. 
(Ord. No. 233, § 1, 12-10-1984) 
Sec. 2-132. - Established; membership. 
    There is hereby established a tree commission. The mayor and city councilmembers who are chairpersons of the committee on streets, committee on sanitation, and committee on parks and recreation shall serve as ex-officio members on the commission. In addition, the state forester of the county shall be an additional automatic member of the tree commission. In addition thereto, up to ten of the members shall be appointed from the citizens. All members shall serve for three years with the exception of ex-officio and automatic members who shall serve on the tree commission during the term of their office or tenure of employment. All members shall serve until their successors are appointed or elected. 
(Ord. No. 233, § 2, 12-10-1984; Ord. No. 435, § 1, 6-22-1998; Ord. No. 494, § 1, 3-21-2005) 
Sec. 2-133. - Meetings. 
    The commission shall provide in its minutes for regular periodic meetings. Meetings may also be called by the mayor, by either of the councilmembers, or by any three members of the commission, after giving not less than three days' notice of the date, time and place of the special meeting. 
(Ord. No. 233, § 3, 12-10-1984) 
Sec. 2-134. - Functions. 
    The tree commission shall make recommendations to the mayor and council on the needs of the municipality in connection with its tree planting program; shall recommend the type and kind of trees to be planted upon municipal streets, parks and other public places within the municipality; shall assist the mayor and council in providing information regarding the protection, maintenance, removal, and planting of trees on public property and, where requested by the owner, on private property; shall meet with the city planning commission and assist in making a master street plan by recommending the use and species of trees; shall recommend to the mayor and city council which trees are considered unwanted weed trees, and identify and recommend removal of dead, dying, diseased or insect infected trees; and shall make studies and report back to the mayor and council with recommendations on matters concerning trees in the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 233, § 4, 12-10-1984) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Alcoholic beverages, Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-1-1 et seq.; minimum age for purchase, etc. of alcohol, Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-1-5; sales to underage persons, Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-25(a)(3); purchase or consumption of alcohol by underage persons, Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-25(a)(18); local regulation of alcoholic beverages, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 45-36A-100, 45-36A-100.01. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Scottsboro Alcoholic Beverage Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 586, art. 1, § 1, 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 4-2. - Purpose. 
    This chapter is enacted for the purposes among others, of promoting the general health, safety, and welfare of the city, of establishing reasonable standards for the regulation and control of the sale, delivery, and consumption of alcoholic beverages, and of protecting and preserving certain areas, through reasonable consideration, among others, to the character of the areas and their peculiar suitability for particular uses, to the congestion in the roads and streets, all with the general view of promoting desirable living conditions and sustaining stability of neighborhoods and property values, and to the prevention of undesirable persons from engaging in or having any interest in alcoholic beverages. This chapter shall be construed as an exercise by the city of the police power of the state delegated to the city for the regulation of traffic in alcoholic beverages within the city as provided by state law. 
(Ord. No. 586, art. 1, § 2, 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 4-3. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall only be in force and effect within the corporate limits of the city, and shall not apply within the police jurisdiction outside the corporate limits. 
(Ord. No. 586, art. 1, § 3, 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 4-4. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The definitions set forth in Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3-1 are adopted by reference and made a part hereof as if fully set forth herein. 
    Abandonment means the closing of a licensed business for a period of time greater than 12 months, regardless of the purpose, reason, or circumstances. 
    Association means a partnership, limited partnership, limited liability company (LLC) or any other form of unincorporated enterprise. 
    Bartender/server/waiter/waitress means an employee of a retail alcoholic beverage license who is directly involved with the opening, mixing, dispensing, serving, or final sale of alcoholic beverages to a customer of the licensed establishment. 
    Board means the alcoholic beverage control board of the state. 
    Bottomless means the state of undress wherein a person is wearing no clothing below the waist, or where a person is exhibiting any portion of the buttocks, anus, rectum, genitalia, or pubic area. 
    Business owner means a person issued a privilege license by the city to conduct routine business. 
    Child care facility means a child development program or club that promotes extended educational services that is funded partially or completely by federal, state, or local government revenue (i.e. Head Start Programs, Boys & Girls Club, etc.). The term "child care facility" shall also include any day care center licensed by the state department of human resources. 
    Church means an entire house or structure set apart primarily for use for the purposes of public worship, and which is tax exempt under the laws of the state, and in which religious services are held and with which a clergyman is associated, and the entire structure, not rented or leased, is kept for that use and not put to any other use inconsistent therewith. For the purposes of this chapter, a chapel or any room used for religious purposes and called by a name within a nursing home, retirement home, hospital, medical clinic, funeral home or cemetery shall not be considered a church. 
    City alcohol license fee means a fee charged by the city to a person that has been granted approval by the board for the privilege of selling alcoholic beverages within the city limits. 
    Club : 
(1)  Class I. A corporate association organized or formed in good faith by authority of law and which must have at least 100 paid-up members. It must be the owner, lessee, or occupant of an establishment operated solely for the objects of a national, social, patriotic, political, or athletic nature or the like, but not for pecuniary gain, and the property as well as the advantages of which belong to all the members and which maintains an establishment provided with special space and accommodations where, in consideration of payment, food with or without lodging is habitually served. The club shall hold regular meetings, continue its business through officers regularly elected, admit members by written application, investigation and ballot and charge and collect dues from elected members. 
(2)  Class II. A corporation or association organized or formed in good faith by authority of law and which must have at least 50 paid-up members. It must be the owner, lessee, or occupant of an establishment operated solely for the objects of a national, social, patriotic, political, or athletic nature or the like. The club shall hold regular meetings continue its business through officers regularly elected, admit members by written application, investigation and ballot and charge and collect dues from elected members. 
    Convenience store means an establishment that sells convenience items, snacks, grocery items, gasoline, and/or other motor fuels. A convenience store shall not be considered a package store if no more than 25 percent of the floor space, excluding coolers and dry storage area, is dedicated to the public display of alcoholic beverages. 
    Corporation means a corporation or joint stock association organized under the laws of the state, the United States, or any other state, territory or foreign country, or dependency. 
    Distributor means any person or association who directly sells alcoholic beverages to retailers and business owners who are involved in the retail sale of alcoholic beverages. 
    Engaged in business means a person who has a fixed place of business offering for sale or consumption any alcoholic beverages within the corporate limits, or if pursuant to an agreement of sale, expressed or implied, that person delivers any alcoholic beverage within the corporate limits. 
    Fixed place of business means any place where any alcoholic beverage is kept or stored for sale or delivery. 
    Fortified wine or vinous liquor means any wine containing more than 161/2 percent alcohol by volume but not more than 24 percent. The term "fortified wine" means vinous liquor. 
    Grocery store means a retail establishment whose primary function is the sale of packaged or unprepared food and grocery items for consumption off the premises and whose annual gross sales of alcoholic beverages do not exceed ten percent of its total gross sales and whose floor space is at least 5,000 square feet; a retail establishment selling gasoline shall not be considered a grocery store. 
    Importer means any person, association or corporation engaged in importing alcoholic beverages, liquor, wine, or beer, manufactured outside of the United States of America into the state or for sale or distribution in the state, or to the board or a licensee of the board. 
    License means a retail alcoholic beverage license or any other license issued by the board requiring consent and approval of the city council. 
    Licensee means any person licensed by the city or the board to engage in business involving the sale or delivery of any alcoholic beverage. 
    Lounge : 
(1)  Class I lounge means any place or premises operated by a responsible person of good reputation in which alcoholic beverages of all types may be offered for sale for on-premises consumption and off-premises consumption, but which does not meet the requirement for a restaurant-lounge or private club lounge and meets the following requirements: The premises must have a lounge area of at least 1,000 square feet on one floor in one room, the area to be equipped with tables and chairs and capable of sitting at least 30 persons and have a minimum 30 public and or private parking spaces. 
(2)  Class II lounge-package store means a class II lounge retail liquor license, also known as a retail liquor for off-premises consumption license, where the licensee who operates the licensed premises for the sale of all classes of alcoholic beverages in the original unopened containers for off-premises consumption only. In addition to meeting all other legal requirements, such licensee must also comply with the ABC Regulation 20-X-5-.13. 
    Manager means an employee of a retail alcoholic beverage licensee who is given the responsibility and authority by the licensee to direct the operation of the licensed establishment, either solely or in conjunction with other similarly designated employees, by directing the activities of other employees of the licensed establishment. Such direction could include, but not be limited to, such responsibilities as assignment of employee tasks, scheduling of employee hours, evaluation of employee performances, and employee hiring or discipline. 
    Manufacturer means any person, association or corporation engaged in the producing, bottling, manufacturing, distilling, rectifying or compounding of alcoholic beverages, liquor, beer or wine in the state or for sale or distribution in the state or to the board or to a licensee of the board. 
    Meal means a diversified selection of food some of which is not capable of being consumed in the absence of at least some articles of tableware, and which cannot be conveniently consumed while one is standing or walking about. 
    Merchandise store with incidental table wine sales means an establishment principally operated for the sale of apparel, home decor, art, jewelry, antiques, or specialty gift merchandise, and that also offers the sale of a diversified selection of both domestic and imported table wine, but not beer or liquor, in unopened containers for off-site consumption. Such establishments may apply for a license for retail table wine for off-premises consumption. The sale of alcoholic beverages shall be no more than ten percent of its gross annual sales, and no more than 15 percent of the public floor space may be dedicated to the public display of alcoholic beverages. In addition, the owner of a merchandise store with incidental table wine sales may apply with the city for an on-premises wine license for the purpose of offering up to two wine tastings per month of their product. With respect to these tastings, no alcohol shall be served free of charge. In such cases, the establishment may also apply for a retail table wine license for on-premises consumption. 
    Minor means any person under 21 years of age. 
    Open container means a container containing alcoholic beverages, which has been opened or unsealed subsequent to filling and sealing by the manufacturer or importer. 
    Package store means those retail licensees who declare to the board that their primary business shall be the sale of alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption and who further declare their compliance with Regulation 20-X-5-.13 of the board. 
    Person means a natural person, association, or corporation, or other legal entity. Whenever used in provisions prescribing a fine or imprisonment, the term "person," as applied to the term "association," means the partners or members thereof. As applied to corporation, the term "person" shall mean the officers thereof. As applied to a corporation, the term "person" means the officers thereof, except as to incorporated clubs; the term "person" means such individual who, under the bylaws of such clubs, shall have jurisdiction over the possession and sale of alcoholic beverages therein. 
    Person in charge (PIC) means each licensee, except a licensed individual who is on the premises, shall have a designated person who is at least 21 years of age present and in actual charge of the business being conducted under the license at any time the licensed establishment is kept open for business, whether or not the privileges of the license are being exercised. The name of the designated person of every retail licensee shall be posted in an area of the establishment, readily available to ABC board personnel, in letters not less than one inch in size, during the time he is in charge. 
    Privilege license means a privilege license issued by the city to a person to conduct routine business. 
    Privilege license fee means a fee charged by the city to a person that has been granted approval by the board the privilege of selling alcoholic beverages with the corporate limits as herein enumerated and defined. 
    Public place means any place or gathering which the public generally attends or is admitted to either by invitation, common consent or right, or by payment of an admission or other charge, and without limiting the foregoing, shall include any streets, alleys, sidewalks, public easements, rights-of-way, or parking lots designed for use by the general public, public buildings, buildings which are open to the public, including, but not limited to, school buildings or grounds, parks, libraries, places where school-related and recreational games or contests are held, theaters, auditoriums, skating rinks, dance halls or other place of amusement or any club, provided that such terms shall not mean or include premises which have been duly licensed under the ordinances the city and the laws of the state for the sale or consumption of such beverages, and provided further that no private gathering is included within the meaning of the term "public place" with respect to the owners or occupants of such premises, or to any persons invited therein. 
    Restaurant means a reputable place licensed as a restaurant, operated by a responsible person of good reputation, in which a selection of food, refreshments, and alcoholic beverages are offered for sale for consumption within the building or adjacent outdoor seating areas. All areas of the restaurant shall comply with any applicable building code occupancy requirements. In order to be deemed a restaurant, the following criteria must be met: 
(1)  The facility shall have a kitchen in which food is prepared for consumption by the public, which is separate and apart from the dining area, in which the food or meals are served. To meet the definition of the term "restaurant," the establishment or facility shall serve at least four meals per week when open for business, which shall be for no less than four days per week, with the exception of holidays, vacations, and periods of repair, maintenance, or improvements. The facility's kitchen shall remain open so that patrons may order food up until one hour before the establishment's closing time. 
(2)  The facility shall meet the minimum requirements for a state alcoholic beverage control board on-premises license. 
(3)  The dining area shall have adequate climate control, with the exception of any outdoor seating area. 
(4)  The serving of food or meals shall constitute the principal business of such establishment, with the serving of alcoholic beverages being only an incidental part of the business, defined as follows: During any 90-day period, the gross receipts from the serving of meals and food shall constitute at least 50 percent of the total gross receipts of the business. The licensee shall maintain separate cash register receipts, one for food and one for alcoholic beverages. In addition, the licensee shall maintain all invoices for the purchases of food and all types of alcoholic beverages and shall preserve such records for not less than one year. All such records shall be available for inspection and audit at the licensee's premises within the city during regular business hours as the city clerk, or duly authorized representative, may request. 
    Restaurant Class I means a facility or establishment which meets the criteria of the term "restaurant," and which meets the following additional requirements: 
(1)  Total dining area of greater than or equal to 400 square feet. 
(2)  The dining area shall be equipped with tables and chairs accommodating equal to or greater than 25 people at one time. 
(3)  At least seven meals per week shall be served when open for business, which shall be for no less than four days a week with the exception of holidays, vacations and periods of repair, maintenance, or improvements. The facility's kitchen shall remain open so that patrons may order food up until one hour before the establishment's closing time. 
    Restaurant Class II means a facility or establishment which meets the requirements of the term "restaurant," but which fails to meet the criteria of a restaurant, Class I as provided above, with the following exception: An establishment or facility that meets all of the requirements of a restaurant, Class II, and such establishment or facility is associated with a public golf course (with no less than nine holes), such facility shall have no minimum meal per day requirement, and provided further that food sales in any 90-day period shall equal a minimum of 20 percent of gross revenue of food and beverage operation. 
    Retailer means any person licensed by the board to engage in the retail sale of any alcoholic beverages to the consumer. 
    Sale or sell means any transfer of alcoholic beverages for consideration, and any gift in connection with, or as part of, a transfer or property other than alcoholic beverages for consideration. 
    School means a public or private elementary, intermediate, middle, junior high or senior high school. 
    Specialty beverage store means an establishment principally operated for the sale of a diversified selection of both domestic and imported beer and/or wine, but not liquor, in unopened containers for off-site consumption. Such establishments may apply for the following licenses: 
(1)  Retail table wine for off-premises consumption; and 
(2)  Retail beer license for off-premises consumption. 
In addition, the owner of a specialty beverage store may apply with the city for an on-premises beer and wine license for the purpose of offering up to no more than two wine/beer tastings per month of their product. With respect to these tastings, no alcohol shall be served free of charge. In such case, the establishment may also apply for a retail table wine license for on-premises consumption; and retail beer license for on-premises consumption. 
    Specialty wine and beer establishment means an establishment principally operated for the sale of diversified selection of domestic beer, imported beer, domestic wine, and imported wine. Where otherwise permitted by the board, such establishments must apply and hold the following licenses: 
(1)  Retail table wine (license) for off-premises consumption; 
(2)  Retail beer license for off-premises consumption; 
(3)  Retail table wine license for on-premises consumption; and 
(4)  Retail beer license for on-premises consumption; 
All sales for off-premises consumption must be in sealed, unopened containers. A specialty wine and beer establishment must also offer incidental food service, including the sale of food for on-premises consumption and the sale of containerized, gourmet foods for off-premises consumption, but not in such a manner that the establishment will constitute a Class I or Class II restaurant. A specialty wine and beer establishment shall offer up to two tasting events per month of their product. With respect to these tastings, no alcohol shall be served free of charge. 
    Topless means the state of undress wherein a person is wearing no clothing above the waist, or where a person is exhibiting any portion of the nipple or areola, or where the person is wearing clothing covering, in the case of females, less than 12 square inches of each breast. 
    Unopened container means a container containing alcoholic beverages, which has not been opened or unsealed subsequent to filling and sealing by the manufacturer or importer. 
(Ord. No. 586, art. 1, § 4, 2-23-2015) 
Secs. 4-5-4-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONTROL OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 

Sec. 4-27. - Location of premises near church, school, or child care facility. 
(a)  Subject to the exceptions contained in this section, no facility or establishment shall be authorized to be engaged in business involving alcoholic beverages, pursuant to any category of license where the building in which the facility or establishment is located is less than 150 feet from any building in which there is located a church, school, park or child care facility. This distance restriction shall not apply in the following cases: 
(1)  Where the church, school, or child care facility was established after the licensed premises became licensed to be engaged in a business involving alcohol, and said operation has not been abandoned or discontinued for any reason for a period of 12 months or longer. 
(2)  Where the licensed premises is a grocery store as defined in section 4-4. 
(b)  When measuring from a church, school, park or day care facility, the closest point on the exterior wall of the closest building of the church, school, or day care facility to the license applicant shall constitute the beginning point for measurement. When measuring from the license applicant, the closest point on the exterior wall of the building occupied by the applicant shall be used for measurement purposes if the building is occupied solely by the applicant; otherwise, such measurement shall be made from the closest point of the applicant's occupancy within the building in question. The method of the measurement is a straight line between these defined points. 
(c)  No business engaged is business involving alcoholic beverages shall be permitted unless in a commercial, agriculture or industrial zone under the city's zoning ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 586, art. II, § 1, 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 4-28. - Maintenance of order; report of violation. 
    It shall be the duty of each licensee and of each person-in-charge at any time charged with the management and supervision of any licensed premises, while the same is open to the public, to maintain order upon the premises and to exclude from the premises any person who is drunk and disorderly or who commits any breach of the peace, or who uses or engages in offensive, disorderly, threatening, abusive or insulting language, conduct or behavior with the intent to provoke a breach of the peace, or whereby a breach of the peace might be occasioned. It shall be the duty of each person in charge of any licensed premises within the city to immediately make a verbal report to the city police department of each incident involving physical harm to a person occurring on the licensed premises while open for business. It shall further be the duty of each licensee to make a written report of each such incident to the police department and to the local field office of the board within 36 hours thereof. 
(Ord. No. 586, art. II, § 2, 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 4-29. - Offenses in public. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink, sell, serve, dispense or give away, or attempt to drink, sell, serve or give away, any liquor, wine or malt or brewed beverages, while upon any street, alley sidewalk, public easement, right-of-way, parking lots designed for use by the general public or in any public building or upon any public property, or while in any other public place in the city. As used in this section, the term "public place" means and includes any place or gathering which the public generally attends or is admitted to, either by invitation, common consent or right, or by the payment of an admission or other charge, and, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, shall include library school buildings, and school athletic contests, provided that such term shall not mean or include premises which have been duly licensed by the city as provide by the Code of Alabama, 1975, and this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a business licensed by the city (whether or not the business is licensed to sell or furnish alcohol) to allow patrons, customers, invitees, or guests to bring alcoholic beverages onto the license premises. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for patrons, customers, invitees, or guests to bring alcoholic beverages onto premises licensed to do business by the city, whether or not the business is licensed to sell or furnish alcohol. 
(Ord. No. 586, art. II, § 3, 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 4-30. - Offenses by seller or agent. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or for any employee, servant, or agent of any person to sell, or offer for sale, any alcoholic beverages to any person visibly intoxicated. The person selling alcoholic beverages shall request a photo-ID as proof of age for any person purchasing alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to serve to a minor or allow a minor to be served any alcoholic beverage in any place where such beverages are sold. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person who operates any business licensed to be engaged in the business of alcoholic beverages to allow any such beverages to be consumed by any person under 21 years of age, on the premises where such alcoholic beverages are sold. 
(Ord. No. 586, art. II, § 4, 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 4-31. - Minors; offenses generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, furnish, give to, or purchase for any person under 21 years of age any alcoholic beverage, or to attempt to sell, furnish, give to, or purchase any alcoholic beverage for any minor person. 
(Ord. No. 586, art. II, § 5, 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 4-32. - Authorized hours. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, whether an alcoholic beverage licensee or not, to sell, offer for sale, or to serve dispense or offer for reward, or to offer to serve or dispense for reward any alcoholic beverage for off-premises (example: convenience/gas stores, package stores, grocery stores, drug stores or any and all other type of retail establishment holding an alcohol license) consumption between the hours of 12:00 a.m. on Sunday morning and 12:00 a.m. on Monday morning unless otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 586, art. II, § 7, 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 4-33. - Regulation of conduct. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, club, firm or corporation or the officers, members, agents, servants or persons in charge thereof at any club or at any other place to which the general public generally resorts or is admitted, which is a liquor, wine or beer licensed place, or any combination thereof, to permit, allow, conduct or condone any of the following: 
(1)  Topless or bottomless waitresses, waiters, dancers, servers, performers, or cashiers, or any lewd or indecent conduct. 
(2)  Acts, or simulated acts, of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law. 
(3)  Acts, or simulated acts, of caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals. 
(4)  Acts involving the displaying of the breast, anus, vulva or genitals. 
(5)  Permitting any patron, customer or member to touch, caress or fondle the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals, or any part of the body or clothing of a performer or entertainer. 
(6)  Permitting the showing of films, still pictures, electronic reproductions or other visual reproductions depicting: 
a.  Acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law. 
b.  Any person being touched, caressed or fondled on the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals. 
c.  Scenes wherein a person displays the breast, vulva or the anus or the genitals. 
d.  Scenes wherein artificial devices or inanimate objects are employed to depict, or drawings are employed to portray, any of the prohibited activities described above in this section. 
(7)  An employee including, but not limited to, waiter, waitress, dancer, entertainer, performer, or model employed upon the licensed premises to sit at tables with customers, members, or guests while so employed and while open for business. 
(8)  Any person at the time employed or engaged on the licensed premises as an entertainer or performer to also serve as a waiter or waitress while so employed. 
(9)  The showing of the human male or female genitals, public area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a full opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the darkened area surrounding the nipple, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a lewd or indecent manner by any waiter, waitress, dancer, entertainer, employee, model, or customer. 
(Ord. No. 586, art. II, § 8, 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 4-34. - Records; reports. 
    It shall be the duty of each person subject to the license tax imposed by this chapter to keep full and complete records of all purchases, sales, and deliveries of alcoholic beverages from which records can be readily obtained information as to the correct amount of license tax due the city. As a part of such records, each wholesaler shall keep an individual ledger or card account for each of his customers, and said ledger or card account shall show the correct name and address of each person to whom any alcoholic beverages are delivered, together with the dates thereof and the number of cases sold or delivered, and each wholesaler shall also keep, as evidence of the foregoing a receipted delivery ticket signed by each purchaser or his authorized agent. Each retailer shall keep an individual ledger or card record showing the correct name and address of each person from whom he purchased alcoholic beverages, a delivery ticket evidencing each such purchase, the date thereof and the number of cases purchased. The aforesaid records shall be kept posted currently and shall be preserved for not less than one year following each calendar year. All such records shall be available for inspection and audit at the licensed premises within the city during regular business hours by the city clerk, or duly authorized representative, as requested. Failure to keep any of the records required by this section, or elsewhere in this chapter, or refusal to make any records available to the city clerk, or duly authorized representative, shall constitute grounds for revocation of any license issued under this chapter. Further, an annual report, under oath, shall be filed with the city clerk, or duly authorized representative, in January each year, showing the purchases of the entire previous calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 586, art. II, § 9, 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 4-35. - Packaging of beverages. 
    Retail licensees for off-premises sale of individual or packages of six or less alcoholic beverages must place each container thereof in a bag, box, or other similar opaque covering prior to the customer's leaving the license building used for alcoholic beverage sales. 
(Ord. No. 586, art. II, § 10, 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 4-36. - Delivery vehicles. 
    A manufacturer, importer, or wholesaler, servant, agent, or employee of the same shall deliver all alcoholic beverages in vehicles bearing the required information on each side of the vehicle as required by the board. 
(Ord. No. 586, art. II, § 11, 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 4-37. - Open containers. 
    Except as provided in Code of Ala. 1975, § 20-3A-20.1, it shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Possess or consume any open container containing alcoholic beverages while upon or along any public place, street, road or highway in the city, except when approved by the city council for special events. 
(2)  Possess or consume any alcoholic beverages at any public park, municipal playground, municipal recreation facility, school playground, school stadium, or school recreational facility, except as may be provided by law and/or when approved by the city council for special events. 
(3)  Possess or consume any alcoholic beverage in an open glass, bottle, cup, can, keg, bag or other receptacle not its original container while upon or along any public street, road or highway in the city or while in any automobile or other motor vehicle on or along any public street, road or highway in the city, except when approved by the city council for a special event. 
(Ord. No. 586, art. II, § 12, 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 4-38. - Discrimination prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any alcoholic beverage licensee of the city to discriminate against any person with respect to the sale of any food, beverage, product, cover charge, or admission charge based upon familial status, race, color, creed, or sex. It is specifically provided that no alcoholic beverage licensee shall have or permit any entertainment, show, or presentation on the licensed premises to which any person is excluded based upon race, color, creed, or sex. This section shall apply to the licensee, manager, to any person in charge of any licensed premises, and to any employee of the licensee authorizing, permitting, or committing any violation hereof. 
(Ord. No. 586, art. II, § 13, 2-23-2015) 
Secs. 4-39-4-64. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LICENSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal approval of certain state licenses, Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-11 et seq. 

Sec. 4-65. - Alcohol license tax bond. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of each person subject to a license fee, privilege tax, or excise tax imposed by this article to deliver to the city a bond conditioned to promptly pay to said city all such amounts as are required to be paid to said city under the terms of this article, or any amendment hereto, and any other amount which may become due to the city for any license fee, privilege tax, or excise tax becoming due after the date of the bond. The amount of the bond shall be $2,500.00 for each location of the person's business that is engaged in activity with respect to which a license or excise tax under this article is imposed. Such a bond must remain in place continuously during the entire period that the person is subject to a license fee, privilege tax, or excise tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  With respect to those instances where the consent and approval of the city council is required with respect to the issuance of an alcoholic beverage license, such consent and approval will not be granted where the bond described in this section has not been delivered to the city clerk. Moreover, where such a bond is required by this section, no privilege license shall be granted, renewed, maintained, or allowed to be transferred where the city clerk, or his authorized representative, has not received or does not hold a valid and binding bond as required by this section. 
(c)  Said bond shall be posted in substantially the same manner and form as shown below: 
CITY OF SCOTTSBORO 
ALCOHOL ORDINANCE TAX OR FEE BOND 
    That ____________ , hereinafter called "principal," and City of Scottsboro, Alabama, a municipal corporation, in the sum of ____________ , for the payment of which well and truly to be made we hereby bind ourselves, our heirs, executors, administrators, successors and assigns, jointly and severally, firmly by these presents. 
    The condition of the foregoing is such, however, the whereas, as one of the conditions precedent to the consent an approval of the city council with respect to the issuance of any alcoholic beverage license, or to the granting, renewal, maintenance, transfer or allowance of a privilege license, the principal is required to deliver to the city a bond conditioned to promptly pay to said city all such amounts as are required to be paid to said city under the terms of Ordinance No. 586, or any amendment thereto, and any other amount which may become due to the city for any license fee, privilege tax, or excise tax imposed by said ordinance and becoming due after the date of the bond. 
    NOW, THEREFORE the condition of this obligation is such that if the principal shall faithfully comply with all the laws and ordinances of the city now in force, or that may hereafter be adopted, and will promptly pay to said city. All such amounts as may become due as required under the terms of the above license, then this obligation is to become null and void; otherwise to remain in full force and effect. 
    If the surety shall so elect, this bond may be canceled by providing notice through certified mail to the city clerk, or his designated representative. This notice shall provide for 30 days' notice to the city, and this bond shall be deemed canceled at the expiration of said 30 days; the surety remaining liable, however, subject to all the terms, conditions, and provisions of this bond, for any acts covered by this bond which may have been committed by the principal up to the date of such cancellation. 
    IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the said principal and the said surety have hereunto set their hands and seals at City of Scottsboro, Alabama on this the ____________ / ____________ / ____________ day of ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
    ____________ (Seal) 
    Principal 
    By ____________ (Seal) 
    ____________ (Seal) 
    Surety 
    By ____________ 
    Title 
(Ord. No. 586, art. III, § 1, 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 4-66. - Required; transfer; suspension; display. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have in such person's possession any alcoholic beverage with the city for the purpose of sale, storage, or delivery without having first procured from the city a privilege license and from the board of license entitling the applicant to engage in the alcoholic beverage transactions authorized thereby. Licenses issued under this article may not be assigned or transferred. The city is hereby authorized to allow the address for the privileged licensed premises to be changed from one place to another within the city, as the city may determine appropriate, but shall not allow the transaction of business at a place for which the license could not originally have been issued lawfully. 
(b)  In the event of a change of ownership of a licensed establishment, the current licensee shall be required to file a written statement of intent with the city clerk prior to either completing the sale of the licensed business or relinquishing management or financial control of the business operation, whichever occurs first; and additionally, the party to whom the licensed establishment is to be sold must file with the city a completed application for a city license within 20 days of notification to the city of the intent to sell, transfer, or assign the establishment. Upon request of the city clerk, or designated representative, any applicant may be requested to produce records of the business or the transaction surrounding the sale of the business. These records include, but are not limited to, lease agreements, land sale agreements, bank statements, stock transfers, minutes of corporate board meetings, bills of sale, and/or purchase invoices. Any failure to produce the requested records, or a determination by the city that the transaction is not in compliance with the requirements specified herein, shall result in immediate forfeiture of the city license upon notification of this determination and an opportunity for a public hearing by the city council as provided in section 4-69. 
(c)  Licenses issued by the city shall be deemed to terminate, by operation of law, when there is a change in ownership in a licensed establishment, or when a licensed establishment is leased, rented, or abandoned, or when possession is otherwise surrendered to another party. Provided, however, that an applicant for a new license at a currently licensed establishment may be allowed to operate the establishment for a period not to exceed 30 days if said applicant is in compliance with subsection (b) of this section. In such case, the original licensee shall continue to be responsible for the conduct, operation, and city tax liabilities of the establishment until such time as a license is issued by the city in the new licensee's name. 
(d)  Upon the temporary closing of the licensed establishment for a period in excess of 30 days, the city license to sell alcoholic beverages shall be immediately returned to the city clerk, or designated representative, to be held pending the reopening of the business. In the event the temporary closing is due to any renovation, remodeling, or repair to the licensed premises, the licensee shall provide written evidence of compliance with applicable building, fire, and health codes to the city clerk, or designated representative, prior to the release of the license. In the event that the establishment remains closed for 12 months or greater, for any purpose, the license shall be deemed terminated by operation of law. 
(e)  For the purposes of this section, the sale or transfer of 25 percent or more of a corporation's stock or interest in the business shall constitute a change in ownership of the licensed establishment. 
(f)  The city shall have the right to revoke any privilege license issued by the city for any violation of this chapter or the regulations of the board, after notice and opportunity for a hearing before the city council in accordance with the provisions of section 4-69. 
(g)  Every privilege license issued by the city to conduct normal and routine business and every license issued by the board shall be conspicuously and constantly exposed under a transparent substance in an area visible to the general public on the licensed premises. 
(h)  Each business that changes its name shall provide to the city clerk the new information within 30 days of the name change. 
(Ord. No. 586, art. III, § 2, 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 4-67. - Application for license; payment. 
(a)  Each applicant seeking the consent and approval of the city council for any license issued by the board shall make application to the city council as required by this article. Said application shall be upon an appropriate form supplied by the city clerk, or duly authorized representative and shall be signed and verified by oath or affirmation by the licensee, if a natural person, or in the case of a partnership, association or unincorporated enterprise, by a partner, limited liability company (LLC) or managing member thereof, or in the case of a corporation, by an executive officer thereof. The applicant shall deposit with the city clerk the required application fee that includes the background check with the state bureau of investigation and the amount of publication costs to be incurred hereunder upon filing the application. 
(b)  The municipal license application form, as provided by the city and shall be signed and verified by oath or affirmation by the owner, if a natural person, or in the case of a partnership, association, limited liability company, or unincorporated enterprise, by a partner or member thereof, or in the case of a corporation, by an executive officer thereof, and the form shall request the following information and statements: 
(1)  The name and residence of the applicant and how long he has resided in the indicated place, and if a partnership, association, limited liability company, unincorporated enterprise, or corporation the names and residence address of the partners, members, officers and directors, and how long each of such persons has resided at the indicated place. 
(2)  A description of the particular place for which the license is desired, which shall include the E911 address and legal description to the real property, and a description or plan of that part of the lounge where it is proposed to keep and sell liquor. 
(3)  The place of birth of the applicant, and, if a limited liability company or corporation, when and where formed or incorporated, and if not incorporated in the state, then whether or not it is duly qualified under the laws of the state to do business in the state. If a corporation, the application shall also contain a statement that all officers and directors of the corporation are reputable individuals. 
(4)  The names and addresses of the owner of the premises upon which the business is to be constructed, together with the names and addresses of all lessees and sublessees. A copy of any lease agreement under which the applicant has the right of possession, if the applicant is not the owner of the property, shall be filed as an attachment to the application. The certification of said application shall include the certification of said lease agreement; provided, however, that the amount of monthly rental or other compensation to be paid by the lessee under said lease may be struck out on said attached copy. 
(5)  That the applicant is not, or in the case of a partnership, limited liability company, or unincorporated enterprise, that the partners or members are not, and in the case of a corporation, that the officers and directors are not, in any manner pecuniarily interested either directly or indirectly in the profits in any other class of business regulated under this article and/or the alcoholic beverage licensing code (Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-1 et seq.), or if so interested, the extent of said interest, including the name of such business must be stated. 
(6)  That the applicant is the only person in any manner pecuniarily interested in the business so asked to be licensed, except as stated, and that no other person shall be in any manner pecuniarily interested therein during the continuance of the license. 
(7)  Whether the applicant, or in the case of a partnership, association, limited liability company, or unincorporated enterprise, any partner or member thereof, or in case of a corporation, any officer, director or stockholder thereof, has, during the three years immediately preceding the date of said application, had a license for the sale of spirituous or vinous liquors, fortified wine or table wine, or malt or brewed beverages, revoked or suspended by any governmental authority. 
(8)  A statement of whether the applicant has made application heretofore for a similar or other liquor license, and the disposition of such application. 
(9)  A statement showing the criminal records of the applicant, each partner, member, officer, member of the board of directors, landlord, and manager for the past preceding five years, and shall include every violation charged irrespective of disposition of each charge. Minor traffic offenses may be omitted; however, driving while intoxicated and reckless driving cases must be shown. 
(10)  Each applicant for a club retail liquor license shall also file with, and as a part of, the application the following: 
a.  A certified copy of the certificate of incorporation, and of the constitution and bylaws of such club. 
b.  A verified list of the paid-up members of such club at the time of the application, together with the resident address of each such paid-up member. 
c.  The name and residence address of the manager of the club. If the person shown as manager of the club ceases to be such manager, then the club shall notify the clerk within five days of such change, together with the names and resident address of any new manager. 
d.  A copy of any certificate from the Internal Revenue Service or Treasury Department concerning any exemption of the club from taxation. 
(11)  Written evidence that the applicant has obtained all required permits from the county department of public health and has fully met with the requirements of the fire prevention codes and ordinances of the city and of the laws of the state. 
(12)  Written evidence, of the type and substance required by the state alcoholic beverage control board and the state code and ABC board regulations, of the applicant's compliance with the state requirements mandate that the applicant have a sufficient net worth or, in the alternative, a sufficient policy of liability insurance to comply with said regulations as the same are in effect as of the date of the application. 
(Ord. No. 586, art. III, § 3, 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 4-68. - Review of applications. 
(a)  The board application shall be forwarded to the city clerk, or designated representative from the board field office. 
(b)  Said application for a municipal Class I lounge license shall be delivered to the city clerk who shall immediately thereafter deliver the same to the license inspector of the city, who shall conduct an investigation and inquire into all matters and things contained in the application and then submit said application, together with the results of his investigation, and his recommendation thereon, back to the city clerk who shall, in turn, submit same to the city council. The license inspector shall have ten days to complete said investigation, unless time is extended by the city council. 
(c)  The city clerk shall cause notice to be published by posting at city hall and on the city's webpage. 
(d)  The city clerk, or designated representative, shall be responsible for ensuring that applicable written approvals from city departments are included as a part of the application indicating compliance, or lack thereof, with the applicable requirements of each respective department. It will then be presented to the city council. 
(e)  The city clerk shall present the application at the next meeting of the city council. An application shall not be finally approved or denied until the next-following regular meeting of the city council; however any application may be held under advisement for a longer period. No initial application shall be approved except by the city council in a regular meeting, and the city council may in such regular meeting direct that any renewal application, specifying the particular application be withheld. 
(f)  Subsequent to the city council approval and the applicant's compliance with subsection (d) of this section, the city clerk, or designated representative, is hereby authorized to indicate, and communicate in writing, the city's approval for the issuance of a license for the applicant to the board. The method for the communication of this approval by the city shall be determined based on the most current mechanism indicated as acceptable by the board field office supervisor responsible for the county. 
(g)  Upon notification of board approval of the applicant for a state license, then the city shall issue a city license to the application after receiving the appropriate license fee. 
(Ord. No. 586, art. III, § 4, 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 4-69. - Public notice. 
    Upon receipt of an application, together with the results of the investigation and recommendations made thereon, if any is required, the city clerk shall cause notice to be posted stating that the application will be considered at the next regular meeting of the city council, which said notice must be posted as aforesaid at least six days in advance of the next regular meeting of the city council, and further stating the time and place that same is to be considered and that such time and place all persons residing, having a business, or being interested with the same, shall have an opportunity of being heard in opposition to or in favor of the application. The notice shall contain the common E911 address and legal description of the proposed establishment. 
(Ord. No. 586, art. III, § 5, 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 4-70. - Consideration of application; revocation. 
(a)  In rendering a decision on each application for a license under this chapter, the city council may consider, among others, the following factors: 
(1)  The effects upon residents, real property owners and businesses within 300 feet of the location for which a license is sought. 
(2)  The character and reputation of the applicant, each partner, member, officer, member of the board of directors, landlord, bartender and manager. 
(3)  The criminal records of the applicant, each partner, member officer, member of board of directors, landlord, bartender and manager. 
(4)  The location of the premises for which a license is sought and the number of establishments presently holding licenses within 300 feet of the location for which the license is sought. 
(5)  Compliance by the applicant each partner, member, officer, member of board of directors, landlord, bartender and manager with the laws of the state and ordinances of the city. 
(6)  Any other information deemed by the city council to be relevant to the public health, safety, and welfare city. 
(b)  In its sole discretion, the city may reconsider the issuance of any license, provided that seven days' notice is given to the licensee and a public hearing is conducted by the city council. At such hearing, the city council may consider any of the factors provided in subsection (a) of this section, regardless of whether such information arose before or after the issuance of the license. The city may revoke any license, in its discretion, if it finds that continued authority for the licensee to conduct business in alcoholic beverages is not in the interests of the city health, safety, or welfare. 
(c)  Any determination by the board to suspend or revoke a license issued by the board shall be recognized and given full force and effect by the city such that any license granted by the city permitting the licensee to engage in the same conduct or business shall thereby be suspended or revoked, as the case may be, effective simultaneously with the board's decision. 
(Ord. No. 586, art. III, § 6, 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 4-71. - Filing fee. 
    There is hereby required, as a filing fee to cover the costs of processing and investigating each application filed with the city for a city license of any kind or class, the sum of $150.00, and the city clerk or duly authorized representative shall not accept any application for any such license not accompanied by said payment to the city along with the payment of the publication costs, as required in this article. The city shall retain the filing fee to cover the expenses of processing and investigating said application, whether or not said application results in approval or denial; provided, however, that the filing fee for a special events license application shall be $75.00. 
(Ord. No. 586, art. III, § 7, 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 4-72. - License fees and taxes. 
(a)  Each person licensed by the board who shall engage in alcoholic beverage, liquor, beer or wine business within the city limits, prior to engaging in such business, shall pay to the city, for the privilege of so engaging in business, an annual privilege business license fee and further license fees as established below: 
(1)  Manufacturer license. Each person who has obtained a manufacturer license from the board pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-6 shall pay to the city an annual privilege license fee of $500.00. 
(2)  Importer license. Each person who has obtained an importer license from the board pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-7 et seq. shall pay to the city an annual license fee of $500.00. 
(3)  Liquor wholesale license. Each person has obtained a liquor wholesale license from the Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-8 shall pay to the city an annual privilege license fee of $750.00 
(4)  Wholesaler license for beer or table wine. Each person licensed as a beer wholesaler pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-9 shall pay to the city an annual license fee of 50 percent of the amount charged for a state beer and wine license by the state. In addition, each licensee will remit to the city clerk, on forms provided by such clerk, each month, the privilege or exercise tax levied on the sales of beer by the Code of Ala. 1975, title 28, ch. 3, art. 5B (Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3-190 et seq.) In addition, each licensee will remit to the city clerk, on forms provided by such clerk, each month, the privilege or excise tax levied on the sales of table wine by the Alabama Table Wine Act (Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-7-1 et seq.). Wholesale beer and wine dealers and/or distributors will not sell to any retail outlet that does not have a current city license. 
(5)  Warehouse license. Each person licensed by the board to receive, store or warehouse alcoholic beverages within the state pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-10 for transshipment inside and outside the state shall pay to the city an annual privilege license fee of $500.00. 
(6)  Lounge retail liquor license. Each person licensed by the board to operate a retail Class I lounge, pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-1, shall pay to the city an annual privilege license fee of $2,000.00. In addition thereto, each such licensee shall pay to the city on or before the 15th day of each calendar month for the privilege of so engaging in such business in the next-preceding calendar month an additional privilege license fee of ten percent to the gross purchases made by the licensee from the board during such next preceding calendar month, other than purchases of table wine. 
(7)  Retail liquor for off-premises consumption. Each person licensed by the board to operate a retail lounge also known as a Class II lounge pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-11 shall pay to the city an annual license fee of $1,500.00. In addition thereto, each such licensee shall pay to the city on or before the 15th day of each calendar month for the privilege of so engaging in such business in the next preceding calendar month an additional privilege license fee of six percent to the gross purchases made by the licensee from the board during such next-preceding calendar month, other than purchases of table wine. 
(8)  Club retail liquor license. Each person licensed by the board to sell table wine for off-premises consumption pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-15 shall pay to the city an annual privilege license fee of $1,500.00 if a Class I club, and $2,500.00 for a Class II club. 
(9)  Restaurant retail liquor license. Each person licensed by the board to sell alcoholic beverages in connection with the operation of a restaurant pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-15 shall pay to the city an annual privilege license fee of $1,000.00. In addition thereto, each such licensee shall pay to the city on or before the 15th day of each calendar month for the privilege of so engaging in such business in the next-preceding calendar month an additional privilege license fee of ten percent to the gross purchases made by the licensee from the board during such next-preceding calendar month, other than purchases of table wine. 
(10)  Retail table wine license for on-premises and off-premises consumption. Each person licensed by the board to sell table wine at retail for on-premises and off-premises consumption pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-15 shall pay to the city an annual license fee of 50 percent of the amount charged for a state wine license by the state, unless such person shall have paid for an on-premises liquor license. 
(11)  Retail table wine license for off-premises consumption. Each person licensed by the board to sell table wine for off-premises consumption pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-15 shall pay to the city an annual license fee of 50 percent of the amount charged for state wine license by the state. 
(12)  Retail beer license for on-premises and off-premises consumption. Each person licensed by the board to sell beer for on-premises and off-premises consumption pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-15 shall pay to the city an annual license fee of 50 percent of the amount charged for state wine license by the state. 
(13)  Retail beer license for off-premises consumption. Each person licensed by the board to sell beer at retail for off-premises consumption pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-17 shall pay to the city an annual license fee of 50 percent of the amount charged for state beer license by the state. 
(14)  Special retail license. Each person who has obtained a special retail license from the board pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-15 shall pay to the city a privilege license fee of $250.00 when the period of use is 30 days or less. Such person shall pay to the city a privilege license fee of $350.00 when the period of 30 days, but in no event shall the duration of the license exceed one year. Further, the terms of such license shall not exceed or conflict with the license issued by the board. These privilege license fees shall be due for every license issued under this subsection, not on an annual basis. 
(15)  Special events retail license. Each person who has been recommended by the city and obtained a special events retail license from the board pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-20 shall pay to the city a license fee of $150.00. No such license shall be issued for a period in excess of seven days. Such alcoholic beverages as are authorized by the board may be sold. All applications for special events retail licenses shall be filed with the city clerk at least 25 days in advance of the event for which a license is sought. Hereunto, shall apply to applicant for a special event retail liquor license: 
a.  Submit the required filing fee of $75.00. 
b.  Receive approval from the city council. 
c.  Receive a license from state alcoholic beverage control board. 
d.  Pay the required license fee of $150.00. 
e.  Each applicant/organization shall not be allowed to apply for more than five special event licenses in any one calendar year. 
f.  No sale of alcohol is to be sold during a special event on any Sunday after 12:01 a.m. unless otherwise allowed by law. 
g.  Shall be required to purchase the alcoholic beverages from a wholesale licensee of the board. 
1.  The stated annual license fee levied by the schedule under the foregoing provisions shall be due January 1 of each year and shall be delinquent after January 31 of the year for which such license is due, and a penalty of ten percent of the license amount shall be collected during February through March; 20 percent during April through June; 30 percent during July through September; and 40 percent during October through December. In addition, such person must pay a $200.00 citation fee. There shall be no pro rata refund of any license fee because of having operated only a part of a calendar year, except as required under state law, nor shall any rebate be allowed upon revocation, suspension, abandonment or surrender of such license before the expiration thereof. New application fees shall be pro-rated on a quarterly basis. 
2.  If reports are not filed within the time herein provided and the taxes not paid on the dates herein provided for, such person shall pay to the city the full amount of tax together with interest at the rate of three percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the date the payment of such tax became delinquent; a penalty of 15 percent of the amount of the tax; and a citation fee of $150.00; with interest, penalty, and citation fee must be paid by such person. 
(Ord. No. 586, art. III, § 8, 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 4-73. - Reports of business done and tax due. 
    Each licensee shall file with the city clerk a report in such form as the city clerk may prescribe on or before the final date on which the tax may be paid without penalty evidencing the amount of businesses done and the amount of license tax or other tax due thereon, together with full payment for any tax liability. Any failure to comply with this section shall be considered a violation of this article, and penalties, interest, and fees shall be due and payable as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 586, art. III, § 9, 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 4-74. - Alabama Responsible Vendor Act. 
    The Alabama Responsible Vendor Act (Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-10-1 et seq.) is hereby adopted by reference and made a part hereof as if fully set forth herein. 
(1)  Each licensee of the city shall obtain certification through the state responsible vendor program within 30 days of license approval by the board. 
(2)  Upon losing certification through the state responsible vendor program, the city privilege license shall be suspended until such time as the licensee achieves recertification or the license expires or is terminated as otherwise provided herein, whichever shall occur first. 
(Ord. No. 586, art. III, § 10, 2-23-2015) 
Secs. 4-75-4-91. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 4-92. - Inspection. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to refuse the city or any of its authorized employees the right to completely inspect the entire licensed premises at any time during which the premises are open for the transaction of businesses. 
(b)  Any licensees, upon the request of the city clerk or his designee, shall prevent all requested records for inspection at the city upon the providing of reasonable notice. Reasonable notice shall be not less than 14 days. 
(Ord. No. 586, art. IV, § 2, 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 4-93. - Conflicts with state statutes and regulations. 
    This chapter shall be deemed cumulative with and supplemental to any and all statutes and regulations of any administrative body of the state regarding the subject matter hereof and to be subordinate to same and in no manner intended to supersede any such statutes or regulations of the state. Any provision hereof in conflict with any provision of any state statue or regulation shall be construed so as to be in harmony with the same where possible, and otherwise, to be superseded by the provisions of such state statue. 
(Ord. No. 586, art. IV, § 4, 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 4-94. - Conflict with ordinances of the city. 
    This chapter shall be deemed cumulative with any other ordinance of the city and shall be read in pari material. 
(Ord. No. 586, art. IV, § 5, 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 4-95. - Policy and procedures. 
    Policies and/or procedures may be adopted to aid in the administration of the provisions of this chapter, although they shall not in any event conflict with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 586, art. IV, § 6, 2-23-2015) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Animals generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 3-1-1 et seq.; general authority relative to animals, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 3-5-14, 11-47-110; offenses relating to police animals, search and rescue animals, and handlers thereof, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-11-260 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1-6-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS AND CATS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- County licensing of dogs, Code of Ala. 1975, § 3-7A-1 et seq.; cruelty to dogs and cats, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-11-240 et seq.; service dogs, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-11-230 et seq. 

Sec. 6-19. - Director of the animal control center. 
(a)  There is hereby created within the city the position of director of the animal control center. The director shall be hired by the personnel department in accordance with the personnel rules and regulations of the city. The director shall be the supervisor over the animal control center and over the employees assigned to the animal control center. All enforcement officers assigned to the animal control center shall hereinafter be known as animal control officers. The animal control center is hereinafter sometimes referred to as "the pound" or "the city pound." 
(b)  The director and each and every animal control officer shall have the same powers as police officers for dog and cat control purposes and the enforcement of this article, and they shall function under the supervision of the city police chief and his assistants in the city police department. Any provision of this article referring to the director shall also mean and include any authorized employee acting in his stead and under his supervision. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly and willfully to oppose or resist the director, any assistant director, or animal control officer, in executing or attempting to execute any lawful process or in attempting to make or in making any lawful arrest or in the discharge of any regular duty, or in any way to interfere with, hinder or prevent any such officer from discharging his duty. 
(d)  When any dog or cat is found by the director or an animal control officer to be in violation of the provisions of this article, and the owner of said dog or cat becomes known to the director or to an animal control officer, he may issue a citation to said owner for said violation directing him to appear in municipal court at a time and date stated therein to answer to charges of violations of this article which shall be stated in said citation. It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail to appear in the municipal court at the time and place stated in a citation issued by the director or an animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 1, 8-25-2008) 
Sec. 6-20. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    At-large means off the premises of the owner, and not under the control of the owner or his agent either by leash, cord, or chain. 
    Cat means any member of the feline family three months of age or more. 
    Dog means and includes all members of the canine family three months or more of age. 
    Inoculation against rabies means the injection, subcutaneously or otherwise, as approved by the state health officer and the state veterinarian, of canine or feline anti-rabies vaccine. 
    Owner means and includes any person having a right of property in the dog or cat, or who keeps or harbors a dog or cat, or who has it in his care, or acts as its custodian, or who permits a dog or cat to remain on or about any premises occupied by him. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 2, 8-25-2008) 
Sec. 6-21. - Inoculation against rabies required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, keep or harbor in the city any dog or cat which has not been inoculated against rabies, pursuant to and as required and provided for by the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 3, 8-25-2008) 
Sec. 6-22. - License tag required. 
    At the time of inoculation for rabies each year or within 15 days thereof, every owner of a dog or cat shall obtain a license tag from the city clerk, which said license tag shall be for the period of one year. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, keep or harbor in the city any dog or cat which does not have attached to it a license tag as herein required. Provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs or cats whose owners are non-resident, visiting within the city, nor to dogs brought into the city for the purpose of participating in a dog show, nor to seeing-eye dogs actually being used by blind persons for the purpose of aiding them in going from place to place. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 4, 8-25-2008) 
Sec. 6-23. - Preparation and description of tag. 
    The city clerk shall cause to be prepared, and shall keep on hand for issue, an adequate number of license metal tags. Each such tag shall have inscribed thereon the words, "Scottsboro Dog License" or an abbreviation thereof as "Sboro Dog Lic." or "Scottsboro Cat License" or an abbreviation thereof as "Sboro Cat Lic." Each such license tag shall bear a serial number and shall specify, by abbreviation or otherwise, the expiration date thereof. One such tag shall be issued for each appropriate 12-month period for each dog or cat for which application is made, but only when such dog or cat has been vaccinated as required herein. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 5, 8-25-2008) 
Sec. 6-24. - Fee for tag certificate. 
(a)  Before any dog or cat license tag shall be issued for any dog or cat, the applicant shall pay to the city clerk a license tax or fee of $3.00 per animal. 
(b)  Before any license tag shall be issued for any dog or cat, the applicant shall exhibit to the city clerk a valid certificate issued by a person authorized to inoculate dogs or cats against rabies pursuant to the laws of the state, showing that such animal has been duly vaccinated as prescribed and required by state law. 
(c)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to persons in the business of breeding dogs or cats and/or holding a current kennel license under the business license ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 6, 8-25-2008) 
Sec. 6-25. - Animal to wear tag issued for it. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow any dog or cat in his charge or control to wear a dog license tag issued for a different dog or cat. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 7, 8-25-2008) 
Sec. 6-26. - Untagged dog or cat, impounding. 
    Any dog or cat which is found in the city which does not have attached to it a current city dog or cat license tag is hereby declared to be public nuisance and danger, and it shall be the duty of the director and/or the other animal control officers to take up and impound in the city pound every such dog or cat. Any such dog or cat, so impounded, may be retaken or redeemed from the pound by the owner thereof within ten days from impoundment thereof, or at any time thereafter before sale or destruction thereof, by paying to the director or other animal control officers the sum of $5.00 plus the cost of keep of such dog in the pound at the rate of $5.00 per day. Every such dog or cat which has remained in the pound for ten days and which has not been redeemed or taken by the owner within such time may be sold by the director and/or other animal control officers for cash, after having first given seven days' written notice of the time of the sale with a description of the dog to be sold, by posting such notice upon the bulletin board at the pound, which said place shall be open to the public; provided, however, that no such dog or cat shall be sold at a price less than $5.00 plus the cost of keep at the rate hereinabove prescribed. No such dog or cat shall be released from the pound either to the owner or to a purchaser, unless and until the same shall have been vaccinated as prescribed in this article and a vaccination certificate and license tag, as likewise prescribed, shall have been issued therefor. For the purpose of issuing a license tag, the director and/or other animal control officers shall have the authority of a deputy city clerk. All money received by the director and/or other animal control officers as a result of issuance of license tags, redemption or purchase of dogs shall be promptly remitted to the city clerk. Dogs or cats not redeemed or purchased as herein provided shall be destroyed by the director and/or other animal control officers in a humane manner. Such dogs or cats as may be voluntarily delivered to the director and/or other animal control officers for destruction, and such as shall be rabid, shall be promptly destroyed by the director and/or other animal control officers in a humane manner without holding the same for redemption or advertising same for sale. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 8, 8-25-2008) 
Sec. 6-27. - Impounding of dogs, duty of owners. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every owner of a dog to keep such animal from being at-large and to keep said animal under effective restraint. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for the owner of a dog to fail to keep a dog under effective restraint or permit a dog to be at-large within residential or commercial zoned areas within the city. 
(c)  Whenever a dog is found to be running at-large in or about any street, through fare, place, lot, or premises in a residential or commercially zoned area of the city contrary to the provisions of this article, or is not under effective control in any other area of the city, it shall be the duty of the director and/or animal control officers, or of any person employed by the city for that purpose to take such animal into custody and remove or cause it to be removed to the city pound and placed in charge of the director and/or other animal control officers. 
(d)  Dogs may be permitted to be at-large if they are under effective control of their owner in certain parks and recreational area's designated in writing by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 9, 8-25-2008) 
Sec. 6-28. - Disposition of impounded dogs. 
    Any dog or cat impounded under the provisions of this article shall be dealt with as provided in section 6-26. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 10, 8-25-2008) 
Sec. 6-29. - Noisy dogs. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any owner or other person in charge to keep on a residential lot or premises within the corporate limits of the city any dog known to said owner or other person in charge to habitually, continuously, or intermittently make or emit sounds or noises of such volume and nature as unreasonably to interfere with or disturb the peace, quiet, comfort and repose of persons of ordinary sensibilities within the neighborhood in the reasonable use and enjoyment of adjacent property. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any owner or other person in charge to keep on any tract, lot or premises within the city any dog, whether the same is housed or kept in a corral, kennel, building or otherwise, under such circumstances that the sounds or noises emitted by said dog are of such volume and nature as unreasonably to interfere with or disturb the peace, quiet, comfort and repose of persons of ordinary sensibilities in the reasonable use and enjoyment of any adjacent property used for residential purposes. 
(c)  Any owner or person in charge violating this section shall be guilty of maintaining a nuisance and, upon conviction, punished as hereinafter provided for violations of this article. Provided, however, that no prosecution shall be commenced and no arrest made pursuant to this section 6-29, except upon affidavit made before, and warrant issued by a municipal judge or magistrate. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 11, 8-25-2008) 
Sec. 6-30. - Vicious dogs. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or other person in charge thereof to harbor or keep in the city a vicious dog. It shall be prima facie evidence that a dog is a vicious dog if it shall bite or fiercely attack any person whatsoever, or any other animal, such person or other animal at the time of said biting not being on the owner's premises. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 12, 8-25-2008) 
Sec. 6-31. - Other unlawful acts. 
    It shall also be unlawful for the owner or other person in charge of a dog or cat to own or keep a dog or cat within the city which: 
(1)  Shows vicious habits or molests passersby who are lawfully on a public street, public park or school grounds, whether or not such dog is on a public street; 
(2)  At any time has attacked or bitten a person off the premises of the dog's owner or keeper; 
(3)  Habitually runs or barks at pedestrians, joggers, teams or vehicles; 
(4)  Is kept upon the premises of the owner or person harboring said dog or cat under such unsanitary conditions that the maintenance or keeping of said animal creates vile smells to the annoyance of the public in the vicinity; 
(5)  Gets into, overturns, and/or scatters garbage; or 
(6)  Damages or destroys gardens, flowers, and/or shrubs, or otherwise interferes with the welfare of the neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 14, 8-25-2008) 
Sec. 6-32. - Violations. 
    Each violation of any provision or requirement of this article shall constitute an offense against the city. No animal control officer shall enter upon the private property of a citizen of the city without first having probable cause to do so. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 15, 8-25-2008) 
Chapter 8 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Building regulations authorized, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-59; state building construction standards, Code of Ala. 1975, § 41-9-160 et seq.; general contractors, Code of Ala. 1975, § 34-8-1 et seq.; home building and home improvement industries, Code of Ala. 1975, § 34-14A-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 8-1-8-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODES (RESERVED)[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Adoption by reference, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-8. 

Secs. 8-19-8-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MOVING OF BUILDINGS 

Sec. 8-40. - Permit required. 
    No building or part of any building shall be moved through or across any sidewalk, street, alley or highway within the governmental limits without first obtaining a permit from the city's building official. 
(Ord. No. 540, § 1, 7-28-2008) 
Sec. 8-41. - Permit application. 
    Any person desiring to move a building shall first file with the city's building department a written application setting forth the following information: 
(1)  Type and kind of building to be moved. 
(2)  The extreme dimensions of the length, height and width of the building. 
(3)  Present location and proposed new location by lot, block, subdivision and street numbers. 
(4)  The approximate time such building will be upon the streets, and the contemplated route that will be taken from the present to a new location. 
(Ord. No. 540, § 2, 7-28-2008) 
Sec. 8-42. - Permit denial. 
    If, in the opinion of the city's building official, the moving of any building will cause serious injury to persons or property or serious injury to the streets or other public improvements, or the building to be moved has deteriorated more than 50 percent of its original value by fire or other element, or the moving of the building will violate any of the requirements of the city's codes or of the zoning regulations, the permit shall not be issued and the building shall not be moved over the streets. Any building being moved for which a permit was granted shall not be allowed to remain in or on the streets for more than 24 hours. 
(Ord. No. 540, § 3, 7-28-2008) 
Sec. 8-43. - Bond. 
    The city's building officials, as a condition precedent to the issuance of such permit, shall require a bond to be executed by the person desiring such removal permit, with corporate surety to his satisfaction. Such bond shall be made payable to the applicable governing body and for such amount as he prescribes. It shall indemnify the applicable governing body against any damages caused by the moving of such building to streets, curbs, sidewalks, shade trees, highways and any other property, which may be affected, by the moving of a building. Such surety bond shall also be conditioned upon and liable for strict compliance with the terms of said permit, as to the route to be taken and limit of time in which to effect such removal and to repair or compensate for the repair and to pay said applicable governing body as liquidated damages an amount not exceeding $500.00 to be prescribed by the building official for each and every day's delay in completing such removal or in repairing any damages to property or public improvement or in clearing all public streets, alleys or highways of all debris occasioned thereby. 
Exception 1. A $1,000,000.00 liability insurance policy written to the city's satisfaction will also be acceptable. 
(Ord. No. 540, § 4, 7-28-2008) 
Sec. 8-44. - Notice if permit issuance. 
    Upon the issuance of said moving permit, the building official shall cause notice to be given to the chief of the fire department, telephone or light companies, or others whose property may be affected by such removal. The building department shall set forth in all notices the route that will be taken, time started, and approximate time of completion. 
(Ord. No. 540, § 5, 7-28-2008) 
Sec. 8-45. - Overnight occupancy of public property. 
(a)  Every building, which occupies any portion of public property after sundown, shall have sufficient lights continuously burning between sunset and sunrise for the protection of the public. 
(b)  There shall be a minimum of five red lights placed on such street side of the building. Such red lights shall be attached to the building in such a fashion as to indicate extreme width, height, and size. 
(c)  There shall be placed, in addition to the red lights on the building, flares at regular intervals for a distance of 200 feet (60 meters) up the street on each side of the building. 
(d)  When more than 50 percent of the street, measured between curbs, is occupied at night by the building, or when in the opinion of the building official, flagmen are necessary to divert or caution traffic, the owner or person moving such building shall employ at their expense two flagmen, one at each street intersection beyond the building. Such flagmen shall remain at these intersections diverting or cautioning traffic from sunset to sunrise. Red lights shall be employed in flagging traffic at night. 
(Ord. No. 540, § 6, 7-28-2008) 
Sec. 8-46. - Building code compliance. 
    The owner of any house, building, or structure proposed to be moved shall make all necessary improvements required in order for said house, building or structure to comply with the requirements of the International Building Code within 90 days from the date of the issuance of the moving permit. Extensions of such time as deemed reasonable may be granted by the building official upon a showing of delay caused by matters beyond the control of the owner or house mover. The application for the moving permit shall be accompanied by an application for a building permit, accompanied by complete plans and specifications showing the changes or conditions of said house, building, or structure as the same is proposed to be when moving, and all contemplated improvements, signed by the owner or the owner's agent. 
(Ord. No. 540, § 7, 7-28-2008) 
Sec. 8-47. - Compliance with state and federal rules. 
    Any person, corporation, partnership or firm seeking a permit under this article must also comply with any state or federal rules and regulations applicable thereto. 
(Ord. No. 540, § 9, 7-28-2008) 
Chapter 10 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal elections, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-46-1 et seq. 

Sec. 10-1. - Qualification fees for candidates seeking election as mayor, councilman, or member of city board of education. 
(a)  A qualification fee in the amounts and for the offices hereinafter set forth is hereby fixed and imposed upon all candidates seeking election for the following offices in the city, except as is hereinafter provided for, to-wit: 
Office Fee Mayor $50.00 Councilman $50.00 Member, city board of education $50.00  
(b)  Such qualification fee shall be paid to the city clerk and deposited to the general fund of the city at or prior to the time of taking out qualification papers by any such candidate. Any person desiring to qualify who is not financially able to pay the required fee may qualify, provided such prospective candidate furnishes the clerk with an affidavit stating that he is financially unable to pay the required fee fixed by this chapter. 
(c)  This chapter shall be effective in all elections, both general and special, for the aforesaid offices. 
(Ord. No. 207, §§ 1-3, 4-20-1982) 
State Law reference- Authority to set qualification fees, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-46-2, 45-36A-101. 
Sec. 10-2. - Voting center. 
    Pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-46-24(b), the city council hereby establishes in the city a voting center which the city council hereby designates as a place where voting machines will be maintained and/or operated at all future municipal elections held in the city. This voting center shall be located at the Scottsboro Rec-Com, located at 701 South Houston Street, Scottsboro, Jackson County, Alabama. 
(Ord. No. 504, §§ 1, 2, 9-12-2005) 
Chapter 12 - ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Health and environmental control generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-1-1 et seq.; health and sanitation powers of municipality, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-47-130, 11-47-131. 

Sec. 12-1. - Installation of storm drainage pipe, culverts and driveway pipe. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to install any type of corrugated steel pipe in any ditch, driveway or other stormwater drainage culvert within the city limits. All street cross drains shall be reinforced concrete pipe. All other pipes installed in any ditch, driveway, or other stormwater drainage culvert shall be reinforced concrete pipe, HDPE type S drainage pipe or corrugated aluminum pipe as designated by the street superintendent. All pipe shall meet applicable AASHO requirements. 
(b)  The superintendent of the street department for the city shall also approve the type of pipe and the material from which such pipe is made prior to installation. All storm drainage pipe culverts and driveway pipe shall be installed in accordance with the installation manual attached to this chapter. 
(c)  Prior to the installation of any drainage device in any ditch, driveway or stormwater drainage culvert within the city limits, the person making such installation shall obtain consent for such installation from the superintendent for the street department or from such other person designated by the mayor, who shall make a determination of the correct size of pipe to be installed. 
(d)  Any person who willfully installs any pipe in a ditch, driveway or stormwater drainage culvert within the city limits is in violation of this chapter and shall be guilty of an offense. In addition, such person shall reimburse the city for any expense of removing such unapproved pipe. 
(Ord. No. 460, §§ 1-4, 10-22-2001) 
Chapter 14 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal fire prevention powers, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-59; state fire marshal, Code of Ala. 1975, § 36-19-1 et seq. 

Sec. 14-1. - Outdoor burning permit. 
(a)  No person shall burn or cause to be burned on or in any bonfire, rubbish fire or other outdoor fire any heavy oils, asphaltic materials, items containing natural or synthetic rubber, brush, stumps, logs, rubbish, fallen timber, grass, stubble or debris of any sort without having first obtained therefor a permit from the city fire department, which permit may be either written or oral. 
(b)  This chapter shall apply within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 197, §§ 1, 2, 9-22-1980) 
Chapter 16 - FLOODS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1-16-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 16-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered new construction. 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the chief building inspector's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
    Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 16-25. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, and permanent storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
    Existing construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced before February 23, 1987 (i.e., the effective date of the first floodplain management code or ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for that community's participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)). 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before February 23, 1987 (i.e., the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the community). 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been designated as Zone A. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
    Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
    Floodway (regulatory floodway) means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Functionally dependent facility means a facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair facilities. The term "functionally dependent facility" does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for an individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
    Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For the purposes of this article, the term "mean sea level" is synonymous with national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum. 
    National geodetic vertical datum (NGVD), as corrected in 1929, is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    New construction means any structure (see Structure ) for which the start of construction commenced after February 23, 1987, and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure (i.e., the effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for community participation in the (NFIP). 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after February 23, 1987 (i.e., the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community). 
    Repetitive loss means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Remedy a violation means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this article or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
    Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The tem "actual start of construction" means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (The term "permanent construction" does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (Note: accessory structures are not exempt from any article requirements) For a substantial improvement, the term "actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above-ground, a manufactured home, or a gas or liquid storage tank. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. The term "substantial damage" also means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. 
(1)  The term "substantial improvement" includes structures which have incurred repetitive loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The market value of the building should be: 
a.  The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
b.  In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. 
(2)  The term "substantial improvement" includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
(3)  The term "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
(4)  The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include either: 
a.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
b.  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions means where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
    Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) §§ 44, 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) and corresponding parts of this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 531, art. 6, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 16-20. - Statutory authorization. 
    The state legislature has, in Code of Ala. 1975, title 11, chs. 19 (Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-19-1 et seq.), 45 (Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-1 et seq.), 52 (Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-1 et seq.) and Code of Ala. 1975, § 41-9-166, authorized local government units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city does ordain as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 531, art. 1, § A, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 16-21. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. No. 531, art. 1, § B, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 16-22. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. No. 531, art. 1, § C, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 16-23. - Objectives. 
    The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  To ensure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 531, art. 1, § D, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 16-24. - Lands to which this article applies. 
    This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 531, art. 2, § A, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 16-25. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated September 28, 2007, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS and data for unincorporated areas of the county are hereby adopted by reference. Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in an FIS. 
(Ord. No. 531, art. 2, § B, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 16-26. - Establishment of development permit. 
    A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. No. 531, art. 2, § C, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 16-27. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 531, art. 2, § D, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 16-28. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing division, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 531, art. 2, § E, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 16-29. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 531, art. 2, § F, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 16-30. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 531, art. 2, § G, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 16-31. - Penalties for violation. 
    Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as are necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 531, art. 2, § H, 1-14-2008) 
Secs. 16-32-16-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 16-51. - Designation of administrator. 
    The city office of community development is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 531, art. 3, § A, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 16-52. - Permit procedures. 
    Application for a development permit shall be made to the chief building inspector (floodplain administrator) on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following: Plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the regulatory lowest floor level, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of sections 16-83(2) and 16-85(2); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
(2)  Construction stage: 
a.  For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level using appropriate FEMA elevation or floodproofing certificate immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
b.  Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The chief building inspector (floodplain administrator) shall review the above-referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 531, art. 3, § B, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 16-53. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
    Duties of the chief building inspector shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development permits to ensure that the permit requirements of this division have been satisfied and that sites are reasonably safe from flooding. 
(2)  Review proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 16-25, then the chief building inspector shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of division 3 of this article. 
(4)  Verify and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the regulatory floor level, including basement, of all new construction or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 16-52(2). 
(5)  Verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with sections 16-83(2) and 16-85(2). 
(6)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the chief building inspector shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with sections 16-52(1)c, 16-83(2) and 16-85(2). 
(7)  Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and the state department of economic and community affairs/office of water resources/NFIP state coordinator's office. 
(8)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA and state to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Ensure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(9)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this division. 
(10)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the floodplain administrator and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 531, art. 3, § C, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 16-54. - Variances. 
(a)  The board of zoning adjustment as established by the city council shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by chief building inspector in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of zoning adjustment may appeal such decision to the county circuit court, as provided in the Code of Alabama 1975, as amended. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the board of zoning adjustment shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(h)  Conditions for variances are as follows: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction, therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The chief building inspector shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the state department of economic and community affairs/office of water resources upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the board of zoning adjustment may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 531, art. 5, §§ A-I, 1-14-2008) 
Secs. 16-55-16-81. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 16-82. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.  So as not to violate the lowest floor criteria of this division, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components and all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this division shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. No. 531, art. 4, § A, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 16-83. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard designated as A1-30, AE, AH, or A (with estimated BFE), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of section 16-82(4), elevated buildings. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction or the substantial improvement of any nonresidential structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water-tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in section 16-53(6). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on: 
1.  Individual lots or parcels; 
2.  In new or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; 
3.  In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or 
4.  On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood; 
Must have the lowest floor including a basement elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.  Where no base flood elevation exists, the manufactured home chassis and supporting equipment is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength and is elevated to a maximum of 60 inches (five feet). 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Refer to section 16-82.) 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on-site must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, fully licensed and ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions; or 
2.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for new construction, including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection (3)a.3 of this section. 
(Ord. No. 531, art. 4, § B, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 16-84. - Floodways. 
    Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 16-25 are areas designated as floodways. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  The community shall select and adopt a regulatory floodway based on the principle that the area chosen for the regulatory floodway must be designed to carry the waters of the base flood, without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one foot at any point; 
(2)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the adopted regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted, however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; 
(3)  Require, until a regulatory floodway is designated, that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
(4)  Only if subsection (2) or (3) of this section are satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 531, art. 4, § C, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 16-85. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations (approximate A Zones). 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 16-25, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (approximate A Zones), the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 16-25, then the chief building inspector shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this division only if data are not available from these sources, then the provisions of subsections (2) and (3) of this section shall apply: 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 25 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  All development in Zone A must meet the requirements of sections 16-82 and 16-83(1). 
(4)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Also, in the absence of a base flood elevation, a manufactured home must also meet the elevation requirements of section 16-83(4)a.2 in that the structure must be elevated to a maximum of 60 inches (five feet). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 16-82(4), elevated buildings. 
The chief building inspector shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. No. 531, art. 4, § D, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 16-86. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones). 
    Areas of special flood hazard established in section 16-25 may include designated AO shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above-ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 16-82(4), elevated buildings. The chief building inspector (administrator) shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water-tight to the specified FIRM flood level or two feet (if no map elevation is listed), above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in sections 16-52(1)c and 16-52(2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 531, art. 4, § E, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 16-87. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(b)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(c)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(d)  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser. 
(Ord. No. 531, art. 4, § F, 1-14-2008) 
Chapter 18 - HEALTH[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Health and environmental control generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-1-1 et seq.; health and sanitation powers of municipality, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-47-130, 11-47-131. 

Sec. 18-1. - Use of tobacco products in city buildings and city vehicles. 
(a)  As it is in the public interest to promote the general health and safety of the city's employees as well as the general public and to provide a healthful environment for each and every municipal employee as well as visitors to a municipal workplace, this chapter is adopted. 
(b)  The smoking or use of cigarettes, cigars, pipes, or the use of any tobacco product, smokeless or otherwise, is prohibited in all buildings and vehicles owned, operated, or controlled by the city or agencies of the city. 
(c)  Any employee of the city or its agencies who willfully fails or refuses to follow this chapter shall be subject to disciplinary action for insubordination and/or refusal to follow a direct order of his supervisor. 
(d)  No employee of the city shall harass or otherwise discriminate or retaliate against any other city employee who seeks to enforce the terms of this chapter. 
(e)  The smoking or use of cigarettes, cigars, pipes, and any other tobacco product, be it smokeless or otherwise, shall not be permitted or allowed at any entrance to any building owned, operated, or controlled by the city or agencies of the city unless designated as a smoking or tobacco use area by appropriate signage approved prior to posting in writing and signed by the appropriate department head and mayor. 
(Ord. No. 458, intro. ¶, §§ 1-4, 5-28-2001) 
State Law reference- Alabama Clean Indoor Air Act, Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-15A-10. 
Chapter 20 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Historic preservation, Code of Ala. 1975, § 45-36A-102. 

Sec. 20-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Board means the architectural review board. 
    Building means a structure created to shelter any form of human activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel, or similar structure. The term "building" may refer to a historically related complex, such as a courthouse and jail or a house and barn. 
    District means a geographically definable area, urban or rural, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures, or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district may also be comprised of individual elements separated geographically but linked by association or history. 
    Historic commission means the city historic preservation commission. 
    Object means a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical, or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable, yet related to a specific setting or environment. 
    Site means the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historic occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains a historical or archeological value regardless of the value of any existing structures. 
    Structure means a work made up of interdependent and inter-related parts in a definite pattern or organization. Constructed by man, it is often an engineering project large in scale. 
(Ord. No. 205, § I, 1-25-1982) 
Sec. 20-2. - City historic preservation commission. 
(a)  Creation of commission. There is hereby created a city historic preservation commission, hereinafter for abbreviation referred to as the "historic commission," with membership, duties and powers as herein designated. 
(b)  Membership of historic commission. 
(1)  The historic commission shall be composed of seven members who shall be residents of the city. 
(2)  Members of the commission may be reappointed after their terms expire. 
(3)  In the event of a vacancy occurring during the term of a member of the historic commission, the city council shall make an interim appointment to fill out the unexpired term of such member. 
(4)  The members of the commission shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed by the commission for expenses necessarily incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(c)  Rules and regulations. 
(1)  The historic commission shall elect from its membership a chairperson and a vice-chairperson who shall serve for terms of one year and who shall be eligible for re-election. The chairperson shall preside over the commission and shall have the right to vote and speak on all matters as other committee members. The vice-chairperson shall, in the absence or disability of the chairperson, perform the duties of the chairperson, and, if a vacancy shall occur during the term of office of the chairperson, shall become chairperson for the unexpired portion of the term of the chairperson. In the absence or disability of both the chairperson and the vice-chairperson, the commission shall, by a majority vote of those present, choose one of their members to perform the duties of the chairperson. 
(2)  The historic commission shall operate under a constitution as adopted by the commission and approved by the city council. 
(3)  The historic commission shall select a secretary who shall keep a record of all resolutions, proceedings and actions of the historic preservation commission. Such record shall be a public record. 
(4)  The historic commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business. They shall, in addition to other provisions, provide for the time and place of holding regular meetings. They shall provide for the calling of special meetings by the chairperson or by at least two members of the commission or by request of the city council. 
(d)  Purposes, duties, and powers. 
(1)  Purposes. The historic commission shall have as its purposes: 
a.  The promotion of the general public welfare within its jurisdictional area, by maintaining and increasing real estate values, generating business, creating new positions, attracting tourists and new residents, stimulating interest in architecture and design, educating citizens in American culture and heritage, and making the city a more attractive and desirable place in which to live; 
b.  The preservation and protection of areas, sites, buildings, and structures of historic and architectural value in the historic districts, as defined in this section, and the maintenance and improvement of the distinctive character of these districts; 
c.  The fostering and encouraging of the preservation, restoration and utilization of areas, sites, buildings and structures of historic districts; 
d.  The development and promotion of historic districts as major tourist attractions of historic, architectural, and economic value, and in connection therewith, shall be authorized to provide for patio, sidewalk, or balcony type restaurants with outdoor dining facilities. 
(2)  Duties. 
a.  It shall be the duty of the historic commission to exercise such powers as the historic commission shall deem necessary and fitting to carry out the above-stated purposes; 
b.  It shall also be the duty of the historic commission to submit a written report to the mayor and the city council containing a review of the activities of the historic commission for the previous year and the proposed activities for the coming year; 
c.  Provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be construed to authorize the historic commission to obligate the city to expend any of its funds without prior approval of the mayor and the city council. 
(3)  Powers. Said historic commission shall have the power and authority, in addition to all powers conferred on it by the general law: 
a.  To purchase, sell, contract to purchase, contract to sell, own, encumber, lease, mortgage, acquire, and dispose of easements in any part of, and ensure real and personal property of all kinds and descriptions; 
b.  To request, solicit, and accept gifts, donations, pledges, fees, bequests, devises, loans, or appropriations of any kind and from any source whatever; 
c.  To set up such lawful depository in the city as it may select, a revolving fund for historic development which shall be composed of the monies which may come into its hands from any source whatsoever and which shall be used for the furtherance of the objectives and purposes of the commission; 
d.  The commission may with the consent of the mayor and city council employ such professional, office, technical and other personnel as may be necessary or desirable for the performance of the purposes of the commission in the most efficient manner; 
e.  The mayor and the city council may provide funds, equipment and accommodations for the historic commission's work; 
f.  The commission shall be a non-profit governmental agency whose funds shall be used exclusively for public purposes. Such commission shall have a tax exempt status, and the properties of the commission and the income therefrom, together with all leases, agreements, and contracts made by it, shall be forever exempt from any and all taxation by the state and any political subdivision thereof, including, but not limited to, income, admission, amusement, excise and ad valorem taxes. 
(Ord. No. 205, § II, 1-25-1982) 
State Law reference- Historic preservation commission, Code of Ala. 1975, § 46-36A-102. 
Sec. 20-3. - Designation of sites and districts. 
    The mayor and the city council may, upon the recommendation of the historic commission, designate as a historic district or historic site any area, site, building or structure within the city having an overall atmosphere of either historic or architectural distinction or both. 
(1)  Any person, group of persons or association may request the designation of a historic district or a historic site by submitting to the secretary of the historic commission an application for such designation on a form furnished by the historic commission. The historic commission, in addition, may, on its own motion, initiate proceedings for designation of a historic district or historic site. 
(2)  Notice that an application for designation is being considered shall be given to the owner of the parcel on which the proposed district or site is situated or which is part of the proposed district or site. 
a.  Such notice shall be served by the secretary of the historic commission by certified mail, addressed to the owner at his last known address as the same appears in the records of the county tax assessor's office, or if there is no name on such records, such notice may be served by regular mail, addressed to "owner" at the street address of the property in question. 
b.  Said owner shall have the right to confer with the historic commission prior to final action by the historic commission on the application. 
c.  The historic commission may, in addition, hold a public hearing on the proposed designation by giving notice of the place, date and time of the public hearing by publication in an official newspaper of general circulation at least three days immediately prior thereto. 
(3)  After such investigation by the historic commission as it deems necessary, but in no case more than 90 days after the receipt of the application, or if the proceeding is initiated by the historic commission, no more than 90 days after such initiation, the application for designation shall be approved or disapproved. Said approval or disapproval shall be in writing and signed by the chairperson of the historic commission and shall state the reasons for approval or disapproval. The approval may limit itself to the proposed district or site as described in the application or may include modifications thereof and approval as so modified. The written approval or disapproval shall be filed in city hall in the office of the community development coordinator and given to the mayor and the city council. 
(4)  Any designation made by the historic commission pursuant to subsection (3) of this section shall be in full force and effect at the time of the written approval of designation by the mayor and the city council. 
(5)  The historic commission, in making its decision, shall consider, among other factors, the relation of the designation to the master plan of the city, the zoning ordinances, projected public improvements, any plans for the renewal of the area involved, and other factors affecting the general welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. 205, § III, 1-25-1982) 
Sec. 20-4. - Architectural review board. 
(a)  Vacancy. In the event of a vacancy occurring during the term of a member of the architectural review board, the mayor and the city council shall make an interim appointment to fill out the unexpired term of such a member. 
(b)  Rules and regulations. 
(1)  The board shall select from its membership a chairperson and such other officers as it may determine. The terms of the chairperson and other officers shall be one year, with eligibility for re-election. 
(2)  The board shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations, which record shall be a public record. 
(3)  The board shall meet within 15 days after notification by the building inspector of an applicant for a certificate of appropriateness or permit requiring action by the board, and shall meet upon request of the historic commission. The meetings of the board shall be open to the public, and a full and impartial hearing shall be granted. 
(4)  The board shall vote and announce its decision on any matter properly before it no later than 15 days after the conclusion of the hearing on the matter unless the time is extended by mutual agreement between the board and the applicant. 
(5)  The board, with the consent of the mayor and the city council, may appoint such employees as it may deem necessary for its work, whose appointment, promotion, demotion, and removal shall be subject to the same provisions of law as govern other civil employees of the city. The board, with the consent of the mayor and the city council, may contract with architects and other professional and technical consultants for such services as it may require. 
(6)  The expenditures of the board, exclusive of gifts and grants, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the city council, which may provide funds, equipment, and accommodations for the board's work. 
(c)  Duties and powers. The board shall have as its purpose the preservation and protection of buildings and structures of historic and architectural value in the city historic districts and maintenance of the distinctive character of those districts. To this end, it shall be the duty of the board to: 
(1)  Review all plans for the erection, alteration, repair, moving, or demolition of any building or structure which is located or is to be located in the designated historic districts. 
(2)  It shall have the power to pass upon such plans before a permit for such activity can be granted by the building inspector. 
(3)  The board shall pass only on exterior features of a building or structure and shall not consider interior arrangements. 
(4)  The board shall have the power to call in experts to aid in its deliberations. 
(5)  The regulatory functions of the board shall extend to any property, however owned, including projects or work to be executed by or assisted by any governmental body or its officers, departments, agencies, authorities, or boards. 
(6)  The board shall have the authority to further promulgate regulations and set guidelines governing new construction, restorations, alterations, repairs, remodeling and additions that take place in the historic districts and to set material standards for the above-listed activities. 
(Ord. No. 205, § IV, 1-25-1982) 
State Law reference- Architectural review board, Code of Ala. 1975, § 45-36A-102. 
Sec. 20-5. - Procedure for review of plans. 
(a)  Permit application. Application for review of plans for the erection, alteration, repair, moving, or demolition of any building or structure located in or to be located in a historic district shall be made to the building inspector. Every application shall be accompanied by plans for the proposed building or structure. As used herein, plans shall mean drawings or sketches with sufficient detail to show, as far as they relate to exterior appearance, the architectural design of the building or structure, including proposed materials, textures and colors, and the plot plan or site layout, including fences, walks, terraces, planting, accessory buildings, sign lights and other appurtenances. Preparing lots for parking purposes in a historic district is considered a site improvement and requires a permit from the office of the building inspector and the approval of the review board. Such applications with plans shall be forwarded by the building inspector to the board for review. Such applications will be forwarded to the board only at such times as the above-stated requirements have been met. 
(b)  Review, notification and building permit. The board shall promptly review such plans and render its decision thereon as a written order to the building inspector. If the board shall have approved the plans, a certificate of appropriateness shall be issued by the board. If all other requirements of the city have been met, the building inspector shall issue a permit for the proposed building. If the board shall have disapproved the plans, the building inspector shall not issue such permit. In a case where the board has disapproved the plans, the building inspector shall furnish the applicant with a copy of the board's written order, together with a copy of any recommendations for changes necessary to be made before the board will reconsider the plans. The applicant, if he so desires, may make modifications to his plans and shall have the right to resubmit his application at any time after so doing. 
(c)  Failure to review plans. If no action upon plans properly submitted to the board has been taken at the expiration of 45 days from the date of submission to the board, unless otherwise agreed upon by the applicant and the board, such plans shall be deemed approved and, if all other requirements of the city have been met, the building inspector shall issue a permit for the proposed building. 
(d)  Conformance of work with certificate of appropriateness. A certificate of appropriateness issued pursuant to this chapter shall relate solely to proposed plans accompanying the application or otherwise submitted for official consideration prior to issuance of the certificate. It shall be unlawful to deviate from the said plans upon which issuance was granted unless an amended certificate of appropriateness shall be applied for and issued. Where city certificates of appropriateness are required, it shall be the duty of the building inspector's department to inspect regularly any work pursuant to the certificate to ensure compliance. If work is not in accordance, the building inspector shall issue a stop order and work shall cease. No person, firm or corporation shall undertake any work on such project as long as such stop order is in effect. 
(Ord. No. 205, § V, 1-25-1982) 
Sec. 20-6. - Decisions. 
(a)  General considerations. In passing on plans, the board shall consider exterior design and appearance of the building including the front, sides, rear, and roof; height, materials, textures and colors; plot plan or site layout, including features such as walls, walks, terraces, plantings, accessory buildings, signs, lights and other appurtenances and relation of the building to immediate surroundings and where applicable to the historic district in which it is or is to be located. The term "exterior" shall be deemed to include all of the outer surfaces of the building and is not restricted to those exteriors visible from a public street way or place. The board shall not consider interior design or plan and it shall not impose on new construction any architectural style, traditional or modern, as a condition precedent to approval. The board shall not exercise any control over land use, such as is governed by zoning ordinances or over construction, such as is governed by building codes. A certificate of appropriateness shall be issued after review and approval where the board finds any of the following: 
(1)  In the case of a proposed alteration or addition to an existing building, that such alteration or addition shall not materially impair the architectural or historic value of the building. 
(2)  In the case of a proposed new building, that such building shall not, in itself or by reason of its location on the site, materially impair the architectural or historical value of buildings on adjacent sites or in the immediate vicinity or be injurious to the general visual character of the historic district in which it is to be located. 
    Proposals for new construction need not seek to duplicate specific styles and historic periods. What is to be sought is compatibility with existing historic structures. Harmony with adjacent buildings and areas is to be sought through the appropriate use of scale, architectural elements, materials, colors, details, roof shapes, and treatment of grounds. 
(3)  In the case of the proposed demolition of an existing building, that the removal of such building shall not be detrimental to the historic and architectural character of the historic district, or to the historic heritage of the city. 
a.  The building inspector's department shall notify the applicant seeking a demolition permit that approval of the board must be had before such permit can be issued. 
b.  Applicants, in applying to the board for demolition approval, must submit post-demolition plans for the site, including the relationship of such plans to the distinctive quality or public purpose of the district. If post-demolition plans include a replacement structure on the site, sketches or drawings in sufficient detail to convey the architectural design of the new building shall be submitted. The applicant must demonstrate the financial ability to ensure that the proposed new construction shall take place within an agreed upon time period. 
c.  Balancing the interest of the city in preserving the integrity of the district and the interest of the owner of the property in the use of benefits of his property, approval of the plans for demolition is required by considerations of reasonable justice and equity; in the event the board should conclude that the demolition of an existing building or structure would be detrimental to the historic or architectural character of the district or to the historic heritage of the city and thus detrimental to the general welfare, the board shall issue an order postponing demolition for a period not to exceed six months. If the board concludes that the demolition should be postponed, it shall, before issuing any final order with respect to such postponement, afford the applicant an opportunity to appear before the board to offer any evidence he may desire to present concerning the proposed order. Within the period of postponement, the board shall consult with the historic commission and others to ascertain what the city or other agency or organization may do to preserve such architecturally or historically valuable building and shall make recommendations to that effect to the historic commission and the city council or otherwise cause the building to be preserved. 
(b)  Change in scope of work. Any change in the scope of the work subsequent to the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness shall require a new certificate of appropriateness for said changes. 
(c)  Completion of work, expiration of certificate of appropriateness, or permission to demolish. 
(1)  A certificate of appropriateness for alterations, additions, and new construction shall expire one year after issuance and a new certificate must be applied for. If, in one year after issuance of the certificate, the project is not completed as shown on the certificate, the project shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(2)  Permits to demolish, if not enacted within one year of the issuance of said permit, shall be void and a new application for demolition must be submitted to the board. 
(d)  Form of decision. Every decision of the board, in passing upon plans for buildings located or to be located in historic districts, shall be in the form of a written order stating the finding of the board, its decision and the reason thereof. 
(e)  Recommendations for changes. The board shall not disapprove any plans without giving its recommendations for changes to be made before the plans will be reconsidered. Such recommendations may be general in scope and compliance with them will qualify the plans for reconsideration by the board. 
(f)  Members disqualified from voting. Any member of the board who shall be employed to design or construct a building under consideration or who shall have any proprietary tenancy or personal interest in such building requiring approval of the plans by the board shall be disqualified from voting thereon. 
(Ord. No. 205, § VI, 1-25-1982) 
Sec. 20-7. - Appeals. 
(a)  Procedure for appeals. 
(1)  Any person aggrieved by a decision of the board may, within 15 days thereafter, appeal therefrom the historic commission. He shall file with the board a written notice of such appeal, specifying the decision from which such appeal is made, and shall furnish a copy of such notice to the historic commission. 
(2)  Any person thereafter aggrieved by the decision of the historic commission on any such appeal may thereafter appeal therefrom the city council. He shall file with the board a written notice of such appeal, specifying the decision from which such appeal is made, and shall furnish a copy of such notice to the historic commission and the city council. 
(b)  Transcript of proceedings. Upon receiving notice of any such appeal the board shall transmit a certified copy of the proceedings of the case to the appropriate commission or body to which the appeal is taken. 
(c)  Trial of appeals. The issue shall be tried de novo by the historic commission, and thereafter by the appropriate governing body hearing the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 205, § VII, 1-25-1982) 
Sec. 20-8. - Enforcement. 
    Upon petition of the board, the office of the building inspector may restrain any construction, reconstruction, restoration, erection, replacement or demolition in violation of this chapter and may order the removal in whole or part of any exterior architectural feature permitted to exist in violation of this article and may order such reconstruction or restoration as may be necessary or desirable to redress any alteration or demolition in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 205, § VIII, 1-25-1982) 
Sec. 20-9. - Overlapping of contradictory regulations. 
    Where the regulations imposed by any provision of this chapter conflict with comparable regulations imposed by any other ordinance, law, resolution, rule or regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 205, § XI, 1-25-1982) 
Chapter 22 - LICENSES, TAXATION AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Gas tax. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Distributor means and includes any person who engages in the selling or distributing of gasoline within the corporate limits of the city by wholesale domestic trade, but shall not apply to any transaction of such distributor in interstate commerce. 
    Gasoline means gasoline, naptha, woco-pep and other liquid motor fuels, or any device or substitute therefor commonly used in internal combustion engines; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be held to apply to those products known commercially as "kerosene oil," "coal oil," "fuel oil" or "crude oil," commonly used for lighting, heating or industrial purposes. 
    Person means and includes persons, corporations and co-partnerships. 
    Retail dealer means and includes any person herein defined as a distributor who is also engaged in the selling of gasoline within the corporate limits of the city in broken quantities. 
    Storer means and includes any person who ships or causes to be shipped, or receives, gasoline within the corporate limits of the city in any quantity and stores the same in any manner and withdraws or uses the same for any purpose. 
(b)  Every distributor or seller shall pay a license tax to said city, and license tax is hereby fixed and created, which license tax shall be an amount equal to $0.02 on each and every gallon of gasoline sold or delivered within the corporate limits of said city and an amount equal to $0.01 on each and every gallon of gasoline sold or delivered outside the corporate limits of said city but within the police jurisdiction thereof. 
(c)  The excise tax imposed by subsection (b) of this section shall apply to persons, as defined in this section, storing gasoline and distributing the same or allowing the same to be withdrawn from storage, whether such withdrawals are for sale or other use, provided that sellers of gasoline and its substitute, paying the tax herein provided may pay the same, computed and paid on the basis of their sales as herein required, and storers and distributors shall compute and pay this tax on the basis of their withdrawals or distributions. 
(d)  On or before the 20th day of each month after the ordinance from which this section is derived shall have taken effect, every person on whom this excise tax is levied shall render to the city clerk a true and correct statement of all sales and withdrawals of gasoline made by him, or them, during the next-preceding calendar month and shall furnish the city council such other information as such council may demand or require, and at the time of making such monthly report, shall pay to the city clerk an amount of money equal to the excise tax herein levied. 
(e)  The monthly statement herein required to be made by the distributor, storer or retail dealer shall be sworn to before some officer authorized to administer oaths, and any person who makes any false or fraudulent statement so sworn to shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(f)  All distributors, storers or retail dealers shall keep, for not less than one year, such books, documents or other papers as will clearly show the amount of sales, distributions or withdrawals of gasoline made within the corporate limits of the city. 
(g)  If any distributor, storer or retail dealer in gasoline, covered by the provisions of this section, shall fail to make the reports, or any of them, to the city clerk, as herein required, or shall fail to keep the records as herein required, such distributor, storer or retail dealer shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(h)  If any distributor, storer or retail dealer in gasoline, covered by this section, shall fail to make the monthly returns prescribed herein and pay the excise tax hereby levied, on or before the 20th day of the month following sale, distribution or withdrawal, the city clerk shall make return for such delinquent upon such information as he may reasonably obtain, assess the excise tax thereon and add a penalty for failure to make such return of 25 percent of the tax due and shall notify such person so assessed of the assessment and the penalty by registered mail to appear before the city clerk on a day to be therein specified, not less than five days from the receipt of the notice and not more than 20 days, to show cause why such assessment should not be made final, and upon the making final of the assessment, the mayor shall issue an execution against such person for the amount of the assessment, the penalty and costs of enforcement. 
(Ord. of 11-17-1938, §§ 1-8; Ord. of 1-5-1939, § 2) 
State Law reference- License tax authorized, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-90. 
Sec. 22-2. - First Monday Trading Events. 
    The following rules and regulations are hereby adopted with regard to the First Monday Trading Events in the city: 
(1)  Any person currently having the right to occupy a space by virtue of a First Monday permit issued by the city shall have the right to occupy that space with his vehicles or display between the hours of 6:00 p.m. on the Friday preceding each First Monday until 1:00 p.m. on First Monday or 4:00 p.m. on federal holidays. If said permit holder shall have not occupied their reserved spaces with his vehicles or display before the hours of 8:30 a.m. on each day, any person arriving thereafter shall have the right to occupy that space with his vehicle or display on that calendar day. 
(2)  The city shall make available a map showing all spaces permitted for vendors during normal First Monday events. 
(3)  All remaining spaces for First Monday shall become available on first come, first served basis. 
(4)  No person, individual, firm, corporation, association, company, partnership or agency shall have reserved more than three spaces at any First Monday event. 
(5)  No person shall display, sell or exchange, or offer to sell or exchange any new goods, wares or merchandise during a First Monday event unless such person personally made, produced or manufactured such new goods, wares, or merchandise. 
(6)  Animals shall not be sold, exchanged or displayed for selling at any First Monday event except by the city's animal control department. 
(7)  The mayor is hereby granted authority to establish supplemental events on the outside of the courthouse square during and after the normal First Monday hours, including the authority to temporarily close city streets on the courthouse square for a period of less than eight hours. 
(Ord. No. 577, 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 22-3. - Taxicab licenses. 
    A person, firm, partnership or corporation shall be entitled to operate a taxicab business within the city limits upon obtaining a taxicab business license and the compliance with all licenses, rules, and regulations of the state for operating said business. Business licenses for future city taxicab businesses are as established in the business license ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 568, §§ 2, 3, 11-14-2011) 
Secs. 22-4-22-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CIGARETTE TAX 

Sec. 22-25. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Container means the individual packages or cans in which cigarettes are customarily sold at retail. 
    Corporate limits means the corporate limits of the city. 
    Dealer means any wholesale dealer, retail dealer, or storer as herein defined. 
    Persons means a natural person firm, corporation, association, club, receiver, and trustee or other person acting in a fiduciary capacity. 
    Police jurisdiction means and includes all that territory outside the corporate limits of the city, lying within three miles of the corporate limits. 
    Retail dealer means any person, other than a wholesale dealer, who sells or delivers tobacco products within the city or its police jurisdiction. 
    Retail price means the retail selling price of the tobacco products before adding the amount of the tax assessed herein or any other tobacco tax imposed under state law. 
    Sold and sale mean any transfer of title or possession, or both, exchange or barter, conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any means whatsoever for a consideration or any agreement therefor, including rewards, prizes or premiums of tobacco products given as a result of operation on punch boards, shooting galleries or other activities. 
    Stamps means the stamp by the use of which the taxes levied under this article are paid. 
    Store and stored means the storage or warehousing of tobacco products in any manner, or the withdrawal or use of the same for any purpose other than for resale or reshipment outside the city or its police jurisdiction. 
    Storer means a person who stores tobacco products in the city or in its police jurisdiction. 
    Tobacco products means cigarettes. 
    Wholesale dealer means a person who sells or delivers within the city or its police jurisdiction, at wholesale only, tobacco products to retail dealers for the purpose of resale only. 
(Ord. No. 281, § 1, 5-14-1956; Ord. No. 15, § 1, 12-22-1958; Ord. No. 16, § 1, 12-22-1958) 
Sec. 22-26. - Levy of tax in the city. 
(a)  In addition to all taxes now imposed by law, every person who is engaged in the business of selling, storing or delivering tobacco products within the corporate limits shall pay a license tax to the city, and a license tax is hereby fixed and levied for engaging in such business within the corporate limits of the city, which license tax shall be in the following amounts (which amounts shall be in addition to all amounts of any license tax levied with respect to such business in any general license code of the city): an amount equal to $0.03 for each package of cigarettes sold within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  The police jurisdiction license taxes imposed by this article are not for revenue, but the amounts derived therefrom shall be used for the protection of the lives, health and property of the citizens and the maintenance of good order and quiet of the community and the preservation of public morals in the police jurisdiction, including fire and police protection. 
(Ord. No. 281, § 2, 5-14-1956; Ord. No. 15, § 2, 12-22-1958; Ord. No. 96, § 1, 10-1-1971; Ord. No. 240, § 1, 6-24-1985) 
Sec. 22-27. - Levy of tax in police jurisdiction. 
    In addition to all taxes now imposed by law, every person who is engaged in the business of selling, storing or delivering tobacco products within the police jurisdiction of the city shall pay a license tax to the city, and a license tax is hereby fixed and levied for engaging in such business within the police jurisdiction of the city, which license tax shall be in the following amounts (which amounts shall be in addition to all amounts of any license tax levied with respect to such business in any general license code of the city): an amount equal to $0.015 (11/2) cents for each package of cigarettes sold within the police jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 281, § 3, 5-14-1956; Ord. No. 96, § 1, 10-1-1971; Ord. No. 240, § 1, 6-24-1985) 
State Law reference- Tax levies in police jurisdiction, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-91. 
Sec. 22-28. - Payment of tax. 
    The license tax imposed by this article shall be paid by affixing stamps in the manner and at the times herein set forth. 
(Ord. No. 281, § 4, 5-14-1956) 
Sec. 22-29. - Stamps. 
    The city clerk shall keep on-hand for sale an adequate quantity of stamps to be affixed to each container of tobacco products in denominations as required under this article. Each stamp shall have inscribed thereon the words "City of Scottsboro Tobacco Tax," but said words need not be arranged in the foregoing order and may be abbreviated. Said stamps may be sold to wholesale dealers only by the remaining ten percent of such full amount representing compensation to the wholesale dealer for the labor of affixing such stamps to the containers of the tobacco products. All other persons, except such wholesale dealers must pay the full amount of the stamps, but no person shall be entitled to purchase any such number of stamps as shall cause the purchase price to include a fraction of a cent. 
(Ord. No. 281, § 5, 5-14-1956) 
Sec. 22-30. - Affixing stamps. 
    Before any tobacco products shall be sold, stored or delivered within the corporate limits of the city or its police jurisdiction by any dealer, such dealer shall affix to each container of tobacco products a stamp obtained from the city clerk in the amount set out in this article in payment of the license taxes imposed by this article. Every dealer shall, within one hour after receipt of any tobacco products within the city or its police jurisdiction, unless sooner offered for sale, cause stamps to the requisite amount of the tax to be affixed as herein provided and shall cause the same to be cancelled by writing or stamping with waterproof ink across the face of each stamp such registered number as shall be furnished to such dealer by the city clerk. After such stamping has been begun, it shall be continued with reasonable diligence by such dealer until all unstamped containers shall have been stamped and the stamps cancelled as herein provided, but no stamp required to be affixed to any container, after the same has been affixed as herein provided, shall be again used in payment of any part of the tax levied under this article. Stamps in denominations equal to the amount of the tax shall be affixed to the container from or in which the tobacco products with respect to which the stamps are affixed are normally sold at retail; and shall be so affixed in such manner that their removal will require continued application of water or steam. In the case of cigarettes which are normally sold at retail in individual packages, the stamps shall be affixed to each individual package in such a way that such stamps shall be torn in two or mutilated when such package is opened. 
(Ord. No. 281, § 6, 5-14-1956) 
Sec. 22-31. - Records. 
(a)  Every wholesale dealer shall, at the time of selling or delivering tobacco products into the city or its police jurisdiction, make a true duplicate invoice of the same which shall show full and complete details of the sale or delivery of such tobacco products and the price thereof. Every wholesale dealer and every retail dealer shall keep a record of the purchase, sale, exchange or receipt of tobacco products. All such invoices and cancelled checks and other memoranda pertaining to any such purchase, sale, exchange or receipt shall be retained for a period of three years and shall be subject to inspection of the city clerk or his duly authorized deputy, who shall have the power and authority to enter upon the premises of any dealer at all reasonable times for the purpose of examining such invoices, records, cancelled checks and other memoranda. 
(b)  Any person who purchases or receives in any manner whatsoever tobacco products which do not have stamps affixed in the manner required by this article shall, within three days after receipt of such tobacco products, report the receipt or purchase, as the case may be, of such tobacco products to the city clerk, giving the date of purchase or receipt, the name of the person or firm from whom purchased or received and the purchase price thereof. Such report must be made by registered mail or in person. 
(Ord. No. 281, § 7, 5-14-1956) 
Sec. 22-32. - Illegal acts. 
    Among others, the following acts and omissions shall be unlawful: 
(1)  For any person who is required by this article to affix stamps to any container of tobacco products to fail to affix such stamps or to fail to cancel such stamps in the manner and within the time required by this article. 
(2)  For any person to sell, offer for sale, store or deliver within the city or its police jurisdiction any tobacco products where stamps have not been affixed and cancelled as provided in this article. 
(3)  For any person to have in his possession or under his control any tobacco products with respect to which stamps have not been affixed in the manner required by this article for more than six hours after receipt of such tobacco products on the premises of such person. The possession of each container of tobacco products not having proper stamps affixed as required by this article shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(4)  To manufacture, buy, sell, offer for sale, or possess, or attempt so to do, any reproduction or counterfeit of the stamps provided for in this article, or to possess tools, implements, instruments or materials of any kind necessary or appropriate to reproduce or counterfeit such stamps, or to alter or cause to be altered any stamps herein provided for. 
(5)  To remove from a container or otherwise prepare any stamps with intent to use or cause the same to be used, after it has already been used, or to buy, sell, offer for sale or give away any washed, removed, altered or restored stamp to any person, or to have in possession any such washed or removed or restored or altered stamp, or for the purpose of indicating payment of any tax hereunder, to reuse any stamp which had theretofore been used for the payment of any tax provided in this article, or to sell any stamp provided for herein, excepting, however, sales made by the city clerk. 
(6)  To reuse or refill with tobacco products any container from which tobacco products have been removed and with respect to which the tax has theretofore been paid. 
(7)  For any person who is, in this article, required to keep records to fail or omit to keep the same in the manner herein provided, or to refuse to permit the city clerk or his duly authorized deputy to inspect the same at any reasonable hour, or to interfere with or obstruct the city clerk or his duly authorized deputy in the making of any such inspection. 
(8)  For any person who is herein required to file statements with the city clerk to fail or omit to make or file any statement herein provided within the time herein specified, or to make any false statement therein, and such offense shall be a continuing offense against the city, and each day during which such person shall sell, store or deliver tobacco products in the city or its police jurisdiction during such default shall constitute a separate offense. 
(9)  For any person who is required to pay the license tax herein provided for to fail or omit to pay the same within the time herein specified, and such offense shall be a continuing offense against the city, and each day during which said person shall sell, store or deliver tobacco products in the city or its police jurisdiction during such default shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 281, § 8, 5-14-1956) 
Sec. 22-33. - Construction. 
(a)  This article shall not be construed to tax interstate commerce or any business of the United States government or any branch or agency thereof. 
(b)  This article shall not be construed to apply to tobacco products stores for the purpose of resale or reshipment outside the city and its police jurisdiction and which are actually so resold or reshipped. 
(c)  This article shall not be construed to repeal any of the provisions of the general license code of the city, but shall be held to be cumulative. 
(d)  Whenever the requisite amount of stamps has been affixed to the containers of tobacco products, as required herein, this article shall not be construed to require additional stamps to be affixed thereunto in case of subsequent sales, deliveries or storage, provided that where such tobacco products have been properly stamped for sale, delivery or storage within the police jurisdiction, then before the same can be sold, delivered or stored in the corporate limits of the city, there must be properly affixed to such tobacco products and properly cancelled an equal amount of stamps to those already affixed. 
(Ord. No. 281, § 9, 5-14-1956) 
Sec. 22-34. - Time of payment of tax. 
    The license tax imposed by this article shall be paid from time to time as stamps are purchased from the city clerk and affixed as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 281, § 10, 5-14-1956) 
Secs. 22-35-22-56. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - 1973 SALES AND USE TAX 

Sec. 22-57. - Sales tax levied in city. 
    There is hereby levied, for the privilege of engaging or continuing within the city in the business activities hereinafter referred to in addition to all other taxes of every kind now imposed by law, and shall be collected as herein provided, a privilege or license tax against the person on account of rates against gross proceeds of sales, or gross receipts, as the case may be, as follows: 
(1)  Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged or continuing within the city in the business of selling at retail any tangible personal property whatsoever, including merchandise and commodities of every kind and character (not including, however, bonds or other evidences of debt or stocks, nor sale of material and supplies to any person for use in fulfilling a contract for the painting, repair or reconditioning of vessels, barges, ships, other watercraft, and commercial fishing vessels of over five tons load displacement as registered with the U.S. Coast Guard and licensed by the state department of conservation and natural resources), an amount equal to one percent of the gross proceeds of sales of the business except where a different amount is expressly provided herein, provided that any person engaging or continuing in business as a retailer and wholesaler or jobber shall pay the tax measured by the gross proceeds of retail sales of such business at the rates specified when his books are kept so as to show separately the gross proceeds of sales of each business, and when his books are not so kept, he shall pay as a retailer the tax measured by the gross sales of the business. 
(2)  Where any used part including tires of an automotive vehicle or a truck trailer, semi-trailer, or house trailer is taken in trade, or in a series of trades, as a credit or part payment on the sale of a new or rebuilt part or tire, the tax levied herein shall be paid on the net difference; that is, the price of the new or used part or tire sold less the credit for the used part or tire taken in trade; provided, however, this provision shall not be construed to include batteries. 
(3)  Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged or continuing within the city in the business of conducting or operating places of amusement or entertainment, billiard and pool rooms, bowling alleys, amusement devices, musical devices, theatres, opera houses, moving picture shows, vaudevilles, amusement parks, athletic contests, including wrestling matches, prize fights, boxing and wrestling exhibitions, football and baseball games (including athletic contests conducted by or under the auspices of any educational institution within this state, or any athletic association thereof, or other association whether such institution or association is a denominational, state, county, or municipal institution or association or school), skating rinks, race tracks, miniature golf courses, or any other place at which an exhibition, display, amusement or entertainment is offered to the public or places where an admission fee is charged, including public bathing places, public dance halls of every kind and description within the city, an amount equal to one percent of the gross receipts of any such business. 
(4)  Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged or continuing within the city in the business of selling at retail machines used in mining, quarrying, compounding, processing and manufacturing of tangible personal property, an amount equal to one-half percent of the gross proceeds of the sales of such machines, provided that the term "machine," as herein used, shall include machinery which is used for mining, quarrying, compounding, processing or manufacturing tangible personal property, and the parts of such machines, attachments and replacements therefor which are made or manufactured for use on or in the operation of such machines and which are necessary to the operation of such machines and are customarily so used. 
(5)  Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged or continuing within the city in the business of selling at retail any machine, machinery, or equipment, either that which is self-propelled or otherwise propelled or drawn and which is used in planting, cultivating, and harvesting farm products, or that which is used in connection with the production of agricultural produce or products, livestock, or poultry on farms, and the parts of such machines, machinery, or equipment, attachments and replacements therefor which are made or manufactured for use on or in the operation of such machines, machinery or equipment, and which are necessary to and customarily used in the operation of such machine, machinery or equipment, an amount equal to one-half percent of the gross proceeds of the sale thereof. The one-half percent rate herein prescribed with respect to parts, attachments, and replacements shall not apply to any automotive vehicle or trailer designed primarily for public highway use, except farm trailers used primarily in the production and harvesting of agricultural commodities. Where any used machine, machinery, or equipment, either that which is self-propelled, or otherwise propelled or drawn and which is used in planting, cultivating, and harvesting farm products or used in connection with the production of agricultural produce or products, livestock, and poultry on farms is taken in trade or in a series of trades as a credit or part payment on a sale of a new or used machine, machinery, or equipment, the tax levied herein shall be paid on the net difference; that is, the price of the new or used machine, machinery, or equipment sold, less the credit for the used machine, machinery, or equipment taken in trade. 
(6)  Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged or continuing within the city in the business of selling at retail any automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer, an amount equal to one-half percent of the gross proceeds of sale of said automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semi-trailer, or house trailer; provided, however, where a person subject to the tax provided for in this subsection withdraws from his stock in trade any automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer for use by him of by his employee or agent in the operation of such business, there shall be paid, in lieu of the tax levied herein, a fee $5.00 per year of part thereof during which such automotive vehicle, truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer shall remain the property of such person. Each such year or part thereof shall begin with the day or anniversary date, as the case may be, of such withdrawal and shall run for the 12 succeeding months or part thereof during which such automotive vehicle, truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer shall remain the property of such person. Where any used automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer is taken in trade or in a series of trades, as a credit or part payment on the sale of a new or used vehicle, the tax levied herein shall be paid on the net difference; that is, the price of the new or used vehicle sold, less the credit for the used vehicle taken in trade. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 1, 1-1-1973; Ord. No. 0581, § 1, 1-13-2014) 
State Law reference- Sales tax authorized, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-200. 
Sec. 22-58. - Levying sales tax in police jurisdiction. 
    For the privilege of engaging or continuing in the business activities hereinafter referred to within the police jurisdiction of the city outside of its corporate limits, there is hereby levied, in addition to all taxes of every kind now imposed by law, and shall be collected as herein provided, a privilege or license tax against the person on account of the business activities and in the amounts to be determined by the application of rates against gross proceeds of sales or gross receipts, as the case may be, as follows: 
(1)  Upon every person engaged or continuing within the police jurisdiction of the city and beyond the corporate limits thereof, in the business of selling at retail any tangible personal property whatsoever, including merchandise and commodities of every kind and character (not including, however, bonds or other evidences of debt or stocks, nor sale of materials and supplies to any person for use in fulfilling a contract for the painting, repair, or reconditioning of vessels, barges, ships and other watercraft, and commercial fishing vessels of over five tons' load displacement as registered with the U.S. Coast Guard and licensed by the state department of conservation and natural resources), an amount equal to one-half percent of the gross proceeds of sales of the business except where a different amount is expressly provided herein, provided that any person engaging or continuing in business as a retailer and wholesaler or jobber shall pay the tax measured by the gross proceeds of retail sales of such business at the rates specified, when his books are kept so as to show separately the gross proceeds of sales of each business, and when his books are not so kept he shall pay as a retailer the tax measured by the gross sales of the business; and provided further that where all sales of a business are single sales of peanut products, milk products, coffee, and confections sold in dispensing machines located in industrial plants or on private property for employees where such machines dispense exclusively articles not to exceed $0.10 per sale, and the person operating such machines shall be engaged in the business of selling exclusively articles not to exceed $0.10 per sale and shall have filed with the state department of revenue a sworn statement to that effect and shall keep and maintain records satisfactory to the state department of revenue, the tax herein provided for shall not be levied with respect to such business. 
(2)  Where any used part including tires of an automotive vehicle or a truck trailer, semi-trailer, or house trailer is taken in trade, or in a series of trades, as a credit or part payment on the sale of a new or rebuilt part or tire, the tax levied herein shall be paid on the net difference; that is, the price of the new or used part or tire sold less the credit for the used part or tire taken in trade; provided, however, this provision shall not be construed to include batteries. 
(3)  Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged or continuing within the police jurisdiction of the city and beyond the corporate limits thereof, in the business of conducting or operating places of amusement or entertainment, billiard and pool rooms, bowling alleys, amusement devices, musical devices, theatres, opera houses, moving picture shows, vaudevilles, amusement parks, athletic contests, including wrestling matches, prize fights, boxing and wrestling exhibitions, football and baseball games (including athletic contests conducted by or under the auspices of any educational institution within this state, or any athletic association thereof, or other association whether such institution or association is a denominational, state, county, or municipal institution or association or school), skating rinks, race tracks, miniature golf courses, or any other place at which an exhibition, display, amusement or entertainment is offered to the public or places where an admission fee is charged, including public bathing places, and public dance halls of every kind and description within the city, an amount equal to one-half percent of the gross receipts of any such business. 
(4)  Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged or continuing within the police jurisdiction of the city and beyond the corporate limits thereof, in the business of selling at retail machines used in mining, quarrying, compounding, processing and manufacturing of tangible personal property, an amount equal to one-fourth percent of the gross proceeds of the sales of such machines, provided that the term "machine" as herein used, shall include machinery which is used for mining, quarrying, compounding, processing or manufacturing tangible personal property, and the parts of such machines, attachments and replacements therefor which are made or manufactured for use on or in the operation of such machines and which are necessary to the operation of such machines and are customarily so used. 
(5)  Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged or continuing within the police jurisdiction of the city and beyond the corporate limits thereof, in the business of selling at retail any machine, machinery, or equipment, either that which is self-propelled or otherwise propelled or drawn and which is used in planting, cultivating, and harvesting farm products, or that which is used in connection with the production of agricultural produce or products, livestock, or poultry on farms, and the parts of such machines, machinery, or equipment, attachments and replacements therefor which are made or manufactured for use on or in the operation of such machine, machinery, or equipment, and which are necessary to and customarily used in the operation of such machine, machinery, or equipment, an amount equal to one-fourth percent of the gross proceeds of the sale thereof. The one-fourth percent rate herein prescribed with respect to parts, attachments, and replacements shall not apply to any automotive vehicle or trailer designed primarily for public highway use, except farm trailers used primarily in the production and harvesting of agricultural commodities. Where any used machine, machinery, or equipment, either that which is self-propelled, or otherwise propelled or drawn, and which is used in planting, cultivating, and harvesting farm products or used in connection with the production of agricultural produce or products, livestock, and poultry on farms is taken in trade or in a series of trades as credit of part payment on a sale of a new or used machine, machinery, or equipment, the tax levied herein shall be paid on the net difference; that is, the price of the new or used machine, machinery, or equipment sold, less the credit for the used machine, machinery, or equipment taken in trade. 
(6)  Upon every person, firm, or corporation engaged or continuing within the police jurisdiction of the city and beyond the corporate limits thereof, in the business of selling at retail any automotive vehicle, truck trailer, semi-trailer, or house trailer, an amount equal to one-fourth percent of the gross proceeds of sale of said automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer; provided, however, where a person subject to the tax provided for in this subsection withdraws from his stock in trade any automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer for use by him or by his employee or agent in the operation of such business, there shall be paid, in lieu of the tax levied herein, a fee of $5.00 per year or part thereof during which such automotive vehicle, truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer shall remain the property of such person. Each such year or part thereof shall begin with the day or anniversary date, as the case may be of such withdrawal and shall run for the 12 succeeding months or part thereof during which such automotive vehicle, truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer shall remain the property of such person. Where any used automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer is taken in trade or in a series of trades, as a credit or part payment on the sale of a new or used vehicle, the tax levied herein shall be paid on the net difference; that is, the price of the new or used vehicle sold, less the credit for the used vehicle taken in trade. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 2, 1-1-1973) 
State Law reference- Sales tax authorized in police jurisdiction, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-206. 
Sec. 22-59. - Provisions of state sales tax statutes applicable to this article and taxes herein levied. 
    The taxes levied by sections 22-57 and 22-58 shall be subject to all definitions, exceptions, exemptions, proceedings, requirements, rules, regulations, provisions, penalties, fines, punishments, and deductions that are applicable to the taxes levied by the state sales tax statutes, except where inapplicable or where herein otherwise provided, including all provisions of the state sales tax statutes for enforcement and collection of taxes. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 3, 1-1-1973) 
State Law reference- State sales tax, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-23-1 et seq. 
Sec. 22-60. - Use tax levied. 
(a)  An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city or police jurisdiction thereof of tangible personal property (not including materials and supplies bought for use in fulfilling a contract for the building, repair or reconditioning of vessels, barges, ships and other watercraft, and commercial fishing vessels of over five tons load displacement as registered with the U.S. Coast Guard and licensed by the state department of conservation and natural resources) purchased at retail for storage, use or other consumption in the city of the police jurisdiction thereof, except as herein specifically otherwise provided, at the rate of one percent of the sales price of said property within the incorporated limits of said city, and at the rate of one-half percent of the sales price if without the incorporated limits of said city but within the police jurisdiction thereof. 
(b)  An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city or police jurisdiction thereof of any machines used in mining, quarrying, compounding, processing and manufacturing of tangible personal property purchased at retail for storage, use or other consumption in the city or police jurisdiction thereof at the rate of one-half percent of the sales price of said machine within the incorporated limits of the city and at the rate of one-fourth percent of the sales price of said machine if without the incorporated limits of said city but within the police jurisdiction thereof. And further providing that said term "machine," as herein used, shall include not only the machinery, but also the parts of such machines, attachments and replacements and which are made or manufactured for the use on or in the operation of such machines, and are customarily so used. 
(c)  An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city or police jurisdiction thereof of any automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer purchased at retail for storage, use or other consumption in the city or police jurisdiction thereof at the rate of one-half percent of the sales price within the corporate limits of said city or at the rate of one-fourth percent of the sales price if without the corporate limits of said city but within the police jurisdiction thereof. Should a used automotive vehicle, truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer be taken in trade as a credit or part payment on the sale of a new or used automotive vehicle, truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer, the tax levied hereby should be paid on the net difference; that is, the price of the new or used vehicle, truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer sold, less the credit for the used vehicle, truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer taken in trade. 
(d)  An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city or police jurisdiction thereof of any machine, machinery, or equipment, either that which is self-propelled or otherwise propelled or drawn and which is used in planting, cultivating, and harvesting farm products, or that which is used in connection with the production of agricultural produce or products, livestock, or poultry on farms, and the parts of such machines, machinery, or equipment, attachments, and replacements therefor which are made or manufactured for use on or in the operation of such machines, machinery, or equipment, and which are necessary to and customarily used in the operation of such machines, machinery, or equipment, an amount equal to one-half percent of the sales price within the corporate limits of said city or at the rate of one-fourth percent of the sales price if without the corporate limits of said city but within the police jurisdiction thereof. The rates herein prescribed with respect to parts, attachments, and replacements shall not apply to any automotive vehicle or trailer designed primarily for public highway use, except farm trailers used primarily in the production and harvesting of agricultural commodities. Where any used machine, machinery, or equipment, either that which is self-propelled, or otherwise propelled or drawn and which is used in planting, cultivating, and harvesting farm products or used in connection with the production of agricultural produce or products, livestock, and poultry on farms is taken in trade or in a series of trades as a credit or part payment on a sale of a new or used machine, machinery, or equipment, the tax levied herein shall be paid on the net difference; that is, the price of the new or used machine, machinery, or equipment sold, less the credit for the used machine, machinery, or equipment taken in trade. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 4, 1-1-1973) 
State Law reference- Levy of use tax authorized, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-51-202, 11-51-206. 
Sec. 22-61. - State use tax provisions to apply. 
    The taxes levied by section 22-60 shall be subject to all definitions, exceptions, exemptions, proceedings, requirements, rules, regulations, provisions, penalties, fines, punishments and statutes, except where inapplicable or where herein otherwise provided, including all provisions of the state use tax statutes for enforcement and collection of taxes. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 5, 1-1-1973) 
State Law reference- State use tax, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-23-60 et seq. 
Sec. 22-62. - Discounts for prompt payment. 
    Discounts are allowed for the prompt payment of sales tax only. Discounts in the amount of five percent on the first $100.00 or less in taxes or in the amount of two percent of any tax over $100.00, if any, are allowed when taxes are paid before becoming delinquent, but no discount shall be allowed if not paid when due. A penalty of ten percent and interest of one-half percent per month or fraction thereof shall be added to taxes not paid when due. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 6, 1-1-1973) 
Sec. 22-63. - Article cumulative. 
    This article is cumulative to the general license code or ordinances. This article shall not be construed to repeal any of the provisions of the general license code or ordinances of the city, but shall be held to be cumulative, and the amounts of the taxes herein levied shall be in addition to the amounts of all other license taxes imposed by the city by its general license code or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 7, 1-1-1973) 
Secs. 22-64-22-84. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TAX ON LESSORS OR RENTERS OF TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY 

Sec. 22-85. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business means all activities which may be licensed under Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-90. 
    Gross proceeds means the value proceeding or accruing from the leasing or rental of tangible personal property, without any deduction on account of the cost of the property so leased or rented, the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, interest paid or any other expenses whatsoever, and without any deduction on account of loss, and shall also include on the part of any person claiming exemption under subsection 22-87(4) an amount equal to the amount of rental paid on any tangible personal property acquired under such exemption and thereafter diverted to the use of such person. 
    Leasing or rental means a transaction whereunder the person who owns or controls the possession of tangible personal property permits another person to have the possession or use thereof for a consideration and for the duration of a definite or indefinite period of time without transfer of the title to such property. The detention by the user thereof of freight cars, oxygen and acetylene tanks and similar property, in respect of which detention a demurrage or per diem charge is made against the user of such property, shall not be deemed to constitute a transaction whereunder property is leased or rented to another within the meaning of this article. 
    Tangible personal property means personal property which may be seen, weighed, measured, felt, or touched, or is in any other manner perceptible to the senses. The term "tangible personal property" shall not include stocks, bonds, notes, insurance, or other contracts, or securities. 
(Ord. No. 368, § 1, 3-29-1994) 
Sec. 22-86. - Levy of tax. 
    In addition to all privilege license taxes of every kind now imposed by law, and shall be collected as herein provided, a privilege or license tax on each person engaging or continuing within the city in the business of leasing or renting tangible personal property, and such tax shall be in the amounts to be determined by the application of the rates against gross proceeds as follows: At the rate of two percent of the gross proceeds derived by the lessor or renter from the lease or rental of tangible personal property; provided the privilege or license tax on each person engaging or continuing within the city in the business of leasing or renting any automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer shall be at the rate of three-fourths percent of the gross proceeds derived by the lessor from the lease or rental of such automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer; provided further that the tax levied hereby shall not apply to any leasing or rental, as lessor, by the state, or any municipality or county in the state. 
(Ord. No. 368, § 2, 3-29-1994) 
State Law reference- Privilege license tax authorized, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-90(a)(2). 
Sec. 22-87. - Exemptions. 
    There shall be exempted from the computation of any tax due hereunder the following: 
(1)  The gross proceeds accruing from the leasing or rental of film to a lessee who charges admission for viewing same; 
(2)  The gross proceeds accruing from any charge in respect to the use of docks or docking facilities furnished for boats or other craft operated on waterways; 
(3)  The gross proceeds accruing from any charge made by a landlord to a tenant in respect to the leasing or furnishing of tangible personal property to be used on the premises of real property leased by the same landlord to the same tenant for use as a residence or dwelling place, including mobile homes; 
(4)  The gross proceeds accruing from the leasing or rental of tangible personal property to a lessee who acquires possession of the same property for the purpose of leasing or renting to another the same property under a leasing or rental transaction subject to a tax hereunder; 
(5)  The gross proceeds accruing from any charge made by a landlord to a tenant in respect to the leasing or furnishing of tangible personal property to be used on the premises of any rooms, lodging or accommodations leased or rented to transients in any hotel, motel, inn, tourist camp, tourist cabin, or any other place in which rooms, lodgings or accommodations are regularly furnished to transients for a consideration; 
(6)  The gross proceeds accruing from the leasing or rental of tangible personal property which the city is prohibited for taxing under the Constitution or laws of the United States or under the constitution or laws of the state; 
(7)  The gross proceeds accruing from the leasing or rental of nuclear fuel assemblies together with the nuclear material contained therein and other nuclear material used or useful in the production of electricity and assemblies containing ionizing radiation sources together with the ionizing radiation sources contained therein used or useful in medical treatment or scientific research; 
(8)  The gross proceeds accruing from a transaction whereunder the lessor leases a truck or tractor-trailer or semi-trailer for operation over the public roads and highways, and such lessor furnishes a driver for each such vehicle; 
(9)  The gross proceeds accruing from the leasing or rental of vehicles in interchange between regulated motor carriers on a per diem basis; 
(10)  The gross proceeds accruing from the leasing or rental of all structures, devices, facilities, and identifiable components of any thereof acquired primarily for the control reduction or elimination of air or water pollution, and the gross proceeds accruing from the leasing or rental of all materials used or intended for use in structures built primarily for the controlled reduction or elimination of air or water pollution; 
(11)  The gross proceeds derived by the lessor (which term includes a sub-lessor ) from the leasing or rental of tangible personal property when the lessor and lessee (which term includes a sub-lessee) are wholly-owned subsidiary corporations of the same parent corporation or one is the wholly-owned subsidiary of the other, provided that the appropriate sales or use tax, if any was due, has been paid on such item of personal property, and provided further that in the event of any subsequent subleasing of such tangible personal property to any person other than any such sister, parent or subsidiary corporation, and privilege or license tax due and payable with respect to such subsequent subleasing under the provisions hereof shall be paid; and 
(12)  The gross proceeds accruing from a transaction which involves the leasing or rental of vessels or railroad equipment which are engaging in interstate or foreign commerce or both. 
(Ord. No. 368, § 3, 3-29-1994) 
Sec. 22-88. - Collection of tax. 
    The privilege license tax levied hereunder, except as otherwise provided, shall be due and payable in monthly installments on or before the 20th day of the month next-succeeding the month in which the privilege license tax accrues. On or before such 20th day, every person on whom the amounts levied hereunder are imposed shall render to the city, on a form prescribed by the city, a true and correct statement showing the gross proceeds of his business for the next-preceding month, the amount of gross proceeds which are not subject to the privilege license tax, or are not to be used as a measurement of the amounts due by such person and the nature thereof, together with such other information as the city may require, and at the time of making such monthly report such person shall compute the privilege license taxes due and shall pay to the city the amounts shown to be due. If any person subject hereto should fail to tender any report in the statements or returns required hereunder, he, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 22-91. 
(Ord. No. 368, § 4, 3-29-1994) 
Sec. 22-89. - Reports of cash and credit rentals. 
    Any person taxable hereunder who makes cash or credit leases or rentals may report such cash leases or rentals only, and he shall thereafter include in each monthly report all credit collections made during the months preceding, and shall pay the privilege license tax due thereon at the time of filling such report. 
(Ord. No. 368, § 5, 3-29-1994) 
Sec. 22-90. - Records. 
    It shall be the duty of every person engaging or continuing in any business for which a privilege tax is imposed hereby to keep and preserve suitable records of the gross proceeds of any such business and such other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax for which he is liable hereunder. It shall be the duty of every person to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all invoices of gross proceeds, proceeding or accruing from the leasing or rental herein taxed, and all such books, invoices and other records shall be open for examination, at any time, by the city or its agent. Any persons leasing, who in addition leases for re-leasing. Each occurrence of a failure to keep records or allow examination thereof shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 368, § 6, 3-29-1994) 
Sec. 22-91. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall fail to keep records as herein required or who shall refuse to permit such examination thereof, or who violated any other provisions hereof, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 368, § 7, 3-29-1994) 
Sec. 22-92. - Penalty for failure to pay tax. 
    Any person who fails to pay the tax herein levied within the time required by this article shall pay, in addition to the tax, a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax due, together with interest thereon at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof, from the date at which the tax herein levied became delinquent, that is due and payable, such penalty and interest to be assessed and collected as part of the tax. Provided the city, if a good and sufficient reason is shown, may waive or remit the penalty of ten percent or a portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 368, § 9, 3-29-1994) 
Secs. 22-93-22-112. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - 1995 LODGING TAX[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- State transient occupancy tax, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-26-1 et seq. 

Sec. 22-113. - Levy of tax in the city. 
    For the privilege of engaging or continuing within the city in the business activities hereinafter referred to, there is hereby levied, in addition to all other taxes of every kind now imposed by law, and shall be collected as herein provided, a privilege or license tax against the person on account of the business activities and in the amount to be determined by the application of the rates against gross receipts as follows: There is hereby levied and imposed, in addition to all other taxes of every kind now imposed by law, a privilege or license tax upon every person, firm, or corporation engaged in the business of renting or furnishing any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations to transients in any hotel, motel, inn, tourist camp, tourist cabin, or any other place in which rooms, lodgings, or accommodations are regularly furnished to transients for a consideration in an amount to be determined by the application of the rate of five percent of the charge for such rooms, lodgings, or accommodations, including the charge for use or rental of personal property and services furnished in such room. Provided, however, there are exempted from the tax levied under the provisions of this article any rentals or sales taxed under the provisions of Code of Ala. 1975, title 40, ch. 23, art. 1 (Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-23-1 et seq.). The tax shall not apply to rooms, lodgings, or accommodations supplied for a period of 30 continuous days or more in any place. 
(Ord. No. 385, § 2, 3-20-1995) 
Sec. 22-114. - Levy of tax in police jurisdiction. 
    For the privilege of engaging or continuing in the business activities hereinafter referred to within the police jurisdiction of the city outside its corporate limits, there is hereby levied, in addition to all taxes of every kind now imposed by law, and shall be collected as herein provided, a privilege or license tax against the persons on account of the business activities in the amounts to be determined by the application of rates against gross receipts as follows: There is hereby levied and imposed, in addition to all other taxes of every kind now imposed by law, a privilege or license tax upon every person, firm, or corporation engaged in the business of renting or furnishing any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations to transients in any hotel, motel, inn, tourist camp, tourist cabin, or any other place in which rooms, lodgings, or accommodations are regularly furnished to transients for a consideration, in an amount to be determined by the application of the rate of 21/2 percent of the charge for such rooms, lodgings, or accommodations, including the charge for use or rental of personal property and services furnished in such room. Provided, however, there are exempted from the tax levied under the provisions of this article any rentals or services taxed under the provisions of Code of Ala. 1975, title 40, ch. 23, art. 1 (Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-23-1 et seq.). The tax shall not apply to rooms, lodgings or accommodations supplied for a period of 30 continuous days or more in any one place. 
(Ord. No. 385, § 3, 3-20-1995) 
Sec. 22-115. - Provisions of state lodgings tax statutes applicable to this article and taxes herein levied. 
    This article and the taxes herein levied shall be subject to all definitions, exceptions, exemptions, proceedings, requirements, rules, regulations, provisions, penalties, fines, punishments, and deductions that are applicable to the taxes levied by the state lodgings tax statutes, except where inapplicable or where herein otherwise provided, including all the provisions of the state lodging tax statutes, for enforcement and collection of taxes. 
(Ord. No. 385, § 4, 3-20-1995) 
Sec. 22-116. - Adding amount of tax to price. 
    Any person on whom the tax levied by this article is imposed may add the tax herein levied to the receipts from rental of rooms, lodgings or accommodations and may collect the same from the occupants of such rooms, but this section is not mandatory. 
(Ord. No. 385, § 5, 3-20-1995) 
Sec. 22-117. - This article cumulative to general license code or ordinances. 
    This article shall not be construed to repeal any of the provisions of the general license code or ordinances of the city, but shall be held to be cumulative, and the amounts of the taxes herein levied shall be in addition to the amounts of all other license taxes levied by the city by its general license code or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 385, § 6, 3-20-1995) 
Secs. 22-118-22-147. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - 1996 SALES AND USE TAX 

Sec. 22-148. - Levy of tax in the city. 
    There is hereby levied, in addition to all other taxes of every kind now imposed by law, and shall be collected as herein provided, a privilege or license tax against the person on account of the business activities and in the amount to be determined by the application of rates against gross sales, or gross receipts, as the case may be, as follows: 
(1)  Upon every person, firm or corporation (including the State of Alabama, the University of Alabama, Auburn University and all other institutions of higher learning in the state, whether such institutions be denominational, state, county or municipal institutions, and any association or other agency or instrumentality of such institutions) engaged, or continuing with the city in the business of selling at retail any tangible personal property whatsoever, including merchandise and commodities of every kind and character (not including, however, bonds or other evidences of debts or stocks, nor sale of materials and supplies to any person for use in fulfilling a contract for the painting, repair or reconditioning of vessels, barges, ships and other watercraft, and commercial fishing vessels of over five tons load displacement as registered with the U.S. Coast Guard and licensed by the state department of conservation and natural resources), an amount equal to one percent of the gross proceeds of sales of the business except where a different amount is expressly provided herein; provided, however, that any person engaging or continuing in business as a retailer and wholesaler or jobber shall pay the tax required on the gross proceeds of retail sales of such business at the rates specified, when his books are kept so as to show separately the gross proceeds of sales of each business, and when his books are not so kept he shall pay the tax as a retailer on the gross sales of the business. 
(2)  Where any used part including tires of an automotive vehicle or a truck trailer, semi-trailer, or house trailer is taken in trade, or in a series of trades, as a credit or part payment on the sale of a new or rebuilt part or tire, the tax levied herein shall be paid on the net difference; that is, the price of the new or used part or tire sold less the credit for the used part or tire taken in trade; provided, however, this provision shall not be construed to include batteries. 
(3)  Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged or continuing within the city in the business of conducting or operating places of amusement or entertainment, billiard and pool rooms, bowling alleys, amusement devices, musical devices, theaters, opera houses, moving picture shows, vaudevilles, amusement parks, athletic contests, including wrestling matches, prize fights, boxing and wrestling exhibitions, football and baseball games (including athletic contests, conducted by or under the auspices of any educational institution within the city, or any athletic association thereof, or other association whether such institution or association be a denominational, a state, county or a municipal institution or association of a state, county or city school, or other institution, association or school), skating rinks, race tracks, golf courses or any other place at which any exhibition, display, amusement or entertainment is offered to the public or places where an admission fee is charged, including public bathing places, public dance halls of every kind or description within the city, an amount equal to one percent of the gross receipts of any such business. 
(4)  Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged or continuing within the city in the business of selling at retail machines used in mining, quarrying, compounding, processing and manufacturing of tangible personal property, an amount equal to one-half percent of the gross proceeds of the sale of such machines, provided that the term "machines," as herein used, shall include machinery which is used for mining, quarrying, compounding, processing or manufacturing tangible personal property, and the parts of such machines, attachments and replacements therefor, which are made or manufactured for use on or in the operation of such machines and which are necessary to the operation of such machines and are customarily so used. 
(5)  Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged or continuing within the city in the business of selling at retail any automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer an amount equal to one-half percent of the gross proceeds of sale of said automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer; provided, where a person subject to the tax provided for in this subsection withdraws from his stock in trade any automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer for use by him or by his employee or agent in the operation of such business, there shall be paid, in lieu of the tax levied herein, a fee of $10.00 per year or part thereof during which such automotive vehicle, truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer shall remain the property of such person. Each such year or part thereof shall begin with the day or anniversary date, as the case may be, of such withdrawal and shall run for the 12 succeeding months or part thereof during which such automotive vehicle, truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer shall remain the property of such person. 
(6)  Where any used automobile vehicle or truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer is taken in trade or in a series of trades, as a credit or part payment on the sale of a new or used vehicle, the tax levied herein shall be paid on the net difference; that is, the price of the new or used vehicle sold less the credit for the used vehicle taken in trade. 
(7)  Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged or continuing within the city in the business of selling at retail any machine, machinery or equipment which is used in planting, cultivating and harvesting farm products, or used in connection with the production of agricultural produce or products, livestock or poultry on farms, and the parts of such machines, machinery or equipment, attachments and replacements therefor which are made or manufactured for use on or in the operation of such machine, machinery or equipment, and which are necessary to and customarily used in the operation of such machine, machinery or equipment, an amount equal to one-half percent of the gross proceeds of the sale thereof; provided, however, the one-half percent rate herein prescribed with respect to parts, attachments and replacements shall not apply to any automotive vehicle or trailer designed primarily for public highway use, except farm trailers used primarily in the production and harvesting of agricultural commodities. 
(8)  Where any used machinery or equipment which is used in planting, cultivating and harvesting farm products, or used in connection with the production of agricultural produce or products, livestock and poultry on farms is taken in trade or in a series of trades as a credit or part payment on a sale of a new or used machine, machinery or equipment, the tax levied herein shall be paid on the net difference; that is, the price of the new or used machine, machinery or equipment sold, less the credit for the used machine, machinery or equipment taken in trade. 
(9)  Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged or continuing within the city in the business of selling through coin-operated dispensing machines, food and food products for human consumption, not including beverages other than coffee, milk, milk products and substitutes therefor, there is hereby levied a tax equal to one percent of the cost of such food, food products and beverages sold through such machines, which cost for the purpose of this subsection shall be the gross proceeds of sales of such business. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1, 7-8-1996) 
State Law reference- Sales tax authorized, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-200. 
Sec. 22-149. - Levy of the tax in police jurisdiction. 
    Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged in the doing of any act, or who shall do any act, or continuing in the doing of any act, or engaged in the operation of any business, or who shall engage in the operation of any business, within the police jurisdiction of the city but beyond the corporate limits of said city, for which or upon which a privilege or license tax is in this article levied or required within the corporate limits of the city, there is hereby levied, in addition to all other taxes of every kind now imposed by law or by municipal ordinance, to be collected as herein provided for the privilege or license taxes herein levied within the corporate limits of the city, a privilege or license tax equal to one-half of that provided, levied or required in this article for the doing of such act, or the engaging or continuing therein, or the engaging or continuing in the operation of such business within the corporate limits of the city; provided further that except for the amount of the privilege or license tax herein levied within the police jurisdiction of said city but without the corporate limits thereof, all the provisions of this article extend and apply to all the area within the police jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 2, 7-8-1996) 
State Law reference- Sales tax authorized in police jurisdiction, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-206. 
Sec. 22-150. - Use tax. 
(a)  An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property (not including materials and supplies bought for use in fulfilling a contract for the painting, repairing or reconditioning of vessels, barges, ships and other watercraft of more than 50 tons' burden) purchased at retail on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived for storage, use or other consumption in the city, except as provided in subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this section, at the rate of one percent of the sale price of such property within the corporate limits of said city. 
(b)  An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of any machines used in mining, quarrying, compounding, processing and manufacturing of tangible personal property purchased at retail on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived at the rate of one-half percent of the sales price of any such machine, within the corporate limits of the city, provided that the term "machine," as herein used, shall include machinery which is used for mining, quarrying, compounding, processing, or manufacturing tangible personal property, and the parts of such machines, attachments and replacements therefor, which are made or manufactured for use on or in the operation of such machines and which are necessary to the operation of such machines and are customarily so used. 
(c)  An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of any automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer purchased at retail on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived for storage, use or other consumption in the city at the rate of one-half percent of the sales price of such automotive vehicle, truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer within the corporate limits of said city. Where any used automotive vehicle, truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer is taken in trade, or in a series of trades, as a credit or part payment on the sale of a new or used vehicle, the tax levied herein shall be paid on the net difference; that is, the price of the new or used vehicle sold less the credit for the used vehicle taken in trade. 
(d)  An excise tax is hereby levied and imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of any machine, machinery or equipment which is used in planting, cultivating and harvesting farm products, or used in connection with the production of agricultural produce or products, livestock or poultry on farms, and the parts of said machines, machinery or equipment, attachments and replacements therefor which are made or manufactured for use on or in the operation of such machine, machinery or equipment, and which are necessary to and customarily used in the operation of such machine, machinery or equipment, which is purchased at retail after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, for the storage, use or other consumption in the city at the rate of one-half percent of the sales price of such property within the corporate limits of said city regardless of whether the retailer is or is not engaged in the business in this city; provided, however, the one-half percent rate herein prescribed with respect to parts, attachments and replacements shall not apply to any automotive vehicle or trailer designed primarily for public highway use, except farm trailer used primarily in the production and harvesting of agricultural commodities. Where any used machine, machinery or equipment which is used in planting, cultivating and harvesting farm products or used in connection with the production of agricultural produce or products, livestock and poultry on farms is taken in trade or in a series of trades as a credit or part payment on a sale of a new or used machine, machinery or equipment, the tax levied herein shall be paid on the net difference; that is, the price of the new or used machine, machinery or equipment sold, less the credit for the used machine, machinery or equipment taken in trade. 
(e)  An excise tax is hereby imposed on tangible personal property at one-half the rates specified in subsections (a), (b), (c) and (d) of this section on the storage, use or other consumption of such tangible personal property outside the corporate limits of the city, but within the police jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 3, 7-8-1996) 
State Law reference- Levy of use tax authorized, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-51-202, 11-51-206. 
Sec. 22-151. - Provisions of state sales tax statutes applicable to this article and taxes herein levied. 
    The taxes levied by sections 22-148 through 22-150 shall be subject to all definitions, exceptions, exemptions, proceedings, requirements, rules, regulations, provisions, discounts, penalties, fines, punishments and deductions that are applicable to the taxes levied by the state sales tax structures, except where inapplicable or where herein otherwise provided, including all provisions of the state sales tax statutes for enforcement and collection of taxes. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 4, 7-8-1996) 
State Law reference- State sales tax, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-23-1 et seq. 
Sec. 22-152. - Collection of taxes. 
    The taxes levied hereunder, except as otherwise provided, shall be due and payable in monthly installments on or before the 20th day of the month next-succeeding the month in which the tax accrues. On or before such 20th day every person on whom the amounts levied hereunder are imposed shall render to the city, on a form prescribed by the city, a true and correct statement showing the gross proceeds of his business for the next-preceding month, the amount of gross proceeds which are not subject to the tax, or are not to be used as a measurement of the amounts due by such person and the nature thereof, together with such other information as the city may require, and at the time of making such monthly report shall compute the taxes due and shall pay to the city the amounts shown to be due. If any person subject hereto should fail to tender any report in the statements or returns required hereunder, he, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 22-154. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 5, 7-8-1996) 
Sec. 22-153. - Records. 
    It shall be the duty of every person engaging or continuing in any business for which a tax is imposed hereby to keep and preserve suitable records of the gross receipts of any such business and such other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax for which he is liable hereunder. It shall be the duty of every person to keep and preserve for a period of three years all invoices of gross receipts from the sale or leasing of tangible personal property herein taxed and all such books, invoices and other records shall be open for examination, at any time by the city or its agent. Each occurrence of a failure to keep records or allow examination thereof shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 6, 7-8-1996) 
Sec. 22-154. - Penalty for failure to maintain records. 
    Any person who shall fail to keep records as herein required or who shall refuse to permit such examination thereof, or who violated any other provision hereof, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 7, 7-8-1996) 
Sec. 22-155. - Penalty for failure to pay taxes. 
    Any person who fails to pay the tax herein levied within the time required by this article shall pay, in addition to the tax, a penalty of ten percent of the amount of tax due, together with interest thereon at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof, from the date at which the tax herein levied became delinquent, such penalty and interest to be assessed and collected as part of the tax; provided the city, if a good and sufficient reason is shown, may waive or remit the penalty of ten percent or any portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 9, 7-8-1996) 
Sec. 22-156. - Provisions cumulative. 
    This article shall not be construed to repeal any of the provisions of city's general license code or ordinances nor any other ordinance of the city, but shall be held to be cumulative, and the amounts of the taxes herein levied shall be in addition to the amounts of all other license or privilege taxes imposed by the city in its ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 10, 7-8-1996) 
Secs. 22-157-22-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - BUSINESS LICENSE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to license occupations, trades and professions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-90(a)(1). 

Sec. 22-181. - Levy of tax. 
    Pursuant to the Code of Alabama, this article is hereby declared to be and is adopted as the business license code and schedule of licenses for the municipality for the year beginning January 1, 2008, and for each subsequent year thereafter. There is hereby levied and assessed a business license fee for the privilege of doing any kind of business, trade, profession or other activity in the municipality, or the police jurisdiction, by whatever name called. 
(Ord. No. 528, § 1, 12-10-2007) 
Sec. 22-182. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business means any commercial or industrial activity or any enterprise, trade, profession, occupation, or livelihood, including the lease or rental of residential or nonresidential real estate, whether or not carried on for gain or profit, and whether or not engaged in as a principal or as an independent contractor, which is engaged in, or caused to be engaged in, within a municipality. 
    Business license means an annual license issued by the municipality for the privilege of doing any kind of business, trade, profession, or any other activity in the municipality, by whatever name called, which document is required to be conspicuously posted or displayed except to the extent the taxpayer's business license tax or other financial information is listed thereon. 
    Business license remittance form means any business license return, renewal reminder notice, or other writing on which the taxpayer calculates the business license tax liability for all or part of the license year and remits the amount so calculated with the form. 
    Department or department of revenue means the state department of revenue. 
    Designee means an agent or employee of the municipality authorized to administer or collect, or both the municipality's business license taxes, which may include another taxing jurisdiction, the department of revenue, or a private auditing or collecting firm as defined in Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-2A-3. 
    Gross receipts means the measure of any and all receipts of a business from whatever source derived, to the maximum extent permitted by applicable laws and constitutional provisions, to be used in calculating the amount due for a business license. Provided, however, that: 
(1)  The term "gross receipts" shall not include any of the following taxes collected by the business on behalf of any taxing jurisdiction or the federal government: All taxes which are imposed on the ultimate consumer, collected by the taxpayer and remitted by or on behalf of the taxpayer to the taxing authority, whether state, local or federal, including utility gross receipts levied pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, title 40, ch. 21, art. 3 (Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-21-80 et seq.); Code of Ala. 1975, title 40, ch. 21, art. 2 (Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-21-50 et seq.); or reimbursements to professional employer organizations of federal, state or local payroll taxes or unemployment insurance contributions; but no other deductions or exclusions from gross receipts shall be allowed except as provided in this article. 
(2)  A different basis for calculating the business license may be used by the municipality with respect to certain categories of taxpayers as prescribed in Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-90.2 
(3)  For a utility or other entity described in Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-129, gross receipts shall be limited to the gross receipts derived from the retail furnishing of utility services within the municipality during the preceding year that are taxed under Code of Ala. 1975, title 40, ch. 21, art. 3 (Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-21-80 et seq.), except that nothing herein shall affect any existing contract or agreement between a municipality and a utility or other entity. The gross receipts derived from the furnishing of utility services shall not be subject to further business license taxation by the municipality. 
(4)  Gross receipts shall not include dividends or other distributions received by a corporation, or proceeds from borrowing, the sale of a capital asset, the repayment of the principal portion of a loan, the issuance of stock or other equity investments, or capital contributions, or the undistributed earnings of subsidiary entities. 
    License form means any business license application form, renewal reminder notice, business license remittance form, or business license return by whatever name called. 
    License officer or municipal license officer means the municipal employee charged by the municipality with the primary responsibility of administering the municipality's business license tax ordinance and related matters thereto. 
    License year means the calendar year. 
    Municipality means and includes the city's police jurisdiction, where the business license tax is levied in the police jurisdiction. 
    Other terms means other capitalized or specialized terms used in this article, and not defined in this section, shall have the same meanings ascribed to them in Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-2A-3, unless the context therein otherwise specifies. 
    Person means any individual, association, estate, trust, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other entity of any kind, except for any nonprofit corporation formed under the state law which is operated to enable municipalities that become members of such nonprofit corporation to finance or refinance capital projects and related undertakings, on a cooperative basis, and whose board of directors or other governing body consists primarily of elected officials of the municipality. 
    Taxing jurisdiction means any municipality that levies a business license tax, whether or not a business license tax is levied within its police jurisdiction, or the department of revenue acting as agent on behalf of a municipality pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, title 11, ch. 51, art. 2, div. 4 (Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-180 et seq.), as the context requires. 
    Taxpayer means any person subject to or liable under this article for any business license tax; any person required to file a return with respect to, or pay or remit the business license tax levied under this article or to report any information or value to the taxing jurisdiction; or any person required to obtain, or who holds any interest in, any business license issued by the taxing jurisdiction; or any person that may be affected by any act or refusal to act by the taxing jurisdiction under this article, or to keep any required by this article. 
    USC means the applicable title and section of the United States Code, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 528, § 2, 12-10-2007) 
Sec. 22-183. - License term; minimums. 
    The license term and the minimum amount for a business license are as follows: 
(1)  Full year. Every person who commences business during the calendar year shall be subject to and shall pay the annual license for such business in full. Unless otherwise specified in the enclosed schedules, the minimum annual license fee shall be $100.00 
(2)  Issue fee. For each license issued there shall be an issue fee collected of $10.00, and said issue fee shall be collected in the same manner as the license tax. 
(3)  Annual renewal. Except as provided in subsections (3)a or b of this section, the business license shall be renewed annually on or before January 31 each year. 
a.  If the due date for payment of any business license falls on a weekend or a holiday recognized by the municipality from time to time, the due date shall automatically be extended until the next business day. 
b.  Insurance company annual license renewals shall be renewed in accordance with Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-122 which states that each year, each insurance company shall furnish the municipality a statement in writing duly certified showing the full and true amount of gross premiums received during the preceding year and shall accompany such statement with the amount of license tax due according to the licensing schedule. Failure to furnish such statement or to pay such sum shall subject the company and its agents to those penalties as prescribed for doing business without a license as provided for in this Code. 
c.  On or before December 31 of each year, a renewal reminder shall be mailed to each licensee that purchased a business license during the current year. Said renewal notice shall be mailed via regular US Mail to the licensee's last known address of record with the municipality. Licensees are required to furnish the municipality any address changes for their business prior to December 1 in order for them to receive their notice. 
d.  Business license renewal payments received by the municipality shall be applied to the current renewal only when any and all other debts the licensee owes to the municipality are first paid in full. No business license shall be issued if the current renewal payment does not meet said prior obligations and the current renewal. Failure to pay such sums shall subject the licensee and its agents to those penalties as prescribed for doing business without a license provided for in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 528, § 3, 12-10-2007; Ord. No. 528-2, § 1, 11-22-2010) 
Sec. 22-184. - License shall be location specific. 
(a)  For each place at which any business is carried on, a separate license shall be paid, and any person desiring to engage in any business for which a license is required shall designate the place at which business is carried on, and the license to be issued shall designate such place, and such license shall authorize the carrying on of such business only at the place designated. 
(b)  Every person dealing in two or more of the articles, or engaging in two or more of the businesses, vocations, occupations or professions scheduled herein, shall take out and pay for a license for each line of business. 
(c)  A taxpayer subject to the license authorized by this article that is engaged in business in other municipalities may account for its gross receipts so that the part of its gross receipts attributable to its branch offices will not be subject to the business license imposed by this article. To establish a bona fide branch office, the taxpayer must demonstrate proof of all the following criteria: 
(1)  The taxpayer must demonstrate the continuing existence of an actual facility located outside the police jurisdiction in which its principal business office is located, such as a retail store, outlet, business office, showroom, or warehouse, to which employees and/or independent contractors are assigned or located during regular normal working hours. 
(2)  The taxpayer must maintain books and records, which reasonably indicate a segregation or allocation of the taxpayer's gross receipts to the particular facility. 
(3)  The taxpayer must provide proof that separate telephone listings, signs, and other indications of its separate activities are in existence. 
(4)  Billing and/or collection activities relating to the business conducted at the branch office is performed by an employee or other representative of the taxpayer who has such responsibility for the branch office. 
(5)  All business claimed by a branch office must be conducted by and through said office. 
(6)  The taxpayer must supply proof that all applicable business licenses with respect to the branch office have been issued. 
(d)  Nothing herein shall be construed as exempting businesses from payment of a license on the basis of a lack of physical location. 
(Ord. No. 528, § 4, 12-10-2007) 
Sec. 22-185. - Restriction on transfer of license. 
    No license shall be transferred except with the consent of the council or other governing body of the municipality or of the director of finance or other chief revenue officer or his designee, and no license shall be transferred to reflect a physical change of address of the taxpayer within the municipality more than once during a license year and never from one taxpayer to another. Provided that a mere change in the name or ownership of a taxpayer that is a corporation, partnership, limited liability company or other form of legal entity now or hereafter recognized by state law shall not constitute a transfer for the purposes of this article, unless: 
(1)  The change requires the taxpayer to obtain a new federal employer identification number or department of revenue taxpayer identification number; or 
(2)  In the discretion of the municipality, the subject license is one for the sale of alcoholic beverages. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a municipality from requiring a new business license application and approval for an alcoholic beverage license. 
(Ord. No. 528, § 5, 12-10-2007) 
Sec. 22-186. - Unlawful to do business without a license. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, taxpayer, or agent of a person or taxpayer to engage in businesses or vocations in the municipality for which a license is required without first having procured a license. A violation of this section fixing a license shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed the sum of $500.00 for each offense, and if a willful violation, by imprisonment, not to exceed six months, or both, at the discretion of the court trying the same. Each day shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, no fine or penalty under this section shall be assessed, or if assessed, shall be waived, if reasonable cause exists. The term "reasonable cause" means the death or major illness of or an accident involving a sole proprietor causing serious bodily injury that in either case resulted in the sole proprietor being unable to purchase the license or operate his business during the ten days preceding the due date for the license; natural disaster, fire, explosion, or accident that caused the closing or temporary cessation of the business of the taxpayer during the ten days preceding the due date for the license; or reliance on the erroneous advice of an employee or agent of the revenue department of the taxing jurisdiction or its designee given in writing or by electronic mail. The city may, but is not required to, waive the penalty for other reasons, including, but not limited to, the taxpayer's reliance on erroneous but good faith advice from its tax adviser or on erroneous oral advice from an employee or agent of the revenue department of the taxing jurisdiction or its designee. The burden of proving reasonable cause shall be on the taxpayer, and a determination by the taxing jurisdiction that reasonable cause does not exist shall be reversed only if that determination was made arbitrarily and capriciously. 
(c)  All penalties administered by the city pursuant to this section shall be assessed and collected in the same manner as business license taxes. 
(Ord. No. 528, § 6, 12-10-2007) 
Sec. 22-187. - License must be posted. 
    Every license shall be posted in a conspicuous place where said business, trade or occupation is carried on, and the holder of the license shall immediately show same to the designee of the municipality upon being requested so to do. 
(Ord. No. 528, § 7, 12-10-2007) 
Sec. 22-188. - Duty to file report. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every person subject to such license tax to render to the municipality on such forms as may be required a sworn statement showing the total business done, amount of sales, gross receipts and gross sales, stock, value of furniture and other equipment, capital invested, number of helpers or employees, amount of space occupied, or other factor described in the schedule, one or several, as the case may require, for the ascertainment of the classification of such person for license taxation purposes and the correct amount of license tax to which he is subject. 
(b)  If the municipality determines that the amount of business license tax reported on or remitted with any business license remittance form is incorrect, if no business license remittance form is filed within the time prescribed, or if the information provided on the form is insufficient to allow the taxing jurisdiction to determine the proper amount of business license tax due, the municipality shall calculate the correct amount of the tax based on the most accurate and complete information reasonably obtainable and enter a preliminary assessment for the correct amount of business license tax, including any applicable penalty and interest. 
(c)  The municipality shall promptly mail a copy of any preliminary assessment to the taxpayer's last known address by either First Class US Mail or certified US Mail with return receipt requested, or, in the sole discretion of the municipality, deliver the preliminary assessment to the taxpayer by personal delivery. 
(d)  If the amount of business license tax remitted by the taxpayer is undisputed by the municipality, or if the taxpayer consents to the amount of any deficiency or preliminary assessment in writing, the municipality shall enter a final assessment for the amount of the tax due, plus any applicable penalty and interest. 
(e)  Petitions and appeals. 
(1)  If a taxpayer disagrees with a preliminary assessment as entered by the taxing jurisdiction, the taxpayer shall file a petition for review with the municipal license officer within 30 days from the date of entry of the preliminary assessment setting out the specific objections to the preliminary assessment. If a petition for review is timely filed, the license officer of the municipality shall schedule a conference with the taxpayer for the purpose of allowing the taxpayer or its representatives and the representatives of the municipality to present their respective positions, discuss any omissions or errors, and to attempt to agree upon any changes or modifications to the assessment. The license officer shall issue findings of fact and law within 60 days following the conference, which shall promptly upon issuance be mailed or delivered to the taxpayer, consistent with the procedures set forth in subsection (d) of this section. 
(2)  If the taxpayer disagrees with the license officer's findings of fact and law, the taxpayer may appeal to the municipal governing body by filing a notice of appeal with the municipal clerk within 30 days after the findings have been issued. The appeal shall be in writing and shall set forth in reasonable detail the grounds on which the taxpayer disagrees with the license officer's findings of fact and law. 
(3)  If a petition for review: 
a.  Is not timely filed, or 
b.  Is timely filed, and upon further review the license officer, or the administrative hearings officer or governing body of the municipality, as the case may be, determines that the preliminary assessment is due to be upheld in whole or in part, 
The taxing jurisdiction shall make the assessment final in the amount of business license tax due as computed by the taxing jurisdiction, with applicable penalty and interest. 
(4)  A copy of the final assessment shall promptly be mailed to the taxpayer's last known address: 
a.  By either First Class US Mail or certified US Mail with return receipt requested in the case of assessments of business license tax of $500.00 or less; or 
b.  By certified US Mail with return receipt requested in the case of assessments of business license tax of more than $500.00. 
In either case, at the option of the taxing jurisdiction, a copy of the final assessment may be delivered to the taxpayer by personal delivery. 
(Ord. No. 528, § 8, 12-10-2007) 
Sec. 22-189. - Duty to permit inspection and produce records. 
    Upon demand by the designee of the municipality, it shall be the duty of all licensees to: 
(1)  Permit the designee of the municipality to enter the business and to inspect all portions of his places of business for the purposes of enabling said municipal designee to gain such information as may be necessary or convenient for determining the proper license classification, and determining the correct amount of license tax; 
(2)  To furnish information during reasonable business hours, at the licensee's place of business, in the municipality or the police jurisdiction, all books of account, invoices, papers, reports and memoranda containing entries showing amount of purchases, sales receipts, inventory and other information from which the correct license tax classification of such person may be ascertained and the correct amount of license tax to which he is subject may be determined, including exhibition of bank deposit books, bank statements, copies of sales tax returns to the state, copies of state income tax returns and federal income tax returns. 
(Ord. No. 528, § 9, 12-10-2007) 
Sec. 22-190. - Unlawful to obstruct. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, or for any agent, servant or employee of such person, to fail or refuse to perform any duty imposed by this article; nor shall any person, agent, servant or employee of such person obstruct or interfere with the designee of the municipality in carrying out the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 528, § 10, 12-10-2007) 
Sec. 22-191. - Privacy. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person connected with the administration of this article to divulge any information obtained by him in the course of inspection and examination of the books, papers, reports and memoranda of the taxpayer made pursuant to the provisions of this article, except to the mayor, the municipal attorney or others authorized by law to receive such information described herein. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to print, publish, or divulge, without the written permission or approval of the taxpayer, the license form of any taxpayer or any part of the license form, or any information secured in arriving at the amount of tax or value reported, for any purpose other than the proper administration of any matter administered by the taxing jurisdiction, or upon order of any court, or as otherwise allowed in this article. 
(c)  Nothing herein shall prohibit the disclosure of the fact that a taxpayer has or has not purchased a business license. Statistical information pertaining to taxes may be disclosed to the city council upon their written request through the mayor's office. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 528, § 11, 12-10-2007) 
Sec. 22-192. - Failure to file assessment. 
(a)  In any case where a person subject to paying a license tax as provided herein fails to do so, the municipal designee shall be authorized to assess and determine the amount of license taxes due using the best information available either by return filed or by other means. 
(b)  The taxpayer shall be notified by registered or certified mail, or by personal service, of the amount of any such assessment, and of his right to appear before the municipal governing body on a day named not less than 20 days from the date of notice and to show cause why such assessment shall not be made final. Such appearance may be made by agent or attorney. 
(c)  If no showing is made on or before the date fixed in such notice, or if such showing is not sufficient in the judgment of the municipality, such assessment shall be made final in the amount originally fixed, or in such other amount as is determined by the municipality to be correct. If, upon such hearing, the municipal designee finds a different amount due than that originally assessed, he shall make the assessment final in the correct amount, and in all cases shall notify the taxpayer of the assessment as finally fixed. 
(d)  A notice by the US Mail, addressed to the taxpayer's last known place of business, shall be sufficient. Any assessment made by the designee of the municipality shall be prima facie correct upon any appeal. 
(Ord. No. 528, § 12, 12-10-2007) 
Sec. 22-193. - Lien for non-payment of license tax. 
    On all property, both real and personal, used in the business, the municipality shall have a lien for such license, which lien shall attach as of the date when the license is due, as allowed by Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-44. 
(Ord. No. 528, § 13, 12-10-2007) 
Sec. 22-194. - Criminal penalties. 
    Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this article shall be fined in an amount not less than $50.00 and not more than $500.00, and may also be sentenced to imprisonment for a period of not exceeding six months, in the discretion of the court trying the case, and violations on separate days shall each constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 528, § 14, 12-10-2007) 
Sec. 22-195. - Civil penalties. 
    In addition to the remedies provided by Code of Ala. 1975, title 11, ch. 51, art. 2, div. 3 (Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-150 et seq.), the continued or recurrent performance of any act within the corporate limits or within its police jurisdiction for which a license may be revoked or suspended under this article is hereby declared to be detrimental to the health, safety, comfort and convenience of the public and is a nuisance. The municipality, as an additional or alternative remedy, may institute injunctive proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction to abate the same. 
(Ord. No. 528, § 15, 12-10-2007) 
Sec. 22-196. - Penalties and interest. 
(a)  All licenses not paid within 30 days from the date they fall due shall be increased by 15 percent for the first 30 days they shall be delinquent, or fraction thereof, and shall be measured by an additional 15 percent for a delinquency of 60 or more days, but this provision shall not be deemed to authorize the delay of 30 days in the payment of the license due, which may be enforced at once. 
(b)  In the case of persons who began business on or after the first day of the calendar year, the license for such new business shall be increased by 15 percent for the first 15 days they shall be delinquent, and shall be measured by an additional 15 percent for a delinquency of 45 days or more. 
(c)  All delinquent accounts (both license taxes and penalties) shall also be charged simple interest at the rate of one percent per month. 
(Ord. No. 528, § 16, 12-10-2007) 
Sec. 22-197. - Prosecutions unaffected. 
    The adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall not in any manner affect any prosecution of any act illegally done contrary to the provisions of any ordinance now or heretofore in existence, and every such prosecution, whether begun before or after the enactment of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be governed by the law under which the offense was committed; nor shall a prosecution, or the right to prosecute, for the recovery of any penalty or the enforcement of any forfeiture be in any manner affected by the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived; nor shall any civil action or cause of action existing prior to or at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived be affected in any manner by its adoption. 
(Ord. No. 528, § 17, 12-10-2007) 
Sec. 22-198. - Procedure for denial of new applications. 
(a)  The municipal designee shall have the authority to investigate all applications and may refer any application to the municipal governing body for a determination of whether such license should or should not be issued. 
(b)  If the municipal governing body denies the issuance of any license referred to it, the municipal clerk shall promptly notify the applicant of the municipal governing body's decision. 
(c)  If said applicant desires to appear before the municipal governing body to show cause why said license should be issued, he shall file a written notice with the municipal clerk, said notice to be filed within two weeks from the date of mailing by the municipal clerk of the notice of the denial of such license by the municipal governing body. 
(d)  Upon receipt of said notice the municipal clerk shall promptly schedule a hearing, to be held within 15 days from the date of receipt of such notice, before the municipal governing body and shall give the notice of the date, time and place of said hearing to the applicant. 
(e)  The applicant shall be given the opportunity to appear personally, or through his counsel, or both, and the municipal governing body shall proceed to hear any evidence which may be presented both for and against the issuance of said license. 
(f)  If the municipal governing body determines from the evidence presented that in order to either provide for the safety, preserve the health, promote the prosperity, or improve the morals, order, comfort and convenience of the inhabitants of the municipality, said license should not be granted, it shall enter an order to that effect; otherwise, said license shall be ordered issued upon payment of any required license fees. 
(Ord. No. 528, § 18, 12-10-2007) 
Sec. 22-199. - Procedure for revocation or suspension of license. 
(a)  Any lawful license issued to any person to conduct any business shall be subject to revocation by the municipal governing body for the violation by the licensee, his agent, servant, or employee of any provision of this article or of any ordinance of the municipality, or any state statute relating to the business for which such license is issued; and shall also be subject to revocation by the municipal governing body if the licensee, his agent, servant, or employee under color of such license violates or aids or abets in violating or knowingly permits or suffers to be violated any penal ordinance of the municipality or any criminal law of the state; and shall also be subject to revocation by the municipal governing body if, in connection with the issuance or renewal of any license, the licensee or his agent filed or caused to be filed any application, affidavit, statement, certificate, book, or any other data containing any false, deceptive or other misleading information or omission of material fact. 
(b)  The conditions hereinabove set forth as grounds for the revocation of a license shall also constitute grounds for refusing to renew a license. 
(c)  The municipal governing body shall set a time for a hearing on the matter of revoking or refusing to renew a license; and a notice of such hearing shall be given to the licensee, or the applicant for renewal, as the case may be, at least ten days before the day set for said hearing. At the hearing the municipal governing body shall hear all evidence offered by any party and all evidence that may be presented bearing upon the question of revocation or the refusal of renewal, as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 528, § 19, 12-10-2007) 
Sec. 22-200. - Refunds on overpayments. 
(a)  Any taxpayer may file a petition for refund with the municipality for any overpayment of business license tax erroneously paid to the municipality. If a final assessment for the tax has been entered by the municipality, a petition for refund of all or a portion of the tax may be filed only if the final assessment has been paid in full prior to or simultaneously with the filing of the petition for refund. 
(b)  A petition for refund shall be filed with the municipality within two years from the date of payment of the business license tax, which is the subject of the petition. 
(c)  The municipality shall either grant or deny a petition for refund within six months from the date the petition is filed, unless the period is extended by written agreement of the taxpayer and the municipality. The taxpayer shall be notified of the municipality's decision concerning the petition for refund by first class US Mail or by certified US Mail, return receipt requested, sent to the taxpayer's last known address. It the municipality fails to grant a full refund within the time provided herein, the refund petition shall be deemed to be denied. 
(d)  If the petition is granted or the municipality or a court otherwise determines that a refund is due, the overpayment shall be promptly refunded to the taxpayer by the municipality, together with interest to the extent provided for in Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-192. If the municipality determines that a refund is due, the amount of overpayment plus any interest due thereon may first be credited by the municipality against any outstanding tax liabilities due and owing by the taxpayer to the municipality, and the balance of any overpayment shall be promptly refunded to the taxpayer. If any refund or part thereof is credited to any other tax by the municipality, the taxpayer shall be provided with a written detailed statement showing the amount of overpayment, the amount credited for payment to other taxes, and the resulting amount of the refund. 
(e)  A taxpayer may appeal from the denial in whole or in part of a petition for refund by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk of the circuit court of the county in which the municipality denying the petition for refund is located. Said notice of appeal must be filed within two years from the date the petition was denied. The circuit court shall hear the appeal according to its own rules and procedures and shall determine the correct amount of refund due, if any. If an appeal is not filed with the appropriate circuit court within two years of the date the petition was denied, then the appeal shall be dismissed for lack of jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 528, § 20, 12-10-2007) 
Sec. 22-201. - Delivery license. 
(a)  In lieu of any other type of license, a taxpayer may at its option purchase for $100.00 plus a $10.00 issuance fee, a delivery license for the privilege of delivering its merchandise in the municipality if the taxpayer meets all of the following criteria: 
(1)  Other than deliveries, the taxpayer has no other physical presence within the municipality or its police jurisdiction; 
(2)  The taxpayer conducts no other business in the municipality other than delivering merchandise and performing the requisite set-up and installation of said merchandise; 
(3)  Such delivery and set-up and installation is performed by the taxpayer's employees or agents, concerns the taxpayer's own merchandise in that municipality, and is done by means of delivery vehicles owned, leased, or contracted by the taxpayer; 
(4)  The gross receipts derived from the sale and any requisite set-up or installation of all merchandise so delivered shall not exceed $75,000.00 during the license year; 
(5)  Any set-up or installation shall relate only to: 
(i)  That required by the contract between the taxpayer and the customer or as may be required by state or local law; and 
(ii)  The merchandise so delivered; 
(6)  If at any time during the current license year the taxpayer fails to meet any of the above stated criteria, then within 45 days after any of said criteria have been violated or exceeded, the taxpayer shall purchase all appropriate business licenses from the municipality for the entire license year and without regard to this section. 
(7)  A taxpayer that otherwise meets the criteria for the purchase of a delivery license is not required to purchase a delivery license or a regular business license if: 
(i)  The taxpayer's gross receipts that are derived from within the municipality or its police jurisdiction do not exceed $10,000.00 during the year; and 
(ii)  The taxpayer has no other physical presence within the municipality or its police jurisdiction during the year. 
(b)  Mere delivery of the taxpayer's merchandise by common carrier shall not allow the municipality to assess a business license tax against the taxpayer, but the gross receipts derived from any sale and delivery accomplished by means of a common carrier shall be counted against the $75,000.00 limitation described in the preceding section if the taxpayer also during the same license year sells and delivers into the taxing jurisdiction using a delivery vehicle other than a common carrier. 
(c)  A common carrier, contract carrier, or similar delivery service making deliveries on behalf of others shall not be entitled to purchase a delivery license. 
(d)  The delivery license shall be calculated in arrears based on the related gross receipts during the preceding license year. 
(e)  The purchase of a delivery license shall not, in and of itself, establish nexus between the taxpayer and the municipality for the purposes of the taxes levied by or under the authority of Code of Ala. 1975, title 40 or other provisions of law, nor does the purchase of a delivery license conclusively determine that nexus does not exist between the taxpayer and the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 528, § 21, 12-10-2007; Ord. No. 597, § 21, 12-18-2017) 
Sec. 22-202. - License classifications and fee or rate schedules. 
    License classifications and fee or rate schedules shall be as now and hereafter established by the city and on file at city hall. Such information is also available on the city's internet webpage. 
Sec. 22-203. - Exchange of information. 
(a)  The license officer may exchange tax returns, information, records, and other documents secured by the municipality, with other municipalities adopting similar ordinances for the exchange of taxpayer information, or with county or state authorities. The license officer may charge a reasonable fee for providing such information or documents. Any tax returns, information, records, or other documents so exchanged shall remain subject to the confidentiality provisions, restrictions, and criminal penalties for unauthorized disclosure as provided under state or municipal law. 
(b)  Any such exchange shall be for one or more of the following purposes: 
(1)  Collecting taxes due; 
(2)  Ascertaining the amount of taxes due from any person; 
(3)  Determining whether a person is liable for, or whether there is probable cause for believing a person might be liable for, the payment of any tax to a state, county, or municipal agency. 
(c)  Nothing herein shall prohibit the use of tax returns or tax information by the municipality in the proper administration of any matter administered by the license officer. The license officer may also divulge to a purchaser, prospective purchaser as defined pursuant to the regulations of the state department of revenue, or successor of a business or stock of goods the outstanding sales, use, or rental tax liability of the seller for which the purchaser, prospective purchaser as defined pursuant to the regulations of the state department of revenue, or successor may be liable pursuant to the Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 40-23-25, 40-23-82, or 40-12-224. 
(Ord. No. 528, § 24, 12-10-2007) 
Sec. 22-204. - License fees in police jurisdiction. 
    Any person, firm, association, or corporation engaged in any business outside the municipality but within the police jurisdiction hereof shall pay one-half of the amount of the license imposed for like businesses within the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 528, § 25, 12-10-2007) 
State Law reference- License fee in police jurisdiction authorized, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-91. 
Sec. 22-205. - Commercial vehicle identification. 
(a)  All commercial vehicles including, but not limited to, delivery vehicles, contractor vehicles, service vehicles, and vehicles used on the public street in the normal transaction of business are required to display once on each side of the vehicle the business name, address, and phone number in letters not less than two inches in height and of contrasting colors sufficient to be legible from 30 feet. The signs may be permanent or removable but must be displayed when the vehicle is in commercial use. 
(b)  Failure to display vehicle identification as described above constitutes a misdemeanor against the city and is punishable by a fine not less than $100.00 and not more than $500.00 for each separate offense, together with the court cost as established by the city council for a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 528-2, § 3, 11-22-2010) 
Secs. 22-206-22-233. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - DEALERS IN ANTIQUE, USED AND SCRAP JEWELRY AND PRECIOUS METALS 

Sec. 22-234. - Registration required. 
    Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation purchasing or otherwise dealing in antique, used or scrap jewelry and precious metals, including, but not limited to, platinum, gold, and silver, where the purchase is for resale in its original form or as changed by remounting, melting, reforming, remolding, or recasting or for resale as scrap or in bulk, shall be required to register with the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 567, § 1, 9-12-2011) 
Sec. 22-235. - Registration information. 
    At the time of such registration the following information shall be supplied: 
(1)  The name of the business, if other than an individual; 
(2)  The name of the individual responsible for the operation of the business; 
(3)  The location and hours of operation of business; 
(4)  The residence address of persons responsible for operation; 
(5)  The permanent location for firm or corporation operating the business; 
(6)  The names of each employee intended to be engaged in the business. 
(Ord. No. 567, § 2, 9-12-2011) 
Sec. 22-236. - Investigations and restrictions on license issuance. 
    The chief of police shall investigate each applicant and employee. No license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of the felony offenses involving receiving and concealing stolen property or goods, burglary, robbery, embezzlement, or theft. 
(Ord. No. 567, § 3, 9-12-2011) 
Sec. 22-237. - Other licenses. 
    Any person authorized to operate under this article shall in addition procure all licenses necessary to operate the business and pay all taxes and fees required by law to the city revenue department. 
(Ord. No. 567, § 4, 9-12-2011) 
Sec. 22-238. - Restriction on changing purchased items. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, or corporation engaging in the activity described in section 22-234 to sell, exchange, barter or remove from the place in which said business is conducted, or to change the form of any of the said items by remounting, melting, cutting up or otherwise changing the form of any of said items for a period of 15 days from the date of said purchase. 
(Ord. No. 567, § 5, 9-12-2011) 
Sec. 22-239. - Records. 
    Every person, firm, partnership, or corporation engaging in the activity described in section 22-234 shall keep a record containing a clear and accurate description of each item purchased sufficient to enable a reasonable person/law enforcement agent to identify the item (including specifically all identifying marks such as words, names, or initials), the date and amount of money paid for each item, the name of the seller, the social security or driver's license number of the seller, and the residence address (not general delivery or post office box, but including the box number if on any rural route) and the telephone number of the seller. The seller and the purchaser shall both sign the record of each transaction. On each day the purchaser transacts business of the type described herein he shall deliver to the chief of police a duplicate copy of the record concerning that day's business. This record shall be delivered by 12:00 noon of the day following the date of said transaction and by 12:00 noon on Monday for all transactions since the preceding Friday. The record shall be carefully preserved without any alteration and shall be at all times available for inspection by a police officer. 
(Ord. No. 567, § 6, 9-12-2011) 
Secs. 22-240-22-256. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - PAWNBROKERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Alabama Pawnshop Act, MCL 5-19A-1 et seq. 

Sec. 22-257. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Pawnbroker means any person engaged in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods left in pawn, or the business of purchasing tangible personal property to be left in pawn on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time. 
    Secondhand dealer means any person who buys, sells, or barters in secondhand goods and is subject to the licensing requirements of a "pawnbroker" or "salvage yard, salvage dealer, waste disposal, or recycling," and/or any person not subject to such license classifications who is engaged in the business of buying, selling, trading, or bartering in secondhand goods, and/or any person who is a pawnbroker under the Alabama Pawnshop Act (MCL 5-19A-1 et seq.). 
    Secondhand goods means any property of any kind or description which has been previously sold to or owned by a consumer or other person who is not a merchant as defined by Code of Ala. 1975, § 7-2-104, or that constitutes pledged goods under the Alabama Pawnshop Act, or that is sold or received as scrap or salvage property, provided that the household furnishings, clothing, waste, and animal waste or aluminum drink cans shall not be considered secondhand goods within this article. 
(Ord. No. 585, § 1, 1-12-2015) 
Sec. 22-258. - Business license. 
    Each person registering as a pawnbroker must comply with the licensing requirements of the Alabama Pawnshop Act (MCL 5-19A-1 et seq.) and obtain a business license from the city. 
(Ord. No. 585, § 2, 1-12-2015) 
Sec. 22-259. - Reports to the chief of police. 
(a)  Every pawnbroker within the city limits shall electronically report to the chief of police a description of every article or thing received by him in pawn, pledge, trade, purchase or consignment. Transaction reports may be entered as soon as time will allow. All transaction reports must be submitted within seven calendar days following said transaction date. 
(b)  Computerized reporting of pawnshop information shall be mandatory. The chief of police shall establish the format and requirements for the transmission of data and may restrict the scope of the items that are to be electronically reported. A transaction reported by electronic transmission under this section shall not be reported on paper forms unless the police chief requests such. Each pawnbroker may pay a fee of $0.50 per transaction required to be electronically reported, if the electronic report transmitted to the chief of police is erroneous, duplicative or in an incorrect or incompatible format, or if no electronic report of the transaction is transmitted. 
(c)  Pawnbrokers shall report their transactions electronically to the police chief as required by this section from and after the following dates: 
(1)  For each pawnshop for which a pawnbroker license is first obtained on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, effective upon commencing business. 
(2)  For each pawnshop for which a pawnbroker license was first obtained before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived that maintains a computerized record-keeping system for its own record of transactions, no later than 45 days after the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(3)  For each pawnshop for which a pawnbroker license was first obtained before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, not later than 45 days. 
(d)  The chief of police may, for good cause shown, grant a pawnbroker an extension of the deadline to a date not later than ten days. An extension may only be granted upon written application by the pawnbroker and upon a showing that the pawnbroker is making satisfactory progress toward acquiring computer programs and equipment to make the necessary electronic transmission of all transactions of the pawnshop. 
(e)  If, after establishing the format and requirements for the transmission of computerized reports of transactions, the chief of police alters the required format, pawnbrokers shall be given at least 45 days to comply with the new format requirements. 
(Ord. No. 585, § 4, 1-12-2015) 
Sec. 22-260. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person found guilty of violating any provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  After notice and hearing, a pawnbroker's municipal business license may be suspended or revoked upon finding that one or more of the following have occurred: 
(1)  The pawnbroker licensee either knowingly or without the exercise of due care has violated this article. 
(2)  A fact or condition exists which, if it had been known at the time of the original application for a license, would have justified the refusal to issue a license. 
(3)  The pawnbroker/licensee has aided, abetted or conspired with an individual or person to circumvent the requirements of this article. 
(4)  The licensee or a legal or beneficial owner of the license has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude. 
(5)  Has intentionally not accurately reported the information required under Code of Ala. 1975, § 5-19A-1 and/or the provisions of this article. 
(c)  A hearing officer may conditionally license or place on probation a person whose license has been suspended or may reprimand a licensee for violation of this article. 
(d)  A hearing officer may reinstate a suspended license or issue a new license to a person whose license has been revoked if no fact or condition then exists which would have justified the refusal to originally issue a license. 
(e)  Hearing officers shall be designated as the chief of police, ordinance officer, revenue officer, one mayor appointee, and one council appointee. A quorum shall consist of no less than three of the aforementioned hearing officers. At least one appointee must be present and included within the quorum. 
(Ord. No. 585, § 5, 1-12-2015) 
Secs. 22-261-22-283. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - 2016 LODGING TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- State transient occupancy tax, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-26-1 et seq. 

Sec. 22-284. - Levy of tax in the city. 
    For the privilege of engaging or continuing within the city in the business activities hereinafter referred to, there is hereby levied, in addition to all other taxes of every kind now imposed by law, and shall be collected as hereinafter provided, an additional privilege or license tax against the person on account of the business activities and in the amount to be determined by the application of the rates against gross receipts as follows: 
    There is hereby levied and imposed, in addition to all other taxes of every kind now imposed by law, an additional privilege or license tax upon every person, firm, or corporation engaged in the business of renting or furnishing any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations to transients in any hotel, motel, inn, tourist camp, tourist cabin, or any other place in which rooms, lodgings or accommodations are regularly furnished to transients for a consideration, in the amount of two percent of the charge for such room, rooms, lodgings, or accommodations, including the charge for use or rental of personal property and services furnished in such rooms. Provided, however, there is exempted from the tax levied under the provisions of this article any rentals or sales taxed under the provisions of Code of Ala. 1975, title 40, ch. 23, art. 1 (Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-23-1 et seq.). The tax shall not apply to rooms, lodgings, or accommodations supplied for a period of 30 continuous days or more in any place. 
(Ord. No. 590, § 1, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 22-285. - Levy of tax in police jurisdiction. 
    For the privilege of engaging or continuing in the business activities hereinafter referred to within the police jurisdiction of the city outside of its corporate limits, there is hereby levied, in addition to all taxes of every kind now imposed by law, and shall be collected as herein provided, an additional privilege or license tax against the persons on account of the business activities in the amounts to be determined by the application of rates against gross receipts as follows: 
    There is hereby levied and imposed in addition to all other taxes of every kind now imposed by law, an additional privilege or license tax on every person, firm, or corporation engaged in the business of renting or furnishing any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations to transients in any hotel, motel, inn, tourist camp, tourist cabin, or any other place in which rooms, lodgings or accommodations are regularly furnished to transients for a consideration, in the amount to be determined by the application of the rate of one percent of the charge for such room, rooms, lodgings, or accommodations, including the charge for use or rental of personal property and services furnished in such room. Provided, however, there is exempted from the tax levied under the provisions of this article any rentals or services taxed under the provisions of Code of Ala. 1975, title 40, ch. 23, art. 1 (Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-23-1 et seq.). The tax shall not apply to rooms, lodgings or accommodations supplied for a period of 30 continuous days or more in any one place. 
(Ord. No. 590, § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 22-286. - Provisions of state lodging tax statutes applicable to this article and taxes levied herein. 
    This article and the taxes herein levied shall be subject to all definitions, exceptions, exemptions, proceedings, requirements, rules, regulations, provisions, penalties, fines, punishments, and deductions that are applicable to the taxes levied by the state lodging tax statutes, except where inapplicable or where herein otherwise provided, including all the provisions of the state lodging tax statutes, for enforcement and collection of taxes. 
(Ord. No. 590, § 3, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 22-287. - Adding amount of tax to price. 
    Any person on whom the tax levied by this article is imposed may add the tax herein levied to the receipts from rental of rooms, lodgings or accommodations and may collect the same from the occupants of such rooms, but this section is not mandatory. 
(Ord. No. 590, § 4, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 22-288. - This article cumulative. 
    This article shall not be construed to repeal any of the provisions of the general license code or any other ordinances in the city, but shall be held to be cumulative, and the amounts of the taxes herein levied shall be in addition to the amounts of all other license taxes levied by the city by its general license code or any ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 590, § 5, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 22-289. - City tourism and economic development account established; tax to be paid into account. 
    There is hereby established a special city fund to be entitled the City Tourism and Economic Development Account from which the proceeds of this tax shall be paid into upon receipt. 
(Ord. No. 590, § 6, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 22-290. - Disbursements from city tourism and economic development account. 
(a)  The treasurer of the city shall pay out of said city tourism and economic development account, on a quarterly basis, one-fourth of the gross receipts of this tax to the commercial development authority of the city, one-fourth of the gross of this tax receipts to the downtown redevelopment authority of the city and one-half of the gross receipts of this tax into a special tourism grant fund. Grants from this fund shall to be awarded by vote of the city council after it has established an application process by resolution and with any grant to be voted for and approved in a public meeting of the city council. 
(b)  Any funds held in said city tourism and economic development account shall roll over each fiscal year into said account. 
(Ord. No. 590, § 7, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 22-291. - Continuation of expenditures. 
    The authorized expenditures above under this tax from the special fund shall continue for a period of five years after the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, at which time the city council may in its discretion change the funding formula. 
(Ord. No. 590, § 8, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 22-292. - Exemption. 
    This article shall not apply and said tax shall not be imposed on RV or campsite rentals. 
(Ord. No. 590, § 11, 4-26-2016) 
Secs. 22-293-22-316. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - DOOR-TO-DOOR SALES OR SOLICITATIONS 

Sec. 22-317. - Declaration of intent. 
    The practice of going in and upon private residences, public buildings, and businesses in the city by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants, and transient vendors of goods, wares, merchandise, books, pictures, and periodicals, not having been requested or invited to do so by the owners or occupants of such private residences, public buildings or businesses for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise, books, pictures and periodicals or for the purpose of disposing of, or peddling or hawking the same, is hereby declared a nuisance and to be unlawful unless one has obtained a city registration certificate. 
Sec. 22-318. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Charity or nonprofit organization means any enterprise entered into with the primary purpose to pursue social, charitable, or other benevolent activities and that is classified as a tax-exempt organization under applicable provisions of the United States Internal Revenue Code and the regulations thereunder. To be classified as a tax-exempt organization, the organization must hold a tax-exempt certificate from the Internal Revenue Service. 
    Registrant or registered solicitor means any person who is subject to this article and who has obtained a valid certificate of registration from the city. 
    Residence means any living unit contained within any building or structure that is occupied by any person as a dwelling consistent with the definition of the term "residence" as defined in the zoning ordinance of the city. 
    Solicitation means any of the following activities: 
(1)  Seeking to obtain orders for the sale or exchange of goods, wares, merchandise, or perishables of any kind, for any kind of remuneration of consideration, regardless of whether advance payment is sought; 
(2)  Seeking to obtain prospective customers to apply for or to purchase insurance, publications or subscriptions to publications; 
(3)  Seeking to obtain contributions or donations of anything of value for the benefit of any individual, association, organization, corporation, or program; 
(4)  Seeking to obtain orders or prospective customers for goods or services; 
(5)  Requesting monies or contributions of other goods or services for any charity or nonprofit organization or for-profit organization or any other type or form of entity; 
(6)  Distributing handbills, written advertisements, or publications. 
    Solicitor means a person engaged in the activities defined in this article as soliciting. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 1, 7-28-2009) 
Sec. 22-319. - Registration requirements for door-to-door solicitation. 
(a)  Registration. All persons desiring to engage in soliciting at residences in the city shall apply to the city at a cost of $300.00 yearly, paid in cash or cash equivalent, for a certificate of registration. The certificate, executed by the city clerk or his designee, shall be maintained by the city clerk and a legible copy shall be carried by the registrant at all times while soliciting. Upon request for inspection by an occupant of a residence or a police officer or a city license officer while the registered solicitor is transacting his business or seeking to transact his business at any residence, the registrant shall show his copy of the registration certificate. 
(b)  Application for certificate. The city shall provide a standard form for use for registration of solicitors. The applicant for the registration certificate shall state in writing upon his oath or affirmation that the information is truthfully provided to the best of his knowledge and belief. The applicant shall supply with or upon the registration form the following information: 
(1)  Applicant's true, correct, and legal name and the name of the organization for which he will be soliciting; 
(2)  Address and phone number of applicant's home and place of business; 
(3)  Names and addresses of the corporate officers or the partners and the managers, if any, of the entity for which the applicant will be soliciting; 
(4)  The purpose for which soliciting will be done; 
(5)  A brief description of the method of presentation that will be made; 
(6)  Whether a permit, license, or certificate of registration from any city in connection with soliciting has ever been revoked or suspended, explaining the circumstances; 
(7)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a misdemeanor or a felony; 
(8)  Documentation that the person is authorized to solicit for the organization; 
(9)  Two passport-sized photos taken within 60 days of application. 
(c)  Police department notified of solicitation. The police department must be notified of the neighborhood in which the solicitation will take place, and the solicitor must remain in that neighborhood unless notification has been given to the police department of the change in neighborhood. 
(d)  Non-endorsement. In addition, the applicant shall certify on the application form that if his registration is granted, he will not state, imply, or represent to any person that the issuance of the certificate is an endorsement by the city of the product, service, solicitor, or the organization represented by the solicitor. 
(e)  Proof of identification required. No certificate of registration shall be issued except upon proof of identification, including a photograph of the applicant, in one of the following forms: 
(1)  A valid driver's license of any state in the United States. 
(2)  A valid United States Uniform Service Identification. 
(3)  A valid passport. 
(4)  A valid identification issued by any agency of a state for the purpose of identification of the holder. 
(f)  Registration complete with issuance. Registration shall be complete when the city issues the certificate of registration, which shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed. 
(g)  Form of certificate. Each certificate shall be numbered, shall list the name of the individual solicitor and of all organizations on whose behalf he is authorized to solicit, the date on which the certificate will expire, and shall be dated and signed by the city clerk or his designee. 
(h)  Expiration. Certificates shall be valid until December 31 of the current year. 
(i)  Non-transferability. Certificates of registration shall be issued only in the name of the applicant and the firms, corporations or associations on whose behalf he is authorized to solicit. Each person soliciting must obtain a certificate of registration. Certificates shall be nontransferable. It shall be a violation for a solicitor whose certificate authorizes soliciting on behalf of a firm named in the certificate to solicit on behalf of any other firm, organization or association or for any purpose other than that specified on the application. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 2, 7-28-2009) 
Sec. 22-320. - Exemptions from registration. 
    The registration provisions of this article do not apply to the following: 
(1)  Persons making solicitations solely for a church, religious organization or charitable organization, including any unincorporated association or corporation under the supervision and control of any church, charitable organization or religious organization, if the church or organization is tax-exempt under the provisions of the United States Internal Revenue Code. 
(2)  Students soliciting contributions to finance extracurricular academic, social, athletic, artistic, scientific, or cultural programs, provided that the solicitation and its purpose have been approved by the principal, president, or chief administrator of the school that the students attend. Any school, private and public, must be located within the county and is deemed to include Northeast Alabama Community College. 
(3)  Persons canvassing for the purpose of distributing political literature or materials on behalf of a political party, candidate, or public issue or introducing themselves as supporters of a candidate, political party, cause, or issue. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 3, 7-28-2009) 
Sec. 22-321. - Deceptive soliciting practices prohibited. 
(a)  No solicitor or canvasser shall intentionally or recklessly make any materially false or fraudulent statement in the course of soliciting. 
(b)  No solicitor shall use a fictitious name, an alias, or any name other than his true, correct, and legal name. 
(c)  No solicitor shall represent, directly or by implication, that the city or any other governmental entity endorses the solicitation or that the granting of a certificate of registration implies any endorsement of the solicitor's produce, goods, wares, or services or of the individual solicitor. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 4, 7-28-2009) 
Sec. 22-322. - No registration of felons. 
    No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of a state or federal felony. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 5, 7-28-2009) 
Sec. 22-323. - Revocation of certificate. 
    Any certificate of registration issued hereunder shall be revoked by the city if the registrant is convicted of a violation of this article, if the registrant has falsified the application, or otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a certificate of registration. Notice of revocation shall be given to the registrant by personal service or by certified mail to the address listed on the application. Immediately upon the giving of such notice, the certificate of registration shall become null and void and shall remain so unless the revocation is ordered rescinded by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 6, 7-28-2009) 
Sec. 22-324. - Appeal. 
    An applicant whose registration was denied or registrant whose certificate was revoked shall have the right to appeal to the city clerk. An applicant shall also have the right to appeal any adverse decision of the city clerk to the city council. Any appeal must be demanded in writing sent by certified mail to the city clerk within seven calendar days of the decision that is being appealed. The right of appeal to the city council is not in derogation of any other rights in law or equity the applicant might have. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 7, 7-28-2009) 
Sec. 22-325. - Residential "no soliciting" notices. 
(a)  Any occupant of a residence or occupants of a multifamily dwelling who desires not to have solicitors call on said residences shall give notice of the desire to refuse solicitors by displaying a clearly visible weatherproof placard no smaller than 16 square inches and no larger than 94 square inches stating "No Soliciting" which shall be posted on or near the main entrance of the private property and not within the public right-of-way. 
(b)  Residents of a residential subdivision may indicate their desire not to have solicitors call on any residences in that subdivision by giving notice of the desire to refuse solicitors by displaying a clearly visible weatherproof placard no smaller than 16 square inches and no larger than 94 square inches stating "No Soliciting" which shall be posted on or near each entrance of the subdivision on private property and not within the public right-of-way. 
(c)  The display of said placard shall be deemed to constitute notice to any solicitor that the inhabitant of the residence does not desire to invite solicitors. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 8, 7-28-2009) 
Sec. 22-326. - Duties of solicitors. 
(a)  Every solicitor shall, upon entering premises on which a residence is located, examine the main entrance to the premises for any "No Soliciting" placard, and if one is posted, desist in any efforts to solicit or to leave any literature concerning the solicitation at that residence. Possession of a certificate of registration does not relieve any solicitor of this duty. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to appear at any private residence and canvass or solicit whereon a placard bearing the words "No Soliciting" or words of similar import is posted for public view. Possession of a certificate of registration does not relieve any solicitor of this duty. 
(c)  Any solicitor who is asked to leave any residence by the occupant shall immediately and peacefully depart. Possession of a certificate of registration does not relieve any solicitor of this duty. 
(d)  Every solicitor shall at all times, while exercising the privilege in the city incident to the permit, carry upon his person his permit, and the same shall be exhibited by such person whenever he is requested to do so by any police officer or by any person who is solicited. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 9, 7-28-2009) 
Sec. 22-327. - Time of day restrictions on soliciting. 
    It is a violation of this article for any person, whether registered or not, to solicit any person at his residence between 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 10, 7-28-2009) 
Sec. 22-328. - Solicitors properly identified. 
    All solicitors must be properly identified in the form of a removable name tag as supplied by the city at a cost of $0.25 per name tag with the solicitors name, company name and permit number. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 11, 7-28-2009) 
Chapter 23 - MANUFACTURED HOMES AND TRAILERS 

Sec. 23-1. - Building numbering, street naming and mobile parks. 
(a)  There is hereby established a uniform system for naming all streets and numbering all mobile home lots, fronting on all streets, avenues and public ways, within all mobile home parks in the city (limits - jurisdiction) and all lots shall be numbered in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  All streets shall be named by the owner of each mobile home park. Each mobile home park owner shall be responsible for clearing the name of each street with the city planner or other person so designated by the mayor of the city, to ascertain that there is no other city street of like or similar name, before that name is officially affixed to said street. 
(c)  All lots on the right side proceeding from the end of each street nearest the main entrance of the mobile home park shall be even numbers. All lots on the left side proceeding from the end of each street nearest the main entrance of the mobile home park shall be odd numbers. 
(d)  There shall be assigned to each lot, its respective number under the uniform system provided for in this chapter. 
(e)  Such numbers shall be placed within 90 days after the passage of this chapter or after assigning of the proper number. The cost of the numbers shall be paid by the property owner. The numbers used shall not be less than 21/2 inches in height and shall be made of durable and clearly visible material. 
(f)  The numbers shall be conspicuously placed within 20 feet of the edge of the street on which the mobile home lot faces and shall be placed no less than 24 inches above the ground and no more than 48 inches. 
(Ord. No. 159, §§ 1-6, 2-14-1977) 
Chapter 24 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS AND OFFENSES 

Sec. 24-1. - Adoption of state offenses. 
(a)  Any person or corporation committing an offense within the corporate limits of the city or within the police jurisdiction thereof, which is declared by state law now existing or hereafter enacted to be a misdemeanor, shall be guilty of an offense against the city. 
(b)  Any person or corporation committing an offense within the corporate limits of the city or within the police jurisdiction shall be guilty of an offense against the city. 
(c)  Any person or corporation committing within the corporate limits of the city or within the police jurisdiction thereof an offense as defined by Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-1-2, which offense is not declared by state law now existing or hereafter enacted to be a felony, misdemeanor, or violation, shall be guilty of an offense against the city. 
(d)  Any person or corporation found to be in violation of subsections (a), (b) or (c) of this section shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 593, 2-27-2017) 
Sec. 24-2. - Noise. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue to make or cause to be made or continued to be made any loud or excessive noise which unreasonably interferes with the comfort, health or safety of other persons within the city. 
(1)  It is hereby declared a nuisance and shall be unlawful to operate or play any radio, musical instrument, phonographs or similar devices whether from a motor vehicle or by a pedestrian in such a manner as to be plainly audible to any person other than the player or operator of the device or passengers in the motor vehicle at a distance of 20 feet in the case of the motor vehicle or ten feet in the case of the pedestrian. 
(2)  It is hereby declared a nuisance and shall be unlawful to operate or play any radio, television, phonograph, musical instrument or similar device which produces or reproduces sound, whether from a business or residence, park, beach, or other similar place in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet to any person in a commercial, residential, multifamily dwelling or other public place. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit special performances by a band or orchestra in a hall, building, or in the open air after proper permits have been obtained from the chief of police. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the ringing of church bells or chimes within the city or noises or sounds produced by radios, sirens or other equipment attached to or being operated by any police, fire, rescue or other emergency vehicles or personnel. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the conducting of live remote broadcast by duly licensed radio stations upon business premises at the request of the owner of the business. Said live remote broadcast shall be limited to daylight hours only. 
(Ord. No. 445, §§ 1, 3, 4, 5-24-1995) 
Chapter 26 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal court, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-1 et seq. 

Sec. 26-1. - Establishment of municipal court. 
    That there be and there is hereby established, effective December 27, 1977, a municipal court for the city pursuant to the provisions of Act 1205, 1975 Regular Session of the Alabama Legislature. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 1, 12-12-1977) 
Sec. 26-2. - Number of judges. 
    The municipal court shall consist of one municipal judge. 
State Law reference- Municipal judges generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-30 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 4, 12-12-1977) 
Sec. 26-3. - Compensation of judge. 
    The annual salary of the municipal judge of the city is as established from time to time by the council. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 5, 12-12-1977) 
State Law reference- Compensation of judge, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-33. 
Sec. 26-4. - Court costs generally. 
    Upon each conviction in the municipal court for a violation of any ordinance of the city there shall be taxed against the defendant as court costs the sum of $10.00, and there shall also be taxed as costs the additional costs and fees imposed by the statutes of the state, and the latter such costs and fees shall be remitted pursuant to the said statutes. All costs taxed for the city, as hereinabove provided, shall be paid into the city treasury. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 6(D), 12-12-1977) 
State Law reference- Court costs, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-14. 
Sec. 26-5. - Additional court costs. 
(a)  In addition to any and all court costs and fees now or hereafter authorized, an additional $5.00 court cost fee shall be assessed and collected on all the municipal court cases filed within the municipal court of the city. 
(b)  The additional court costs provided herein, when collected by the city, shall be paid to the following funds as follows: 
(1)  $4.00 to a capital fund for the municipal court payment of capital and equipment costs within the municipal court; and 
(2)  $1.00 into a fund for capital expenses for the city police department. 
(c)  The assessment of fees shall not be waived by any court unless all other fees, assessments, costs, fines, and charges associated with the case are waived. 
(Ord. No. 563, §§ 1-3, 11-22-2010) 
State Law reference- Court costs, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-14. 
Sec. 26-6. - Additional court costs for crime victims' compensation fund. 
    In addition to costs and charges otherwise fixed by law upon conviction for violations of municipal ordinances, there is hereby imposed, pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 15-23-17, such convictions as follows: 
(1)  Traffic violations. $2.00, crime victims compensation fund. 
(2)  Non-traffic violations. $10.00, crime victims compensation fund. 
(Ord. No. 226, § 1, 6-25-1984) 
Sec. 26-7. - Reports generally. 
    The municipal judge shall report on the proceedings of the municipal court as required by law or rule. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 12, 12-12-1977) 
Sec. 26-8. - Reports to council. 
    The municipal judge shall be required to make a report to the council on the operation of the municipal court every month. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 13, 12-12-1977) 
Sec. 26-9. - Magistrate's fines schedule. 
(a)  Pursuant to Rule 20 of the Alabama Rules of Judicial Administration, the city does hereby amend its local schedule of fines established for the city municipal court where a defendant elects to plead guilty before a magistrate, the fine established in the schedule shall apply. (See Exhibit A, attached hereto by reference.) 
(b)  The procedure whereby a defendant in municipal court elects to plead guilty before a magistrate shall be those procedures established in Rule 20 of the Alabama Rules of Judicial Administration. 
(Ord. No. 412, exh. A, 7-12-1996; Ord. No. 495, 4-25-2005; Ord. No. 412-2, 11-22-2010) 
Sec. 26-10. - Failure to appear. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a misdemeanor against the city for any person to fail to appear before the appropriate judge or magistrate in court pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-1-4. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and constitute a misdemeanor against the city for any person charged with any misdemeanor within the city or the police jurisdiction thereof under a municipal ordinance or state law adopted by the city, which shall be before the municipal court, to fail to appear before a judge or magistrate as required in connection with any misdemeanor. 
(c)  It is directed that the clerk of the court shall distribute monies paid into court on any charges or in any situation where failure to appear has taken place with monies received first paying toward any original fine and court costs; second to any fines under failure to appear charges are to be placed in a fund to be referred to as the Scottsboro Police FTA Account; and last, any court costs as required by the statutes of the state. 
(d)  This section shall not impact the right of a judge to cite a defendant who fails to appear with contempt pursuant to Rule 33.3 of the Alabama Rules of Criminal Procedure, nor does it prevent a judge from ordering the arrest of a probationary who fails to fulfill any condition of probation or initiate revocation proceedings against him pursuant to Rules 27.4, 27.5 and 26.11 of the Alabama Rules of Criminal Procedure. 
(Ord. No. 485, §§ 1, 2, 4, 5, 12-22-2003) 
Chapter 28 - NUISANCES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- General authority relative to nuisances and health and cleanliness, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-117 et seq. 

Sec. 28-1. - Junked, wrecked, and abandoned property. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned property means all tangible personal property which does not have an identifiable owner and which has been disposed of on public property in a wrecked, inoperative or partially dismantled condition or which has no apparent value to its rightful owner. 
    Property means any real property within the city which is not a street or highway. 
    Street or highway means the entire width of right-of-way between boundary lines of every dedicated public right-of-way within the city. 
    Vehicle means a machine propelled by other than human power designed to travel along the ground on wheels, treads, runners or slides and transport persons or property and includes, without limitation, automobiles, trucks, trailers, wagons, tractors, motorcycles and buggies. 
(b)  No person shall abandon, store, park, leave or permit the storing of any vehicle within the city for such time and under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle to reasonably appear to have been abandoned. 
(c)  No person shall leave any partially dismantled, non-operating, wrecked or junked vehicle on any street or highway in the city. 
(d)  No person in charge or control of any real property within the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise shall allow any partially dismantled, non-operating, wrecked, junked or discarded vehicle to remain on such property for longer than ten days. No person shall leave any abandoned property or vehicle on any property within the city for longer time than ten days. This section shall not apply to vehicles in an enclosed storage building, or vehicles in an appropriate storage place, depository or facility maintained in a lawful place and manner by the city. This section shall not apply to licensed and registered junkyards or automobile dealerships if said junkyards or automobile dealerships are licensed by the city. 
(e)  The placing and storage of vehicle's on public or private property as defined in subsection (a) of this section shall constitute a nuisance, detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. It shall be the duty of the owner of vehicles and the private property owner or lessee or such other person in possession of private property where such vehicle may be located to remove it from the city or to have it housed in an enclosed building where it shall not be visible from the street. 
(f)  Any police officer or an employee of the city, authorized by the mayor to do so, shall give written notice to the registered owner of the vehicle which is in violation of this chapter or to give such notice to the owner, lessee or person in possession of the property whereon the vehicle is situated if the identity of the registered owner is not readily ascertainable, advising such person that the vehicle violates this chapter and demanding that the vehicle be removed from the city within ten days or that within ten days it shall be housed in an enclosed building where it will not be visible from the street. Such notice shall be given by personal service or by certified mail. 
(g)  Junked motor vehicles having no apparent market value other than for salvage or parts or as scrap metal abandoned on any city street or public property in an inoperable condition are hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and any police officer or an employee of the city, authorized by the mayor to do so, is hereby authorized to summarily abate such nuisances by removing junked motor vehicles to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(h)  Before any vehicle may be sold or disposed of by the city all relevant provisions of Code of Ala. 1975, title 32, ch. 13 (Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-13-1 et seq.) shall be followed. 
(h)  This chapter is cumulative and shall not be construed as repealing, limiting or restriction any other ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 415, §§ 1-8, 10, 2-24-1997) 
Sec. 28-2. - Demolition of buildings and structures. 
(a)  The city through its city council does hereby elect to come under the provisions of Code of Ala. 1975, title 11, ch. 40, art. 2 (Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-40-30 et seq.). 
(b)  The term "appropriate municipal official," for the purposes of this section, means the city's zoning adjustment board along with any other person designated by the mayor and council to exercise the authority and to perform the duties under that article referenced in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  This chapter is intended to be cumulative in nature and in addition to any power and authority in which the city already has adopted in regard to housing, buildings, weeds, junk and matters of this kind. 
Chapter 30 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Solid Waste Disposal Act, Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-27-1 et seq.; local solid waste management programs, Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-27-47; criminal littering, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-7-29. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Litter control. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Approved, enclosed, covered structure means any building, garage, accessory structure, or other structure, having four enclosing walls and a roof, built according to and in compliance with all applicable building, zoning, fire, or other codes of the city. 
    Automobile graveyard means any establishment or place of business which is duly licensed and operated in accordance with all applicable laws and/or ordinances of the city, and which is maintained, used, or operated for storing, keeping, buying, or selling of wrecked, ruined, damaged, or dismantled motor vehicles or parts thereof. 
    Commercial property means any lot, tract, parcel, land, or other property located within the city that is zoned or designated for uses other than residential purposes. 
    Garbage means the animal and/or vegetable putrescible waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of food or food products. 
    Improved subdivision means a division of a tract of land or acreage into tracts or parcels, and the improvement thereof by construction of streets, water lines and, where applicable, sewer lines to serve the subdivided property. 
    Inoperable means incapable of being used for the manufactured, designed or intended purpose. 
    Inoperable vehicle means any vehicle not currently licensed; in a state of disassembly; in the process of being stripped, dismantled, or overhauled; or undergoing body work; or any other condition that renders the vehicle inoperable or incapable of being used for its designed or intended purpose. 
    Junk means and includes all metals, whether ferrous or nonferrous, including, but not limited to, any used or secondhand parts of machinery; plumbing fixtures, or parts thereof; parts of an automobile, truck, bus, motorcycle, water craft, or other motor vehicle; gas or electrical appliances or fixtures, or parts thereof; household hardware; wire; cable; bearings; valves; pipes and pipe-fittings; building materials; wood; or any other used or secondhand metal articles, including inoperable motor vehicles. 
    Junk or salvage yard means any premises, establishment, or place of business which is duly licensed and operated in accordance with all applicable laws and/or ordinances of the city, and which is maintained, operated, or used for storing, keeping, or dismantling of junk and salvage, but shall not include the place of business or premises of a scrap processor as herein defined. 
    Litter means all waste material which can be or is subject to being blown from place to place or scattered by the elements, including, but not limited to, paper; cardboard; cartons; boxes; plastics; rags; cloth; fibers and fabrics; leather; polyethylene; and polystyrenes. 
    Natural condition means uncultivated and unseeded land, still in a state of nature. But any growth on land once it has been cleared or plowed is not a natural condition, even though it has not been planted or cultivated by anyone. 
    Owner of property means the title holder or person having right of possession of real property and includes legal title holder as shown of record in the tax assessor's office, or agent of legal title holder of said property. 
    Premises means any lot, yard, plot, tract, parcel, or other piece of land or property located within the city. 
    Residential property means any lot, tract, parcel, land, or other property located within the city, on which single or multifamily structures used as a residence or for human habitation exists, or any property that is located within an area that is zoned for residential uses by the city. 
    Scrap means other materials or waste, including, but not limited to, old cordage, ropes; rubber; bottles and other glass; tin or aluminum cans; buckets; tree branches, tree limbs, tree stumps; or other waste or refuse not otherwise classified herein as junk, litter, or garbage. 
    Scrap metal yard means any establishment or place of business which is duly licensed and operated in accordance with all applicable laws and/or ordinances of the city, state, and which is maintained, used, or operated solely for the processing or preparing of scrap metals for re-melting by steel mills and foundries. 
    Scrap processor means any person who is duly licensed and operating in accordance with all applicable laws and/or ordinances of the city, and is engaged primarily in the purchase and collection of scrap metals (e.g. manufacturing byproducts, obsolescent machinery, and vehicles) for the specific purpose of processing into scrap materials for the metals recovery industry, such as steel mills, foundries, smelters, and refineries, and having machinery and facilities designed for such processing, and making regular shipments of such materials in the normal course of business. 
    Vehicle means any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported, carried, or drawn from one place to another, and shall include, but not be limited to, motor vehicles, boat trailers, utility trailers, horse trailers, bicycles, carts, tractors, or other devices. 
    Weed nuisance means any abundance of overgrown weeds or grass within the city, which is injurious to the general public health, safety and general welfare by providing breeding grounds and shelter for rats, mice, snakes, mosquitoes and other vermin, insects and pests; or attaining such heights and dryness so as to constitute a serious fire threat or hazard; or bearing winged or downy seeds, when mature, that cause the spread of weeds and, when breathed, irritation to the throat, lungs and eyes of the public; or hiding debris, such as broken glass or metal, which could inflict injury on any person going upon the property; or being unsightly; or any growth of weeds, other than ornamental plant growth, which exceeds 12 inches in height. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and constitute a nuisance for the owner of any real property situated within the city to allow such real property to become overgrown with weeds or grass so as to constitute a weed nuisance as defined in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the owner of any real property located within the city to maintain any weeds growing upon said property in such a manner as not to constitute a weed nuisance as defined in subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Any property which is in its natural condition. 
(2)  Any property which is located outside any improved subdivision and is located more than 100 feet from any boundary of any lot; or parcel of real estate upon which any dwelling is located, and more than 100 feet from any commercial enterprise. 
(3)  Cultivated row crops and garden plants in their respective growing seasons. This exception applies only to growing crops and garden plants, and shall not be construed to permit any crops or gardens to become overgrown with weeds in violation of the remaining terms of this section. 
(4)  Ornamental shrubbery and ground cover, provided that such uses are part of a landscaping theme and not associated with a general deterioration of the property. 
(e)  All weed nuisances may be declared to be a public nuisance by the governing body of the city and thereafter abated at the cost of the owner as provided in Code of Ala. 1975, title 11, ch. 67, art. 5 (Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-67-80 et seq.), using the procedures provided therein. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person to store or keep upon the premises of any residential or commercial property, within the city, any inoperable vehicle, scrap, or junk, as defined in subsection (a) of this section, unless the same is housed in an approved, enclosed, covered structure. This subsection shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Materials stored or located on the premises of any junk or salvage yard, scrap metal yard, scrap processor, or automobile graveyard, as defined in subsection (a) of this section. 
(2)  Vehicles being repaired or awaiting repair that are located on the premises of any automobile dealer, automobile repair and body shop or garage, or other vehicle repair enterprise that is duly licensed and operated in compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances of the city, provided said vehicles are so located or stored in a manner as to prevent any health, fire, or safety hazard. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section to keep or store upon the premises of any retail store or shop, secondhand store, thrift store, or similar commercial property or establishment, any merchandise, goods, or wares, including, but not limited to, gas or electric appliances, or parts thereof; plumbing fixtures, or parts thereof; lawn mowers or lawn mower parts; machinery, equipment, utensils, or other items displayed for sale to the general public, in such a manner as to constitute a health, safety, or fire hazard. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person in charge of any residential or commercial property to fail to maintain the property free from litter and garbage as defined in subsection (a) of this section, unless said litter and garbage is containerized and stored in such a manner as to prevent it from being blown, deposited, or otherwise scattered by the elements, animals, birds, or any other means. 
(i)  It shall be the duty of the owner, or any person in control of or charge of property located within the city, to maintain said property in compliance with the provisions of this section, free of any inoperable vehicles, scrap, junk, garbage, or litter as defined in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 356, § 1, 4-26-1993) 
Secs. 30-2-30-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Garbage and trash means and includes all waste and discarded materials including rubbish and debris, waste and discarded food, animal and vegetable matter, but not including liquid waste, waste paper cans, glass, crockery, rags, ashes, cinders, brush, grass, weeds, cuttings from lawns and gardens; when such substances are placed in a garbage container as herein defined. 
    Garbage and trash dump means the place for dumping and disposing of garbage and trash, operated by the city or by others as may be contracted for by said city. 
    Garbage container means and includes a water-tight receptacle or can having a capacity of not more than 30 gallons, of substantial metal construction, with a tight-fitting lid or cover, and two handles on the sides of the receptacle or can, or with a bail by which same can be conveniently lifted or moved. 
    Person means and includes a natural person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, trustee, executor, administrator or legal entity, whether singular or plural, masculine or feminine, as the context may require. 
(Ord. No. 280, § I, 4-9-1956) 
Sec. 30-22. - Use mandatory; rates. 
(a)  Use of the garbage and trash collection, hauling and disposal service (garbage service) operated by the city is hereby required and made mandatory for: 
(1)  Each residence (one family); 
(2)  Residences (multifamily) and apartment houses, each unit or family; 
(3)  Each trailer (if situated on trailer court premises, this charge is payable by the owner or operator of the trailer court for each trailer situated thereon); 
(4)  Each business which is situated within the corporate limits, and the charges for such garbage service shall be paid to the city each month by each such user according to the applicable base rate monthly charges as are in effect for such user for such service. 
(b)  The garbage and trash collection, hauling and disposal service operated by the city, heretofore provided for in 1956 by the city's municipal garbage disposal ordinance, shall be continued. The collection, hauling and disposal of garbage and trash shall be made by the officers, agents and employees of the city under the direction of the mayor. The charges herein prescribed for such service are based upon the service being made available to residences and trailer courts once a day, twice a week and to businesses once a day from Monday through Saturday of each week. In cases requiring collection and disposal at more frequent intervals, an additional charge to the hereinafter set forth base rate shall also be imposed, and this additional charge shall be calculated by multiplying the base rate by the fractional proportion of the number of regular pick-ups as are represented by the additional pick-ups required. Beginning with the month of July, 1971, and continuing each succeeding month thereafter, the following base rate monthly charges are hereby imposed by the city for the collecting, hauling and disposing of garbage, to-wit: 
(1)  The monthly charges imposed by the city for collecting, handling and disposing of garbage for business or commercial establishments shall be as established from time to time by the city. 
(2)  The monthly charges imposed by the city for the collecting, handling and disposing of garbage for residences shall be as established from time to time by the city. Any person whose sole income or means of support is a Social Security payment shall be exempt from the payment of residential garbage fees. 
(3)  Any exemption under this article shall not attach until applied for by the person claiming said exemption, an investigation into the information provided by the applicant and approval by the clerk. 
(4)  All bills for garbage service shall be due and payable monthly. The waterworks, sewer and gas board of the city is designated as the city's agent for the collection of such charges and shall remit to the city periodically as such charges are collected. In the case of utility customers of the board, such charges shall be designated on the utilities bill and the same shall be due and payable to the board at the same time the bill for utility services is due. Other persons liable for the garbage service charges who are not utility customers of the board shall also be billed monthly by the board, and such billing shall show a due date thereon which is the same dated as would be shown as the due date if such billing was for utility services of the board, and such garbage service charges shall be due and payable to the board by the due date shown on the bill. 
(5)  Any person, firm or corporation who fails to make timely payment of the garbage service charges provided for in the city municipal garbage disposal ordinance, as amended, or who violates any of the other provisions of this article, as amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 280, § II, 4-9-1956; Ord. No. 93, § 1, 6-14-1971; Ord. No. 152, § 1, 11-22-1976; Ord. No. 169, § 1, 1-23-1978; Ord. No. 184, § 1, 2-26-1979; Ord. No. 254, § 1, 11-10-1986; Ord. No. 309, § 1, 7-9-1990; Ord. No. 315, § 1, 22-5-1990; Ord. No. 347, § 1, 12-14-1992; Ord. No. 350, § 1, 1-25-1993; Ord. No. 477, § 1, 4-7-2003) 
Sec. 30-23. - Placement of certain materials for collection. 
    Boxes, crates, grass, leaves, tree trimmings and shrubbery cuttings not more than five feet in length nor weighing over 50 pounds and originating on the premises from which the street department removes garbage and trash for a service charge as provided in this article shall be placed in front of such premises on the area between the sidewalk and street on the regular collection days for removal by the street department without additional charges therefor; provided, however, not more than one truck load shall be removed without charges on any one collection day. 
(Ord. No. 280, § III, 4-9-1956) 
Sec. 30-24. - Collection agreement. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation desiring use of the garbage service provided in this article shall enter into agreement with the city words and figures substantially as follows: 
    "The undersigned desires the use of the garbage service provided by the City of Scottsboro, and agrees to pay therefor, the sum of $ ____________ for a month ____________ , payable each month when and as the bill for utility service is paid, the same to be billed with each utility bill; and in the event the same is not paid when and as such utility bill is paid, then the City of Scottsboro, may discontinue the garbage service. 
    The same may be reinstated upon the same conditions such utility service is reinstated. 
    Witness my hand this ____________ day of ____________ 20 ____________ 
    ____________ " 
(b)  If no utility service is being furnished, then the person desiring such service shall enter into agreement with the city for such service and pay therefor in advance. 
(Ord. No. 280, § V, 4-9-1956) 
Sec. 30-25. - No service to delinquent accounts. 
    No garbage collection service shall be rendered by the street department for any person, firm or corporation whose account for said service is delinquent by more than 15 days. 
(Ord. No. 280, § VI, 4-9-1956) 
Sec. 30-26. - Nuisances. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to allow garbage or trash to remain exposed to flies on their premises. 
(Ord. No. 280, § VII, 4-9-1956) 
Secs. 30-27-30-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LANDFILL AND CITY BALER 

Sec. 30-56. - Fees and charges established. 
    The city fees and charges, which shall be paid to the city by persons and firms disposing of garbage and trash at either the city's sanitary landfill or at the city's garbage and trash baler, shall be as established from time to time by the city. 
(Ord. No. 183, § 1, 2-26-1979) 
Sec. 30-57. - Limitations. 
    Such use of the city's landfill and garbage and trash baler, for which fees and charges are herein established, shall be limited to residents of and businesses located in the city. 
(Ord. No. 183, § 1, 2-26-1979) 
Secs. 30-58-30-87. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TRASH AND OTHER MATERIAL PICK-UP 

Sec. 30-88. - Fees. 
    With respect to waste such as stumps, tree tops, limbs and brush resulting from site clearing and other land clearing activities, waste from the demolishment of or repair of buildings, construction waste, and other matters not included in the regular routine trash pick-ups, the city street department on behalf of the city shall impose and collect a special charge as established from time to time by the city. Any contractor in charge of the operation generating or producing these wastes, or the owner of such premises in question if there is no such contractor, is charged with the duty and responsibility of: 
(1)  Notifying the city through its street department immediately as soon as there is an accumulation of more than one truck load of such waste; and 
(2)  Making arrangement and timely payment to the city of the special charge hereby imposed at the time said charge is incurred or by executing and delivering to the city an appropriate written obligation promising to pay within ten days said special charge owed pursuant to this division. The city street department shall remove these wastes as expeditiously as possible and avoid the accumulation of these wastes as is reasonably practicable. 
(Ord. No. 322, § 1, 5-13-1991; Ord. No. 525, § 1, 7-23-2007) 
Sec. 30-89. - Trees and tree limbs. 
    Any person clearing lots or building sites shall cut trees and limbs in lengths of no more than ten feet each and shall place or stack the same in an orderly manner on or near the street right-of-way so as to be accessible for city street department pick-up, and the tree stumps and other debris incident to such clearing operations shall be placed in separate piles from the trees and limbs on or near the street right-of-way so as to be accessible for city street department pick-up. 
(Ord. No. 322, § 2, 5-13-1991) 
Sec. 30-90. - Demolition or repair wastes. 
    All wastes from the demolishment or repair of buildings and all construction wastes shall be broken down into such sizes and weights as to be accessible for city street department pick-up by the city street department equipment and personnel available for such purposes without the necessity of additional manpower or equipment to handle or load the same. 
(Ord. No. 322, § 3, 5-13-1991) 
Sec. 30-91. - Placement restrictions. 
    None of the wastes referred to in sections 30-88 through 30-90, and no grass or brush, whether or not resulting from clearing operations, shall be placed for pick-up in any gutter or on any sidewalk or any traveled portion of any public street in the city. 
(Ord. No. 322, § 4, 5-13-1991) 
Chapter 32 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES 

Sec. 32-1. - Pavement cutting. 
(a)  A $20.00 fee per lane of highway or street will be required for a permit, to be obtained from the city, at the city hall or at the office of the city waterworks, sewer, and gas board prior to any cutting, trenching, disturbing, or removing any portion of existing pavement or asphalt covered street or parking lot maintained by the city or in the boundaries of the city limits. 
(b)  All pavement cuts or trench cuts shall be made in a neat straight line cut in pavement to be made with a paving breaker or an equivalent type tool so as not to tear or rip up excessive pavement. 
(c)  All excavated materials from ditches or trenches shall be hauled off or disposed of and backfilled with crusher run type stone or washed stone and compacted to the grade of the existing pavement. 
(d)  The contractor will be responsible to keep ditches or trenches filled and graded to sufficiently accommodate flow of traffic without hazardous holes or drop-offs in the street until city maintenance crews can re-pave or patch said crossing. 
(e)  The contractor shall have proper barricades or warning signs for any street work or construction and be responsible for same until such time for city crews to re-pave or patch any removed pavement. 
(f)  The contractor shall be responsible for any damage to city utilities, sidewalks, curbs and gutters or damage to any city property not covered on original permit issued. Extent of damage or extra cost for same will be determined by authorized city officials. 
(g)  Any ditch or trench cut exceeding a width of 24 inches and/or running length-wise or angling across street, will require a special permit from authorized city officials to determine extra costs accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 200, § I, 2-23-1981) 
Sec. 32-2. - Obstructions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to encumber, block or obstruct a public street or a public sidewalk in the city with a fence, a chain, a gate, or other means. 
(Ord. No. 251, § 1, 4-14-1986) 
Sec. 32-3. - Public utility access. 
(a)  Where a public utility facility has existed over; under, along or across any property in the city limits of the city for a period of seven years or more, or was so placed with the property owners' knowledge and consent, the public utility shall have a right of ingress and egress to such facility of sufficient length, width and depth to operate and maintain safe and reliable service. A facility built, operated, or maintained by a public utility for the sole benefit of the property owner shall not be subject to this subsection. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain buildings or other structures or objects or to store materials, either temporarily or permanently, in a manner which might endanger the facilities of a public utility of the city, or endanger the general public, or prevent access to or maintenance of these facilities by such public utility or the city or its or their agents, employees, equipment or vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 247, § § 2, 3, 10-28-1985) 
Chapter 34 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, Code of Ala. 1975, title 32. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Traffic signs, signals, etc. 
    The location and existence of all traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings are ratified and confirmed. 
Sec. 34-2. - Seizure and forfeiture of automobiles where operators unable to produce valid driver's license on demand of law enforcement officer. 
(a)  The city council finds and declares all of the following: 
(1)  Driving a motor vehicle on the public streets and highways is a privilege, not a right. 
(2)  Of all drivers involved in fatal accidents, a driver with a suspended license is more likely to be involved in a fatal accident than a properly licensed driver. 
(3)  Alabamians who comply with the law are frequently victims of traffic accidents caused by unlicensed drivers. These innocent victims suffer considerable pain and property loss at the hands of people who flaunt the law. 
(4)  It is necessary and appropriate to take additional steps to prevent unlicensed drivers from driving. The city has a critical interest in enforcing its traffic laws and in keeping unlicensed drivers from illegally driving. Seizing the motor vehicles used by unlicensed drivers serves a significant governmental and public interest, namely the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city from the harm of unlicensed drivers who are involved in a disproportionate number of traffic incidents, and the avoidance of the associated destruction and damage to lives and property. 
(5)  This section is consistent with the due process requirements of the United States Constitution and the holding of the Supreme Court of the United States in Calera-Toledo v. Pearson Yacht Leasing Co., 416 U.S. 663, 94 S. Ct. 2080, 40 L. Ed. 2d 452 (1974). 
(b)  A driver unable to produce a valid driver's license shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Towing a vehicle when a driver is unable to produce a valid driver's license. 
a.  If a driver is unable to produce a valid driver's license on the demand of a law enforcement officer, the motor vehicle is subject to impoundment regardless of ownership, unless the law enforcement officer is reasonably able, by other means, to verify that the driver is properly licensed. Prior to impounding the motor vehicle, a law enforcement officer shall make a reasonable attempt to verify the license status of a driver who claims to be properly licensed, but who is unable to produce the license on demand of the law enforcement officer. A notation of the officer's attempt to verify that the driver is properly licensed shall be noted on the departmental report. The driver and occupants of the motor vehicle will be transported to a place of safety by the impounding officer and a vehicle impound report made with a full inventory of items in the motor vehicle. 
b.  A law enforcement officer shall not impound a motor vehicle pursuant to this section if the license of the driver expired within the preceding 60 days and the driver would otherwise have been properly licensed. 
c.  If the owner of the motor vehicle or another family member of the owner is present in the motor vehicle and has a valid license, the motor vehicle shall not be impounded and towed. 
d.  If there is a medical necessity jeopardizing life or limb, the law enforcement officer may elect not to impound the motor vehicle. 
e.  A law enforcement officer who requests that a motor vehicle be towed onto the property of another pursuant to this section shall do so by using a vehicle impound report. 
(2)  A motor vehicle impounded pursuant to this section shall be released if the person redeeming the motor vehicle satisfies in full the fees provided for by subsection (d) of this section and: 
a.  The registered owner appears at the police department, or a representative of the owner with written notarized authorization from the registered owner appears, and presents a valid driver's license and a copy of the written authorization, if applicable, to be copied by the police department; 
b.  If the registered owner does not have a valid driver's license, he may bring someone with him who has a verified valid license and the motor vehicle may be released without written notarized permission; or 
c.  Upon order of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  Any owner of a motor vehicle (including a lienholder, person with a security interest in the motor vehicle, a lessor of the motor vehicle, assignee of the lessor, or the person who is the registered owner of the motor vehicle) who suffers any loss due to the impoundment of any motor vehicle pursuant to this section may recover the amount of the loss from the driver who was unable to produce a valid driver's license at the request of the law enforcement officer. 
(d)  The person redeeming the motor vehicle from the automobile dealer, wrecker service owner, repair service owner, or person, firm, or governmental entity on whose property the motor vehicle was lawfully towed at the written request of a law enforcement officer pursuant to this section will be responsible for paying the set fee for the removal and for the storage of the motor vehicle. 
(e)  If a motor vehicle impounded pursuant to this section is not redeemed or claimed pursuant to this section within 60 days of the date that it is impounded, then the automobile dealer, wrecker service or repair service owner, or any person, firm, or governmental entity on whose property the motor vehicle was lawfully towed at the written request of a law enforcement officer pursuant to this section may sell the motor vehicle at public auction according to the state law governing abandoned motor vehicles in Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 32-13-1-32-13-8. 
(Ord. No. 532, § 1, 1-14-2008) 
State Law reference- Impoundment of motor vehicles driven by unlicensed persons, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-6-19. 
Sec. 34-3. - Distracted driving. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and constitute an offense against the city for any person to drive a motor vehicle recklessly or heedlessly while distracted or in willful, wanton, reckless or negligent disregard for the rights or safety of persons or property, or without due caution and circumspection so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property. 
(b)  Driving while distracted may be considered by the courts of the city to be a lesser included offense under a charge of reckless driving. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to vehicles operated by licensed police officers, firefighters, ambulance drivers, and other public safety employees in performance of emergency duties. 
(Ord. No. 564, §§ 1, 3, 4, 1-18-2011) 
Sec. 34-4. - Cutting corners to avoid traffic devices. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive any motor vehicle upon the streets or highways of the city, or within the police jurisdiction thereof, at any intersection where gasoline filling stations or other business property is located, so as to cause such vehicle to cut the corners of any such intersection by passing over the space used in the operation of such filling station or other business property, and thereby avoid the traffic light or traffic signal at any such intersection, or so as to avoid stopping at any such intersection as is required by the laws of the city, or so as to avoid traveling at any such intersection over the usual lanes of traffic. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-24-1975) 
Secs. 34-5-34-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-23. - Towing illegally parked vehicles. 
    Any vehicle parked upon a public street at a place, in a manner, or for a length of time prohibited by any ordinance of the city including this article, now in effect or which may be hereafter adopted, is, if such vehicle is unattended, hereby declared to be an obstruction in such street and a public nuisance, and any police officer of the city is hereby authorized to remove the same, or cause the same to be removed, to the depository provided by the city for such purposes and impounded therein. 
(Ord. No. 12, § 3, 2-10-1958) 
Sec. 34-24. - Towing vehicles parked for 48 hours. 
    Any unattended vehicle parked upon the public streets of the city, though not parked in violation of an ordinance of the city, may, if such unattended vehicle remains parked at such place for as long as 48 hours after the owner or proprietor of the property adjacent or contiguous to that portion of the street where such vehicle is parked has submitted a signed, written request to the mayor that such vehicle be removed, be deemed an obstruction in such street and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and any police officer of the city is hereby authorized to remove the same, or cause the same to be removed, to the depository provided by the city for such purpose, and impounded therein. 
(Ord. No. 12, § 4, 2-10-1958) 
Sec. 34-25. - Redemption of impounded vehicles. 
    When any vehicle has been impounded by the city according to the provisions of section 34-23 or 34-24 the owner of the same, upon proper proof of ownership made to the mayor or chief of police of the city, and upon payment to the city of a towing and impounding fee as provided in Ordinance Number 579 shall be allowed to redeem such vehicle so removed and impounded by the city. 
(Ord. No. 12, § 5, 2-10-1958) 
Sec. 34-26. - Parking zones generally. 
(a)  Unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the following words, whenever used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section. 
    Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(b)  Subject to the approval of the mayor and council of the city shall have the duty to direct and authorize and mark off "No Parking" zones or areas as he designates a traffic hazard or dangerous congested area. 
(c)  When signs are erected on any street or part of street giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle on the side or sides of any such street or part of street so designated for no parking. 
(Ord. No. 155, §§ 1-3, 12-28-1976) 
Sec. 34-27. - Fire lanes, emergency lanes, etc. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Emergency lane/fire lane means a part of a public access area, as defined herein, which is designed to provide clear and unobstructed access to emergency vehicles, equipment, and personnel to and from all 30,000 square feet and above mercantile occupancies adjacent to or serviced by such public access area. Emergency lanes shall be a minimum of 60 feet in length and eight feet in width and shall be located in front of, or adjacent to, each public entrance to such occupancies and structures. 
    Public access areas means any publically owned property or any privately owned property provided for the general public for the movement or parking of vehicles in connection with a shopping center or publically owned structures used for assembly or educational purposes. 
(b)  No parking shall be permitted at any time on any emergency lane or marked fire lane, and no parking shall be permitted at any location which would prevent access to any emergency lane, or fire hydrant, by any emergency response equipment. 
(c)  No person shall stop, let stand, or park a vehicle whether occupied or not, in any emergency lane or fire lane at any time, and no owner, manager, or tenant of any premises shall permit any customer or visitor to stop, let stand, or park any vehicle on any part of any of any emergency lane or fire lane at any time. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a person may stop a vehicle temporarily in an emergency lane for the limited purposes of allowing passengers in the vehicle to disembark or allowing persons waiting on the vehicle to board. 
(d)  The property owner of any property such to the emergency lane/fire lane requirements of this section shall mark each emergency lane with red paint curbs or, where curbs are absent, with a red painted six-inch-wide lane line along the entire length of the emergency or fire lane to warn people against the blocking of the lane. The owner of the area where an emergency or fire lane is located shall also post appropriate signs indicating that the emergency or fire lane is an emergency or fire lane and indicating that no parking is permitted in the emergency or fire lane. The owner shall erect one such sign for every 50 feet of distance along the curb adjacent to the emergency lane or fire lane or, where curbs are absent, adjacent to the red painted lane line. Each sign shall be maintained in a good state of repair by the property owner. 
(e)  The owner of an area of property where a stand pipe or sprinkler system connection is located shall post appropriate signs indicating that no parking is permitted in that zone. Any person, firm, or corporation who shall receive said citation shall be fined $25.00 if said citation is paid within a 48-hour period. 
(f)  Any person, firm, or corporation receiving a citation and not paying the said $25.00 fine within 48 hours shall be subject to arrest and upon conviction shall be fined not less than $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 398, §§ 1-4, 6, 7, 10-23-1995) 
Secs. 34-28-34-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TWO-HOUR PARKING 

Sec. 34-56. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Vehicle means any device by which any person or property may be transported on streets or highways. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 1, 7-24-1978) 
Sec. 34-57. - Zones. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on a public street or highway within the city which has been designated as limited parking for a period of longer than two hours; such designation to be shown by appropriate signs. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 2, 7-24-1978) 
Sec. 34-58. - Citation forms. 
    The chief of police is hereby directed to supply police officers with citations for the purpose of giving notices to persons in violation of any portion of this division and shall also provide police officers with the necessary implements for proper tire marking in order to properly enforce this division. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 3, 7-24-1978) 
Sec. 34-59. - Days and hours applicable. 
    The provisions of this division shall apply every day after adoption and publication of the ordinance from which this division is derived between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. except Sundays and holidays and provided further that, within the meaning of this division, the term "holiday" shall include the following days only, January 1, July 4, the first Monday in September, December 25, and the day designated and set aside by the President of the United States as a day of Thanksgiving. With the exception of each first Monday of each month, on this such day the area described as Jackson County Courthouse Square means the public parking area and public ways or streets surrounding the county courthouse grounds and Laurel Street on the north, Market Street on the east, Peachtree Street on the south, and Broad Street on the west. The designated parallel parking on Laurel Street, Peachtree Street, Market Street and Broad Street, surrounding the Courthouse Square shall be exempt from the two-hour parking limit after the purchase on a First Monday Trade Day permit. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 4, 7-24-1978) 
Sec. 34-60. - Citation fine. 
    Any person, firm, or corporation who shall receive said citation shall be fined $5.00 if said citation is paid within a 48-hour period. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 5, 7-24-1978; Ord. No. 397, § 1, 10-23-1995) 
Sec. 34-61. - Failure to pay fine. 
    Any person, firm or corporation receiving a citation and not paying the said $5.00 fine within 48 hours will be subject to arrest and upon conviction shall be fined not less than $10.00 and not more than $50.00. 
(Ord. No. 176, § 1, 7-24-1978; Ord. No. 397, § 1, 10-23-1995) 
Secs. 34-62-34-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WRECKERS/TOWING SERVICE 

Sec. 34-81. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the same meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means the operator of a wrecker or tow service who, after being advised of the requirements and regulations for participation therein, makes known his desire to voluntarily participate in the city's rotation roster by making application for the same. 
    Chief of police means the chief of the city's police department or his designee. 
    Contract wrecker/tow service means that wrecker company which has contracted with the city to provide wrecker services requested by the city, for public safety reasons, as opposed to wrecker services requested by a private individual. 
    Department means the city police department. 
    Fire department emergency incident commander means the highest-ranking fire department official who is in charge of the hazardous material incidents and other emergency situations which may arise while executing the mission of the fire department. Duties include, but are not limited to the following: 
    Management decisions means decisions related to personnel, equipment, procedures, etc., at the scene of any emergency incident. 
    Fire extinguisher means a portable device used for extinguishing fires as defined by the National Board of Fire Underwriters, dry chemical extinguisher with either a 5 or 10 B.C. rating and in a quick-release carrier which is capable of extinguishing fires. 
    Impoundment means a seizure of a vehicle made by legal process by the city police department. 
    Large wreckers means and shall be classified as any of the following types of wreckers or tow trucks, tandem dual wheel or tandem rear end wreckers, or twin booms with factory rated or tested lifting capacity of 12 5/10 tons or over per drum and per winch and per winch line, with dual drum capacity, hydraulic or power take-off driven, and shall be equipped with dual rear twin-screw axles, and shall be equipped with quick air couplings for towing vehicles with air brakes, and shall be utilized to tow any vehicle having a gross weight exceeding 10,000 pounds, or any vehicle having dual rear axles or any tractor-trailer combination. The wrecker company shall provide documentation of lifting capacity from the manufacturer or qualified testing facility. 
    Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled. 
    Owner means any person who holds a legal title to a motor vehicle or who has the legal right of possession thereof. 
    Place of business means the place where the wrecker or tow truck company conducts business and is licensed pursuant to municipal law. 
    Police officer means any duly sworn law enforcement officer employed by the city. 
    Repossessor means any person in the business of providing repossession services to others or who performs repossession services on its own behalf, and includes, but is not limited to, officers, managers, agents or employees thereof. 
    Repossession wrecker or tow truck means any wrecker or tow truck, or large wrecker or tow truck, as defined herein, used for the sole purpose of repossessing vehicles. The term "repossession wrecker" shall include vehicles that are commonly referred to as "snatch trucks," as well as any and all motor vehicles used to tow or remove any vehicle from one location to another. Repossession wreckers shall not apply to wreckers or tow trucks used for the dual purpose of performing regular wrecker services and repossession services. 
    Rotation roster means the rotation list of wreckers or tow truck companies available for request by private individuals as prepared and used as provided in the execution of this rule and regulation policy. The city accident and impoundment rotation roster shall be considered and defined as a privilege and not a right. 
    Street means a thoroughfare, including public streets, lanes, alleys, etc., within the city and its police jurisdiction which is reserved for vehicle traffic. 
    Traffic hazard means any disabled vehicle, other than those resulting from a vehicular accident as defined herein, and which is an obstruction to the normal flow or movement of vehicle and pedestrian traffic on any public street within the jurisdiction of the city. 
    Vehicle means every device in or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public street, except devices moved only by human power, or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and shall include trailers and semi-trailers. 
    Vehicular accident means any incident involving contact between a vehicle and any other object or vehicle which results in disabling damage to any vehicle requiring the services of a wrecker or tow truck. 
    Wrecker means any motor vehicle used for the purpose of towing or removing motor vehicles from one location to another location, for any purpose. 
    Wrecker or towing business means the act of towing or removing motor vehicles from one location to another location, for any reason, where either the beginning or ending location is within the city. This definition shall not include situations whereby a business owns or leases wreckers for the sole purpose of towing other vehicles owned or leased by the business. 
    Wrecker company means any person engaged in the wrecker or tow business. 
    Wrecker operator means any person who drives or otherwise uses a wrecker for a wrecker business as defined herein. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 34-82. - Vehicle and equipment inspection and requirements. 
    Each wrecker company participating in the city's wrecker rotation program shall be inspected by the city police department at least once per year and more often if indications arise that the wrecker company is not in compliance with the following provisions: Equipment and certification prerequisite for all wreckers: 
(1)  All equipment necessary for the towing vehicle or the combination of the towing vehicle and towed vehicle must comply with the applicable requirements of 49 CFR 390-399 of the Federal Motor Carrier Rules and Regulations, as they currently exist or as they may be amended in the future. Any future amendments of the Federal Motor Carrier Rules and Regulations which result in a conflict with the additional requirements contained in this section shall be resolved in favor of compliance with the Federal Motor Carrier Rules and Regulations. 
(2)  In the interest of safe and operational equipment and the public's safety, no application will be processed without the applicant first submitting a certified copy of the state wrecker inspection checklist. The applicant wrecker company must be a member or participant of, and in compliance with, the department of public safety (Huntsville Trooper Post) accident wrecker rotation program. Prior to be being placed on the wrecker rotation roster, the applicant shall present and make available for inspection by the chief of police or his designee all wreckers, business facilities and equipment that are to be used by the applicant for the provision of wrecker services. 
(3)  Following inspection and assurances of certifications by the city police department, each wrecker shall be issued a decal which shall be displayed in the lower left corner of the wrecker or tow truck's windshield. Each decal shall indicate the wrecker permit number and the current calendar year. The fee for each annual inspection and issuance of each annual inspection decal shall be a fee of $15.00 payable to the city police department. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 2, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 34-83. - Reports of repossession required. 
(a)  Every wrecker company or repossessor who repossesses a motor vehicle within the city limits shall notify the city police department records division by providing information on the vehicle repossessed, where, type of vehicle, time of repossession and which company, within one hour after the repossession has been completed and shall also file a written incident report of the repossession at least 48 hours after the repossession is completed. 
(b)  At the time of the repossession, every wrecker company operator or repossessor who repossess a motor vehicle within the city limits shall be required to have official paperwork authorizing the repossession of the vehicle on his person. The authorizing paperwork shall include, at minimum, the name of the authorizing authority, the name of the person or entity believed to be in possession of the vehicle, and a description of the vehicle to include license plate number and vehicle identification number. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 3, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 34-84. - Applications and conditions for participation in wrecker rotation program. 
(a)  Written requests for participation in the wrecker rotation system or program. Each applicant desiring to be placed on the rotation roster shall file a written application with the police chief or his designee on a form furnished by the city police department. A new applicant may file a written application at any time. Once an applicant has be accepted and placed on the rotation roster, applications for renewal shall be submitted in January of each year thereafter, and shall adhere to all of the same terms and conditions as apply to new applicants. The city accident and impoundment rotation roster shall be considered and defined as a privilege and not a right. An applicant may request to discontinue participation in the rotation roster at any time. 
(b)  Equipment certification. Each applicant shall certify that each wrecker to be utilized in service of the rotation roster meets or exceeds the following requirements at the time the application is made: 
(1)  For each regular haul wrecker, in addition to the criteria established in section 34-82, a conventional wrecker must be equipped with dollies and wheel lifts or hydraulic operated tilting bed trucks, with a one-ton rated chassis or larger and equipped with a broom and shovel, two fully charged rated fire extinguishers, and agents to remove oil spills from the roadway. 
(2)  The name of the company must be permanently affixed on each side of the wrecker in four-inch-high or larger letters and the address and telephone number in two-inch-high or larger letters or numerals. 
(3)  All safety equipment, horns, lights, flashers, amber lights, brakes and other similar equipment must be operational. 
(4)  In the interest of safe and operational equipment and the public's safety, no application will be processed without first submitting a certified copy of the state wrecker inspection checklist. The applicant wrecker company must be a member or participant of, and in compliance with, the department of public safety (Huntsville Trooper Post) accident wrecker rotation program. 
(c)  Copy of rules and regulations. The chief of police or his designee will furnish each applicant with a copy of the rules and regulations pertaining to the operation of wreckers within the wrecker rotation system. 
(d)  Business license required. Prior to being placed on the wrecker rotation roster, the applicant must furnish the chief of police or his designee with a copy of a current, valid business license issued by the city in the applicant's name. 
(e)  Storage facilities. Prior to being placed on the wrecker rotation roster, the applicant must agree to a preapproval inspection of the wrecker company's premises to ensure adequate outside storage sufficient to accommodate a minimum of ten vehicles, which is well and continuously lighted during the hours of darkness and, at minimum, include an area completely enclosed within a six-foot-high chain link or other equivalent fencing material designed to protect against unauthorized entry. Any inside storage must be within a supervised or locked building. In addition to the provision of a secure storage area, each wrecker company shall employ reasonable safeguards and procedures so that all personal belongings and contents in a stored vehicle remain intact and are returned to the vehicle's owner or agent upon request or upon release of the vehicle. 
(f)  Location of storage facility. The wrecker company, wreckers utilized, operators, and storage facilities must be located within the city limits. 
(g)  Certificate of insurance. The wrecker company participating on the wrecker rotation roster, from the time he moves or otherwise makes contact with any vehicle to be towed, assumes liability for injury to persons, damage to property, fires, or theft resulting from the operators negligent acts or omissions. Therefore, prior to being placed on the wrecker rotation roster, the applicant shall furnish the chief of police with a certificate of insurance that indicates compliance with the following insurance guidelines: 
(1)  Submit a certificate of insurance naming the city police department as the additional insured and stating the city police department will be provided with 30 days' notice of any material change, cancellation or non-renewal. The certificate of insurance should also state that the coverages in subsection (g)(2) of this section are in force. 
(2)  Casualty coverage requirements. 
a.  Not less than $750,000.00 minimum for bodily injury and damage to property in any one accident. 
b.  Not less than $150,000.00 in garage keepers legal liability, which includes fire, explosion, theft, riot and civil commotion, vandalism, collision with a deductible no greater than $500.00. 
(h)  Decal required. A department decal will be placed on each participating wrecker in the lower left corner of the windshield to indicate current inspection and eligibility to participate in the rotation system. Each decal shall indicate the rotation roster permit number and the current calendar year. The fee for each wrecker inspection and issuance of each decal shall be $15.00, and shall be paid by the applicant. 
(i)  Valid license plates requirement. Each wrecker company shall be required to maintain a current, valid license plate on each wrecker used in responding to rotation roster calls. 
(j)  Wrecker company listed only once. Each wrecker company shall be listed on the rotation roster only once. This listing will use the name the wrecker company submitted during the application process and under which he is qualified under this article. It is prohibited for a wrecker company conducting business at one location to receive multiple listings by utilizing a different or fictitious name for wreckers operating from the same location or by utilizing wreckers with the same name out of different locations within the city. Wrecker companies operating more than one rotation wrecker business within the city must maintain completely separate offices, required documentation, logs, and assigned rotation wreckers at the approved locations. A wrecker business will be regarded as having separate locations only when each business or company continuously and regularly occupies separate, different, permanent, nonresidential, non-overlapping structures, each with its own phone number and service, and each keeping its own towing and recovery books, logs, tax records, and other required records, and each business open to customers between the hours of 8:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. Attempts to circumvent the intent of the rotation system will result in the removal of all wrecker companies and operators associated in any way to the offending wrecker company. 
(k)  Authorization and placement on roster. When the chief of police is satisfied that the applicant has met all requirements, he will place the applicant on the rotation roster and so notify the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 4, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 34-85. - Operation and rules of conduct. 
(a)  Obedience to traffic laws. No operator shall speed or violate any other traffic laws or disregard any traffic control devices while answering a call to an accident scene. The provision of the wrecker services shall be done in a reasonable and safe manner, and no operator shall needlessly congest the scene of a traffic accident. While at the scene, the highest ranking city police officer present shall be in charge, and all operators shall follow their direction and commands. 
(b)  Rotation system participation. Authorization to participate in the rotation system shall be considered a personal grant of permission to the wrecker company who made application for the same and shall constitute authorization only to that particular legal entity as it operates a bona fide wrecker service. It shall not be subject to assignment, transfer or lease and neither shall the wrecker company sublet the use of the name under which the rotation system participation was requested and neither shall the operator permit the exercise by another in any manner of the rights or privileges granted by the authorization for participation in the rotation system. Participation on the rotation roster shall not constitute a property interest. Authorization under this article is void if the business address or location of facilities is changed. Further, any change in ownership due to sale, merger, dissolution, death or any other reason shall result in the removal of the wrecker company from the rotation roster and shall necessitate a new application being filed and considered for approval by the chief of police. 
(c)  Submission of daytime and nighttime telephone numbers. At the time of application, each wrecker company shall furnish the chief of police or his designee with one telephone number to be used for dispatches during the day (normal business hours) and one telephone number to be used for dispatches during the night (after normal business hours). Any changes in the aforementioned telephone numbers shall be immediately transmitted to the chief of police or his designee. No pagers or answering machines are permitted to be used as call-out or contact numbers. 
(d)  Twenty-four hour service and access to vehicles. Each wrecker company shall maintain and be fully capable of providing wrecker services 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Further, each wrecker company shall, at no additional cost, provide access, immediately upon request, to its storage facilities between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, to individuals legally entitled or otherwise authorized to view, inspect, access, claim or retrieve personal property or vehicles stored therein. 
(e)  Availability. One attempt by phone shall be made to reach or contact the wrecker company appearing next on the appropriate roster. The acceptance of an assignment may be made by any authorized representative of the company who can verify an immediate dispatch of the wrecker. If no contact is made or the company is unable to accept the call, that company shall be passed for that rotation of the roster and the next wrecker company in line shall be called. A wrecker operator shall not accept a dispatch for wrecker services from the rotation roster unless the operator has a wrecker and the necessary equipment immediately available to perform the requested services. 
(f)  Use of lights. No wrecker operator shall use yellow/amber emergency lights when responding or traveling to a service or wrecker call scene. The use of yellow or amber emergency lighting is authorized only at the scene of an accident or other call for service and when towing or transporting a vehicle from the scene. The use of wig-wag lights is prohibited at all times. 
(g)  Response with own wrecker. The wrecker company shall respond to each dispatch received from the city dispatch with its own wrecker and shall not send another wrecker service in response to a rotation roster dispatch. The responding wrecker must display the name of the wrecker company called by the city dispatcher. In the event the dispatched wrecker is unable to perform the required services or needs of assistance, the police officer has the authorization and discretion to cancel that wrecker and/or dispatch another wrecker service. 
(h)  Response while impaired prohibited. No wrecker operator shall respond to a dispatch when he has consumed alcohol in any amount or has ingested either prescription or non-prescription drugs that may impair motor skills. No wrecker operator shall respond to a dispatch when he is under the influence of any controlled substance. 
(i)  Restriction for conviction of crimes. No wrecker operator shall be on the rotation roster if he has been convicted of any crime within the past five years that is related to his capability to provide wrecker services to the public in a safe and responsible manner. 
(j)  Proficiency. All wrecker operators on the rotation roster shall perform their call-out duty as a wrecker operator in a proficient, professional, polite and competent manner. 
(k)  Driver's license required. No person shall be a wrecker operator or be allowed to drive any wrecker unless such person has a valid state driver's license and a commercial driver's license, if required by law, issued by the state department of public safety. 
(l)  Reflective clothing required. While on the scene of any dispatched scene, all wrecker operators shall wear reflective vests, coats or shirts that meet federal standards as those standards may be amended. 
(m)  Attendance of hazardous material training. All wrecker operators shall make every effort to attend or study some type of hazardous material training with qualified instructors or study material. 
(n)  Removal of glass and debris. Operators shall gather and remove all glass, injurious substances, oil spills, and other debris at or near the scene of the vehicle accident or incident scene with no additional cost as it shall be inclusive within the base price of the tow, unless the debris at accident scene is deemed extreme, unusual or where circumstances would require additional labor to police the debris in a timely manner. 
(o)  Notice of acquisition of a wrecker. Each wrecker company on the rotation roster shall give notice to the chief of police or his designee of any wrecker acquired subsequent to placement on the rotation roster. The police department will inspect the wrecker to determine if it meets all the criteria required by this chapter. No wrecker shall be allowed to perform any rotation roster activity unless properly inspected and decaled in accordance with section 34-84(h). 
(p)  Compliance with laws. Every wrecker company must comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 5, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 34-86. - Towing and equipment specifications. 
(a)  The minimum standards referred to throughout this article shall be determined solely by the manufacturer's specifications for the capabilities and capacities of the wreckers and all towing equipment. 
(b)  Each wrecker shall be equipped with only those winches and cranes that have been produced and constructed by a manufacturer of such equipment which carries product liability and which regularly produces winches and cranes. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 6, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 34-87. - Storage procedures. 
(a)  All personal property left in a vehicle and which is unclaimed will be handled in accordance with existing state law. 
(b)  Any person showing proof of identity and showing either proof of ownership or written authorization from the vehicles registered or legal owner may, without charge, inspect the vehicle and remove personal belongings therefrom during normal business hours. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "personal belongings" means those items which belong to the owner, driver or other occupant of the vehicle and which are not attached in any permanent or semi-permanent manner to the interior or exterior of the vehicle. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "permanent or semi-permanent" shall mean that the removal of an attached object would cause physical damage or deformity to the interior or exterior of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 7, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 34-88. - Records. 
(a)  Each operator shall maintain accurate records reflecting all wrecker services performed pursuant to his participation on the wrecker rotation roster. Each record of wrecker service shall include the following information: 
(1)  The date and time the wrecker operator was contacted and was requested to perform the service. 
(2)  The name of the person requesting the service. 
(3)  The location of the vehicle. 
(4)  A description of the towed vehicle, including license plate number and vehicle identification number. 
(5)  The owner or driver of the vehicle, if known. 
(6)  The service charge and itemized fees associated with the tow service. 
(7)  The final disposition of the vehicle. 
Regardless of the method of payment, each customer shall be given a written receipt containing the above-required information, and a copy of the same shall be forwarded to the city police department and the original maintained by the wrecker company. 
(b)  All records required herein must be available immediately upon request so long as the request is made between the hours of 8:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, for inspection by the chief of police or his designee. Advance notice of an inspection by the chief of police or his designee shall not be required. 
(c)  The operator shall maintain the aforementioned records for the current calendar year and the preceding year. 
(d)  A record of all abandoned motor vehicles is to be maintained by the wrecker company, and any abandoned motor vehicle sold or disposed of by the company shall be so sold or disposed of in accordance with Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-13-1, as may be amended. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 8, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 34-89. - Rotation roster. 
(a)  A wrecker shall be called from the rotation roster when the following occurs: the owner, driver, or person in charge of a vehicle to be towed has been advised by the officer at the scene that such vehicle must be removed and that he may request the wrecker of his choice. In the event he indicates that he has no preference, or the wrecker of his choice fails to respond to the call within a reasonable period of time considering the time of day, the weather conditions and traffic conditions, the officer shall see that the next wrecker from the appropriate roster shall be called. In no event shall any officer suggest, direct, name or otherwise imply that a particular wrecker be called. 
(b)  A wrecker operator shall promptly respond to a dispatch and arrive on-scene with a fully functional wrecker within 30 minutes under normal driving conditions. If this is not feasible, however, the wrecker operator shall make the same known to the department's communication center and the wrecker company will be passed over for that rotation and dispatch will assign the next wrecker company on the roster. When determining whether a violation of this provision has occurred, the police department shall consider the time of day, the weather conditions and traffic conditions. 
(c)  If a wrecker operator responds to a dispatch, but renders no services through no fault of his own, the wrecker company will not lose position on the rotation roster if the wrecker operator provides prompt notification of the same to the department's communications center. 
(d)  Separate rosters shall be established as follows: All rosters shall be in effect 24 hours a day, seven days a week for assignment by the police department communication center. 
(1)  Regular haul accident rotation (10,000 pounds or less). 
(2)  Heavy haul accident rotation (10,001 pounds or more). 
(3)  Service rotation. 
(4)  Impound rotation. 
(5)  Junk car impoundment rotation (Ordinance Number 415). 
All owners' requests will also be logged accordingly at the police communication center and documented by the investigating officer by utilizing the owners request form. The owners' request form shall be attached to the traffic accident report upon submission to headquarters. 
(e)  If the wrecker operator does not arrive on-scene within the time requirements established herein or if the public health, safety and welfare necessitate more expeditious action, the police department reserves the right to request the services of the next wrecker company on the rotation roster. Under these circumstances, the wrecker company who received the first call will forfeit his position on the rotation roster for that turn. Any wrecker operator who is late in responding to dispatches for wrecker services without justification may be subject to penalties as provided herein. 
(f)  The chief of police or his designee has the right to inspect any wrecker or equipment of a wrecker company on the rotation list. All wreckers and equipment shall be inspected annually by the police department. A current inspection sticker will be issued by the police department and must be displayed as described in section 34-84(h), at all times. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 9, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 34-90. - Rates and charges. 
(a)  The maximum fees for wrecker services provided by any wrecker service company on the rotation roster in regard to services provided as a result of accident rotation system dispatch shall not exceed the established amounts per wrecker call or incident, unless otherwise and justified by detailed invoice and circumstances. 
(b)  Base price towing services provided hereunder include cleaning of debris from the roadway and roadside, pickup and towing of vehicles to any destination within the city limits to the wrecker company's business location within the city limits; with the exception of the vehicle owner or vehicle owner's designee is making a request to tow the vehicle to another location which may require the negotiation of additional cost agreement between the wrecker company and the owner of the vehicle being towed. 
(c)  Oil dry. The first 40 pounds of oil dry is included in basic towing. Any additional oil dry used may be charged $10.00 per 40-pound bag. 
(1)  Towing of wrecked or disabled vehicles. 
a.  Two-axle vehicle weighing 10,000 pounds or less: $150.00. 
b.  Impoundment: $150.00. 
(2)  Towing of wrecked or disabled vehicles. 
a.  Two-axle vehicle weighing 10,001 pounds through 26,000 pounds: $200.00. 
c.  Impoundment: $200.00. 
(3)  Towing of wrecked or disabled vehicles. 
a.  Two-axle vehicle weighing more than 26,001 pounds or more, or any vehicle with more than two axles: $350.00. 
c.  Impoundment: $350.00. 
(4)  Towing of a wrecked or disabled vehicle with trailer or other vehicle attached in tandem: $75.00 per trailer or vehicle attached in tandem. 
(5)  Towing of wrecked or disabled vehicle attached in tandem, when the tandem trailer or other vehicle exceeds 40 feet in length: $75.00 per trailer or vehicle attached in tandem. Impoundment: $75.00 
(6)  Righting. Two-axle vehicle weighing 10,000 pounds or less: $75.00 for the first hour and prorated in ten minute increments thereafter based on $75.00 per hour. 
(7)  Righting. Two-axle vehicle weighing 10,001 pounds through 26,000 pounds: $200.00 for the first hour and prorated in ten minute increments thereafter based on $200.00 per hour. 
(8)  Righting. Two-axle vehicle weighing 26,001 pounds or more, or any vehicle with more than two axles: $350.00 for the first hour and prorated in ten minute increments thereafter based on $350.00 per hour. 
(9)  Winching. Two-axle vehicle weighing 10,000 pounds or less: $75.00 for the first hour and prorated in ten minute increments thereafter based on $75.00 per hour. 
(10)  Winching. Two-axle vehicle weighing 10,001 pounds through 26,000 pounds: $200.00 for the first hour and prorated in ten minute increments thereafter based on $200.00 per hour. 
(11)  Winching. Two-axle vehicle weighing 26,001 pounds or more, or any vehicle with more than two axles: $350.00 for the first hour and prorated in ten minute increments thereafter based on $350.00 per hour. 
For the purposes of this section, the term "winching" means the removal of a vehicle, trailer or other piece of equipment from a location inaccessible to a wrecker to a location where the object of removal is accessible to a wrecker and does not include any incidental or routine winching necessary to load any vehicle onto a wrecker. 
(12)  Righting or lifting by airbag, per pound lifted: $0.035. 
(13)  Forklift, backhoe, track hoe and any other necessary recovery equipment services shall be at commercial rental rates plus ten percent per hour (not including operator). 
(14)  Additional labor: $30.00 per hour. 
For the purpose of this section, the term "additional labor" means additional manpower other than originating wrecker operator and is reserved for traffic accident scenes where extreme circumstances require the removal of wrecked vehicles and/or debris that is too large or difficult for the originating wrecker operator to accomplish alone in a timely manner. 
(15)  Storage rates. 
a.  Passenger vehicle storage rates: 
1.  First 24 hours: No charge. 
2.  Second 24 hours: $30.00. 
3.  Each day thereafter: $30.00. 
b.  Commercial vehicle (vehicles where CDL required) storage rates: 
1.  First 24 hours: No charge. 
2.  Second 24 hours: $50.00. 
3.  Each day thereafter: $50.00. 
(16)  After-hour vehicle release (gate fee): During times other than Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. through 5:00 p.m.: $35.00. 
(17)  The rates and charges as established herein do not relate to or regulate consensual wrecker services in which the services for a wrecker company that are chosen by an individual requesting a specific wrecker service (owner requests). 
(Ord. No. 579, § 10, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 34-91. - Removal from the rotation roster. 
(a)  The city accident and impoundment rotation roster shall be considered and defined as a privilege and not a right. Wrecker companies shall be suspended or removed from the rotation roster for the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure of a wrecker company to meet or follow the requirements established in sections 34-82 through 34-90. 
(2)  Failure to accept or refusal to respond to three calls for service in any 12-month period. 
(b)  After a wrecker company has corrected any violation for which it was suspended or removed, unless the company has been permanently revoked from the program, the wrecker company may reapply for inclusion on the rotation roster using the procedures established in section 34-84. 
(c)  Three suspensions or removals of a wrecker company from the rotation roster, or a felony conviction of the owner or any employee of the wrecker company, or criminal violation related to the wrecker business shall be sufficient grounds for the permanent revocation or suspension of any and all further applications, business licenses and wrecker permits issued to such company by the city. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 11, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 34-92. - Suspension from the rotation roster. 
(a)  Upon receipt of proof satisfactory to the chief of police or designee, that any wrecker company has violated any of the provisions of this article other than those violations described in section 34-91, or any other ordinance of the city or law of the state or United States, the chief of police may, at his discretion, suspend such wrecker company's name from any or all rotation rosters for such length of time as set forth herein. Suspension hereunder shall be established pursuant to the following criteria: For violations of sections 34-85, 34-89(b) and 34-90 or any violations of this article not specifically covered in aforementioned sections and articles, shall be afforded the same penalties as described as follows:. 
(1)  First violation: 30-day suspension. 
(2)  Second violation: 60-day suspension. 
(3)  Third violation: 90-day suspension. 
(b)  Three suspensions or removals of a wrecker company from the rotation roster within a 12-month period, or a felony conviction of the owner or any employee of the wrecker company, or criminal violation related to the wrecker business shall be sufficient grounds for the permanent revocation or suspension of any and all, further applications and wrecker rotation permits issued to such company by the city. 
(c)  In the event that suspension or revocation of permits or licenses is contemplated against any wrecker company, the police department shall have the authority to require the wrecker company to make available to the chief of police or designee any and all books and records of the wrecker company pursuant to any investigation of violations of this article by the police department. 
(Ord. No. 579, § 12, 11-25-2013) 
Secs. 34-93-34-108. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ABANDONED, WRECKED, STOLEN AND OTHER VEHICLES 

Sec. 34-109. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Property means any real property within the city, or its police jurisdiction, which is not a street or highway. 
    Street or highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
    Vehicle means a machine propelled by power other than human power designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners, or slides, and transport persons or property or pull machinery and shall include, without limitation, automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy and wagon. 
(Ord. No. 92, § 1, 3-8-1971) 
Sec. 34-110. - Abandonment of vehicles. 
    No person shall abandon any vehicle within the city. It shall be presumed that any vehicle which has been left at any place on a street or highway within the city for a period of 72 hours consecutively is an abandoned vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 92, § 2, 3-8-1971) 
Sec. 34-111. - Leaving of wrecked, non-operating vehicle on street. 
    No person shall leave any partially dismantled, non-operating, wrecked, or junked vehicle on any street or highway within the city, except only so long as may be necessitated and required by a wreck, breakdown or other such emergency and subject to the provisions of the preceding section. 
(Ord. No. 92, § 3, 3-8-1971) 
Sec. 34-112. - Disposition of wrecked or discarded vehicles. 
    No person in charge or control of any property within the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, or otherwise, shall allow any partially dismantled, non-operating, wrecked, junked, or discarded vehicle to remain on such property longer than 30 days, and no person shall leave any such vehicle on any property within the city for a longer time than 30 days, except that this article shall not apply with regard to a vehicle in an enclosed building; a vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise; or a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the city. 
(Ord. No. 92, § 4, 3-8-1971) 
Sec. 34-113. - Impounding. 
    The chief of police of the city or any member of his department designated by him is hereby authorized to remove or have removed any vehicle left at any place within the city which reasonably appears to be in violation of this article or lost, stolen, or unclaimed, and the city police department's removal prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived of all such vehicles whose removal would be authorized hereunder is hereby ratified and approved and such vehicles previously so removed and now stored by the city, as well as those which shall hereafter be removed and stored by the city pursuant to this article, shall be disposed of in the manner hereinafter provided. Any vehicle so taken up and removed shall be stored in a suitable place provided by the city to protect it from deterioration. A permanent record giving the date of the taking of each vehicle, the place where found and taken, and a description of the vehicle shall be kept by the chief of police of the city. 
(Ord. No. 92, § 5, 3-8-1971) 
Sec. 34-114. - Sale. 
    At least every six months, the chief of police of the city shall sell at public auction to the highest bidder for cash the vehicle or vehicles herein authorized to be removed and taken up and which shall have been taken up and stored for a period of three months or more, the sales to be made after notice of the time and place therefor shall have first been given by publication once a week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city. The first publication shall be at least 20 days before the sale. Each vehicle shall be sold separately and a notation in the storage record book shall be made of the amount received for each vehicle. The person making the sale shall have the right to reject any and all bids if the amount bid be unreasonably low and shall have the right to continue the sales from time to time if no bidders are present. After deducting and paying all expenses incurred in the removal, taking up, storing, maintaining and selling, of the vehicle or vehicles, the balance if any shall be paid into the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 92, § 6, 3-8-1971) 
Sec. 34-115. - Redemption. 
    The owner of any vehicle taken up and stored as herein provided may redeem the same at any time prior to its sale by paying the reasonable expense of taking the vehicle in charge, its maintenance and storage and a prorate of the cost of publication. 
(Ord. No. 92, § 7, 3-8-1971) 
Chapter 36 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 36-1-36-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SEWER USE 

Sec. 36-19. - Abbreviations and definitions. 
(a)  The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
Abbreviation Meaning AWIC Alabama Water Improvement Commission BOD Biochemical oxygen demand CFR Code of Federal Regulations EPA United States Environmental Protection Agency NPDES National pollutant discharge elimination system OSHA Occupational Safety and Health Administration P.L. Public Law POTW Publicly owned treatment works SS Suspended solids  
(b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act or the Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (P.L. 92-500) as amended by the Clean Water Act of 1977 (P.L. 95-217), and as further amended. 
    Approval authority means the director of the Alabama Water Improvement Commission (AWIC). 
    Authorized representative of industrial user means: 
(1)  A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-president if the industrial user is a corporation. 
(2)  A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively. 
(3)  A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in five days at 20 degrees Celsius (68 degrees Fahrenheit) expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter). 
    Board means the water works, sewer and gas board of the city. 
    Building sewer or house connection means the connecting pipe from a building to the sanitary sewer. 
    City clerk means the administrative officer of the city council who is charged with administrative duties by the council and is responsible directly to the council as used herein. The term "city clerk" may also include any other employee of the city delegated to act for the council by the city clerk or by the council. 
    Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and waste water. 
    Cooling water means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
    Direct discharge means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the state. 
    Domestic wastewater means all liquid and waterborne pollutants, exclusive of unpolluted water as defined in this section or wastewater or wastes from processes or operations of industrial users as defined in this section. 
    Environmental Protection Agency or EPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term "Environmental Protection Agency" may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
    Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, vacuum-pump tank trucks, and septic tank haulers. 
    Indirect discharge means the discharge or the introduction of non-domestic pollutants from any source regulated under section 307(b) or (c) of the Act into the sewerage system (including holding tank waste discharged into the sewerage system). 
    Industrial user means any user of the sewerage system who is a source of indirect discharge which does not constitute a discharge of pollutants under regulations issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act. (A user who discharges industrial waste into the sewerage system.) 
    Industrial waste means the liquid or other wastes resulting from any process of industry, manufacture, trade or business or from the development of natural resources. 
    Manager means the administrative officer of the water works, sewer and gas board of the city who is charged with administrative control of all operations of the board and is responsible directly to the board. As used herein, the term "manager" may also include any other board employee delegated to act for the board by the manager or by the board. 
    National pollutant discharge elimination system permit or NPDES permit means a permit to discharge wastewater issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act. 
    Person means any individual, firm company, association, corporation, governmental agency, board, commission, or municipal corporation other than the city. 
    Pollution means the manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, and/or radiological integrity of water. 
    Pollutant means any solid waste, chemical waste, biological material, radioactive material, thermal waste, or industrial, municipal, or agricultural waste discharged into water. 
    Private wastewater disposal system means any facilities for wastewater treatment and disposal not maintained and operated by the city. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the organic wastes resulting from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of foods that have been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle being greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
    Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties shall have equal rights, and which is controlled by a governmental agency or public utility. 
    Publicly owned treatment works or POTW means as defined by section 212 of the Act, which are owned in this instance by the city or the board. This definition includes the wastewater treatment plant and any sewers that convey wastewater to the wastewater treatment plant (sewerage system). 
    Receiving stream means that body of water, stream, or watercourse receiving the discharge from a wastewater treatment plant or that body of water, stream, or watercourse formed by the effluent from a wastewater treatment plant. 
    Sanitary sewage means sewage excluding process wastes from industrial users. 
    Sanitary sewer means a public sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility that carries liquid and waterborne wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with minor quantities of groundwaters and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally. 
    Sewage means a combination of water-carried wastes from residences and industrial users (waste water). 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying waste water. 
    Sewerage system means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of wastewater (POTW). 
    Shall; may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissible. 
    Significant industrial user means any industrial user of the city sewerage system who: 
(1)  Has a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average work day. 
(2)  Has a discharge which is greater than five percent of the hydraulic flow or organic design capacity of the city sewerage system. 
(3)  Has a discharge which contains toxic pollutants or priority pollutants as defined pursuant to section 307 of the Act or state statutes and rules and regulations. 
(4)  Is found by the water works, sewer and gas board of the city, the approval authority or EPA to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the sewerage system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality, or air emissions generated by the sewerage system. 
    Storm sewer or storm drain means a sewer which carries stormwater and surface waters and drainage, but which excludes sanitary sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
    Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
    Suspended solids means the total solid matter that either floats on the surface of or is suspended in water or liquid waste and which is removable by laboratory filtration. 
    Unpolluted waste water. 
(1)  The term "unpolluted waste water" means any wastewater which is substantially free of pollutants and is discharged from the following: 
a.  Rain downspouts and drains. 
b.  Footing drains. 
c.  Stormwater and surface water drains. 
d.  Cooling water systems. 
(2)  The term "unpolluted waste water" shall contain, by definition, none of the following: 
a.  BOD in excess of ten mg/l. 
b.  Suspended solids in excess of ten mg/l. 
c.  Free or emulsified greases or oils. 
d.  Acids or alkalies. 
e.  Phenols or other substances imparting taste or odor to receiving waters. 
f.  Toxic or poisonous substances. 
g.  Noxious or odorous gases. 
h.  Any wastewater with a temperature which exceeds 60 degrees Celsius (140 degrees Fahrenheit) at its introduction into the sewerage system or which exceeds 40 degrees Celsius (104 degrees Fahrenheit) at its introduction into a wastewater treatment plant or a receiving stream. 
    User means any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the sewerage system. 
    Wastewater treatment plant means the facilities of the city, or the board, for treating and disposing of waste water. 
    Water works, sewer and gas board or board means the water works, sewer and gas board of the city or, where appropriate, the terms "water works," "sewer and gas board" or "board" may also be used as a designation for the manager or other duly authorized official of the board. 
    Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
    Waters of the state means all bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, within the boundaries of the state. 
(Ord. No. 241, § 1, 7-8-1985) 
Sec. 36-20. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge to any outlet other than a sanitary sewer, within the corporate limits, any domestic or industrial wastes except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article and regulations of the city waterworks and sewer board and where an appropriate NPDES permit has been obtained from AWIC pursuant to section 402 of the Act. 
(c)  Where a storm sewer, as defined by section 36-19(b), is adjacent to a property, it shall be legal to discharge cooling water, as defined by section 36-19(b) and which meets the requirements of section 36-19(b), into said storm sewer in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article and where the city determines that sufficient capacity exists in said storm sewer to carry the cooling water without exceeding the design storm drainage capacity of said storm sewer, and where an appropriate NPDES permit has been obtained from AWIC pursuant to section 402 of the Act. 
(d)  Connections required within specified distance. 
(1)  The owners of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, situated within the city and abutting on any public street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located within 250 feet of said house, building, or property used for human occupancy a public sanitary sewer of the city that discharges to the city wastewater treatment plant, is hereby required at the owner's expense to connect such house, building, or property used for human occupancy directly with the proper public sanitary sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article and regulations of the water works, sewer and gas board within 180 days after the date of official notice to do so. These connections shall be made in accordance with the provisions of this article and regulations of the board. 
(2)  The owners of all buildings or properties used for employment, recreation, or other nonresidential purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located within 100 feet of said property, a public sanitary sewer of the city that discharges to the city wastewater treatment plant, who have installed suitable toilet and other facilities therein necessary for the discharge of domestic and/or industrial waste, are hereby required, at the owner's expense, to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sanitary sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article and regulations of the water works, sewer and gas board within 180 days after the date of the official notice to do so. These connections shall be made in accordance with the provisions of section 36-22 and the regulations of the board. 
(e)  Properties and connections outside the required distance. 
(1)  In the event the owner of a house, building, or property used for human occupancy which is or becomes available to a public sanitary sewer by virtue of being within 250 feet of said residence, does not cause the required connection of such property to the sewerage system to be made within the 180-day period after official notice to do so has been given by the board, the water works, sewer and gas board shall be authorized, on behalf of the city, to give another final written notice to such owner to connect such property to the sewerage system. In the event that such owner fails or refuses to connect such house, building, or property used for human occupancy to the sewerage system within ten days following such date that the final written notice is given, such house, building, or property used for human occupancy shall be subject to and shall thereafter be billed for the monthly sewerage charge by the board following such ten-day notice, and a failure to pay such monthly sewerage charge within the normal time allowed to sewer customers by the board's regulations shall subject the house, building, or property used for human occupancy and the owner and/or occupant thereof to the same sanctions and treatments by the board as would be applicable to other sewer customers who are delinquent in the payment of their sewer bills. 
(2)  In the event the owner of any property used for employment, recreation, or other nonresidential purposes which is or becomes available to a public sanitary sewer, by virtue of being within 100 feet herebefore specified, does not cause the required connection of such property to the sewerage system to be made within the 180-day period after the date of official notice to do so has been given by the board, the board shall give another final written notice to such owner to connect such property to the sewerage system. In the event that such owner fails or refuses to connect such property to the sewerage system within ten days following such date that the final written notice is given, such unconnected property shall be subject to and shall thereafter be billed for the monthly sewerage charge by the board following such ten-day notice, and a failure to pay such monthly sewer charges within the normal time allowed to sewer customers by the board's regulations shall subject the property in question and the owner and/or occupant thereof to the same sanctions and treatment by the board as would be applicable to other sewer customers who are delinquent in the payment of their sewer bills. 
(f)  In the event the owner of any property to whom the notice provided under subsection (e) of this section is required to be given is a nonresident, notice shall be given to such owner by publication once a week for three consecutive weeks in a newspaper published in the city by mailing a copy of such notice to such owner at his last known address, and by delivering a copy of such notice to the agent or occupant of such property. Whenever any notice to a resident owner of property available to sewers is returned "Not Found" the water works, sewer and gas board may prescribe alias notices to be served as in the case of the original notice; two returns of "Not Found" to such a resident owner shall authorize the board to proceed to give notice to such resident owner in a manner provided in the preceding sentence for nonresident owners of property available to sewers. 
(Ord. No. 241, § 2, 7-8-1985; Ord. No. 335, § 1, 3-11-1992; Ord. No. 418, § 1(a)-(c), (e), 7-14-1997) 
Sec. 36-21. - Private wastewater disposal. 
(a)  Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 36-20, such toilet and other facilities necessary for the discharge of domestic and/or industrial wastes shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the requirements of the state, the county and/or the city, and provisions of the International Plumbing Code in force in the city. 
(b)  Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system, the owners shall first obtain a written permit from the appropriate regulatory authority and furnish a copy thereof to the city. The copy of the permit shall be accompanied by such supplementary data as deemed necessary by the city to maintain an accurate file of such private wastewater disposal systems to facilitate the planning of future public sewer service. 
(c)  The type, capacity, location, and layout of a private wastewater disposal system, including methods of sludge disposal, shall comply with all requirements of the state, the county and/or the city. 
(d)  At such time as public sewer becomes available within 250 feet of a house, building, or property used for human occupancy or within 100 feet of a property used for employment, recreation, or other nonresidential purposes served by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 180 days in compliance with this article and the regulations of the water works, sewer and gas board of the city; and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material. 
(e)  The owners shall operate and maintain any private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(f)  No person shall discharge any holding tank wastes or septic tank wastes from private systems into the sewerage system without an appropriate permit from the water works, sewer and gas board of the city. All such discharges shall be in accordance with the regulations of the board. 
(g)  No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by federal or state agencies. 
(Ord. No. 241, § 3, 7-8-1985; Ord. No. 418, § 1(d), 7-14-1997) 
Sec. 36-22. - Building sewers, connections and permits. 
(a)  No unauthorized persons shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the water works, sewer and gas board of the city. 
(b)  All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owners. The owners shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may be directly or indirectly occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(c)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer for the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection aforementioned. 
(d)  Existing building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found on examination and test by the board to meet all the requirements of this article. 
(e)  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and back-filling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the southern building code or other applicable rules and regulations of the board. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(f)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(g)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the southern building code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the city before installation. 
(h)  The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the board when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the board. 
(i)  All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazards. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the board and the city. 
(j)  All construction activities shall conform to all applicable OSHA regulations. 
(Ord. No. 241, § 4, 7-8-1985) 
Sec. 36-23. - Protection of equipment. 
    Only persons authorized by the water works, sewer and gas board of the city or AWIC will be allowed to uncover, adjust, maintain, and remove such equipment and materials. 
(Ord. No. 241, § 5, 7-8-1985) 
Sec. 36-24. - Violations and penalties. 
    A violation of or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this article, including the willful furnishing of false information relative to same for the use of the sewerage system, shall be and hereby is declared to be a misdemeanor. Every person concerned in the violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with same, or who furnishes false information relative to his use of the sewerage system aforesaid, whether he directly commits the acts or aids and abets same, and whether present or absent, shall be proceeded against and held as a principal. 
(Ord. No. 241, § 6, 7-8-1985) 
Appendix A - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed in this appendix is the city's zoning ordinance, being Ord. No. 558, adopted on July 26, 2010. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are shown in brackets. 
State Law reference- Zoning, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-70 et seq. 

ARTICLE 1. - TITLE, LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS AND OFFICIAL ZONING MAP 

Sec. 1.1. - Title. 
    This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "the zoning ordinance of the City of Scottsboro, Alabama." 
Sec. 1.2. - Short title. 
    This ordinance and all subsequent amendments, attachments, and supplements thereto shall be known as the "Scottsboro zoning ordinance." 
Sec. 1.3. - Legal status provisions. 
1.3.1.  Authority. This ordinance has been drafted, subjected to public review, recommended by the Scottsboro Planning Commission, and adopted by the Scottsboro City Council under the authority of title 11, chapter 52 of the Code of Alabama, 1975 Compilation, as amended [Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-1 et seq.]. 
1.3.2.  Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to guide development within the City of Scottsboro in accordance with title 11, chapter 52 of the Code of Alabama, 1975 Compilation, as amended [Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-1 et seq.]; and generally to implement and support the developmental policies of the City of Scottsboro. 
1.3.3.  Interpretation. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this ordinance, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, prosperity, and general welfare. 
1.3.4.  Conflict with other ordinances. In case of a conflict between this ordinance or any part thereof, and the whole or part of any existing or future ordinance of the city, the most restrictive shall in all cases apply. 
1.3.5.  Validity, severability. If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, item or any provision of this ordinance shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect any other article, section, subsection, or part thereof of this ordinance which is not of itself invalid or unconstitutional. 
1.3.6.  Repeal of conflicting ordinances. On the effective date of this ordinance, all other local ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict or inconsistent with this ordinance, and all amendments thereto, are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this ordinance full force and effect. 
Sec. 1.4. - Official zoning map. 
    The city is hereby divided into zones or districts, as shown on the official zoning map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance. 
1.4.1.  The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor attested by the city clerk, and bearing the seal of the city under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the official zoning map of the City of Scottsboro, Alabama," together with the date of the adoption of this ordinance. 
1.4.2.  If changes are made in district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the official zoning map, such changes shall be entered promptly after the amendment has been approved by the city council, hereinafter referred to as "the council." No amendment to this ordinance shall become effective until after such change and entry has been made on said map. 
1.4.3.  No changes of any nature shall be made on the official zoning map or matter shown thereon, except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this ordinance. Any unauthorized changes of whatever kind by any person or persons shall be considered a violation of this ordinance and punishable as described herein. 
1.4.4.  Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official zoning map, which may from time-to-time be published, the official zoning map shall be located in the office of the city clerk and shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land and water areas, building, and other structures in the city. 
1.4.5.  Replacement of the official zoning map. 
1.  In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the council may, by resolution, adopt a new official zoning map, which shall supersede the prior official zoning map. The new official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions on the prior official zoning map, but no such corrections shall have the effect of amending the original official zoning map or any subsequent amendment thereof. The new official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor attested by the city clerk, and bearing the seal of the city under the following words: "This is to certify that this official zoning map supersedes and replaces the official zoning map adopted (date of adoption of map being replaced) as part of the zoning ordinance." 
2.  Unless the prior official zoning map has been lost or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment. 
Sec. 1.5. - Using this ordinance. 
1.5.1.  Internal referencing. All references to articles, sections, subsections, paragraphs and items within this ordinance shall refer to articles, sections, subsections, paragraphs and items in this ordinance unless otherwise specified. When an article, section or other subdivision is referenced within a provision or requirement of this ordinance, unless otherwise specified, all subdivisions within such reference shall be assumed to be applicable. 
1.5.2.  Page numbering. Each article contains its own separate page numbering system. The page numbers are prefixed by the respective article number. As an example, page 10 of article 8 is designated page 8-10. 
Editor's note- Subsection 1.5.2 is incorrect given the page numbering scheme used in this publication. 
ARTICLE 2. - DEFINITIONS 
    For the purposes of this ordinance, certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows: 

Sec. 2.1. - Interpretation. 
2.1.1.  The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." 
2.1.2.  The word "building" includes "structure." 
2.1.3.  The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation as well as an individual. 
2.1.4.  The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular. 
2.1.5.  The masculine gender shall include the feminine, and the feminine gender shall include the masculine. 
2.1.6.  The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. 
2.1.7.  The word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel." 
2.1.8.  Except as otherwise, provided herein, all words have their customary dictionary meaning. The zoning official is authorized to make a final determination of the meaning of any term used in this ordinance, which determination may be appealed to the board. 
Sec. 2.2. - Definitions of terms used in this ordinance. 
2.2.1.  Abutting: Touching along a common side, boundary or property line. Two pieces of property that are separated by a right-of-way are "adjacent," but not "abutting." 
2.2.2.  Access: A way or means of approach to provide physical entrance to a property. 
2.2.3.  Accessory structure or accessory building: A structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal structure. 
2.2.4.  Accessory use: A use of land or of a building or portion thereof commonly associated with and integrally related to the principal use of the land or building on the same lot. 
2.2.5.  Adjacent: Either abutting or on the opposite side of a street, right-of-way, or easement that separates it from the subject property. Properties separated by a railroad shall not be considered "adjacent." 
2.2.6.  Adjoining: See "Abutting." 
2.2.7.  Agriculture: The production, storage, keeping, harvesting, grading, packaging, processing, boarding or maintenance, for sale, lease, or personal use, of plants and animals, including, but not limited to: forages and sod crops; grains and seed crops; dairy animals and products; poultry and poultry products; the keeping, raising and breeding of livestock; bees and apiary products; fur animals; trees and forest products; fruits, nuts and vegetables; plants and flowers; or lands that are devoted to soil conservation or forestry management. 
2.2.8.  Alley: A public or private way, other than a driveway, less in width than a street, designed for the special accommodation of the property it reaches, and not intended for general circulation. 
2.2.9.  Alteration: Any change or rearrangement in the supporting members of an existing building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or interior partitions, as well as any change in doors or windows or any enlargement to a building or structure, whether horizontally or vertically, or the moving of a building or structure from one location to another. 
2.2.10.  Animal shelter: A nonprofit or public facility providing shelter for small domestic animals. 
2.2.11.  Applicable district: That zoning district in which a building, structure, property, or subdivision, for which a zoning application is submitted or permit is sought, is located or is to be moved. 
2.2.12.  Applicant: A person submitting an application for development, variance, special, exception, conditional use or rezoning. 
2.2.13.  Assisted living facility: A building, portion of a building, or a group of buildings in which room, board, meals, laundry, and assistance with personal care and other services are, provided for not less than 24 hours in any week to at least two ambulatory adults not related by blood or marriage to the owner and/or administrator and licensed by the State of Alabama. 
2.2.14.  Automotive repair, major: An establishment engaged in the repair and maintenance of vehicles, including painting, body work, rebuilding of engines or transmissions, upholstery work, fabrication of parts and similar activities, all of which shall be performed entirely within an enclosed building. 
2.2.15.  Automotive repair, minor: An establishment engaged in sales, installation, and servicing of mechanical equipment and parts, including audio equipment and electrical work, lubrication, tune-ups, wheel alignment, tire balancing, brake and muffler work, battery charging and/or replacement and similar activities. 
2.2.16.  Automotive sales or rental: An establishment engaged in the sale or rental of automobiles, light trucks, recreational vehicles, boats, [and] motorcycles, including the incidental parking, storage, maintenance, servicing and repair of such vehicles. 
2.2.17.  Bakery, retail: An establishment, which bakes goods for on-premises retail sale only. 
2.2.18.  Basement: A portion of a building located wholly or partially underground, having one-half or more of its floor-to-ceiling height above the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
2.2.19.  Bed and breakfast: A single-family detached dwelling, or part thereof, where lodging and meals are, provided on a daily basis; and in which the operator of the bed and breakfast resides. 
2.2.20.  Bedroom: A room marketed, designed or otherwise intended to function primarily for sleeping. 
2.2.21.  Block: A tract or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public streets other than alleys or a combination of streets, public land, public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, bodies of water or watercourses, or any other barrier to the continuity of development. 
2.2.22.  Block, double-tiered: A block for single-family detached and duplex dwellings bounded on all sides by streets and within which lots front only on two of the surrounding streets. The corner lots of such blocks are considered "standard corner lots." 

2.2.23.  Board of zoning adjustment or board: The board of zoning adjustment of Scottsboro, Alabama. 
2.2.24.  Boarding house: A single-family detached dwelling or part thereof in which, for compensation, lodging and meals are, provided on a weekly or monthly basis. 
2.2.25.  Broadcast studio: An establishment primarily engaged in broadcasting and other information relay services accomplished through the use of electronic and telephonic mechanisms. 
2.2.26.  Buffer: A strip of land that is landscaped to separate incompatible land uses, promoting visual harmony, reducing noise, diverting emissions, and reducing glare. Buffers may consist of existing or planted trees, shrubs or vegetation, fences, walls or berms. 
2.2.27.  Building: A structure, having a foundation and roof supported by columns, or by walls, designed to be used as a place of occupancy, storage or shelter. 
2.2.28.  Buildable area: The portion of the lot remaining after required yards and buffers, if any, have been, provided. 
2.2.29.  Building area: The portion of the lot occupied by the principal building and accessory and other structures. 
2.2.30.  Building code or city building code: The International Building Code as adopted, and as may be amended, by the city council. 
2.2.31.  Building height: For flat roof buildings, the vertical distance measured from grade level at the front of the building to the highest point of the roof. For pitched-roof buildings, the vertical distance measured from grade level at the front of the building to the average of the eaves and ridges. 

2.2.32.  Building line, front: A line extending across the width of a lot coincident with the front-most plane of the building, excluding eaves and cornices. 
2.2.33.  Building official: The city official assigned by the city council to administer the city building code and provisions of this ordinance as specified herein, including his/her designee. 
2.2.34.  Building, principal: The building in which is conducted the principal use of the concerned lot. This includes any structures attached to such building, including a garage, carport, porte-cochere, or porch. 
2.2.35.  Building spacing: The minimum distance between buildings measured from the outermost projection, excluding bay windows, chimneys, flues, ornamental features, cornices and eaves. 
2.2.36.  Business office or professional office: A room or group of rooms used for the conduct of a business, profession, service, [or] industry and generally furnished with desks, tables and communications equipment. 
2.2.37.  Business support service: A business which supplies support services primarily to business establishments, such as sales of office equipment, supplies and services; cleaning services; computer and office equipment repair and similar services. 
2.2.38.  Campground: A plot of ground on which two or more campsites are located, established, or maintained for occupancy by camping units as temporary living quarters for recreation, education or vacation purposes. 
2.2.39.  City: The City of Scottsboro, Alabama. 
2.2.40.  Club: A group of people organized for a common purpose to pursue common goals, interests and activities and usually characterized by certain membership qualifications, payment of fees or dues, which holds regular meetings and has a constitution or by-laws. 
2.2.41.  Commercial parking: Parking of motor vehicles on a temporary basis within a commercially operated, off-street parking lot or garage. 
2.2.42.  Commercial school: A private, gainful business providing instruction in arts, business, crafts, trades or professions. 
2.2.43.  Communication tower: A transmission tower that either: 
(1)  Serves an individual user and is not available to the general public; 
(2)  Is privately owned and operated for the purpose of leasing tower space to others; and/or 
(3)  Is a single-purpose facility and not part of a cellular network. 
2.2.44.  Conditional use: A use that would not generally be appropriate throughout a zoning district without restriction(s), but which, if controlled as to number, location, area, size, traffic, noise, lighting or other impacts, would not be detrimental to public health. This use is permitted subject to approval by the commission. 
2.2.45.  Conservation subdivision or development: A form of development that permits a reduction in dimensional requirements, provided there is no increase in the overall density of the development, and the remaining land area is devoted to open space, recreation, or preservation of environmentally sensitive areas. 
2.2.46.  Convenience store: A retail establishment, often associated with a gas station, selling food products and beverages, household items, newspapers, magazines and similar goods. 
2.2.47.  Council or city council: The city council of the City of Scottsboro. 
2.2.48.  Country club: Land or buildings containing recreational facilities and clubhouses for private club members and their guests. Facilities in which the primary function is the operation of a casino, nightclub, dance hall or bingo hall is [are] not considered a country club. 
2.2.49.  Day care center: A licensed facility, other than a residence, providing care for part of a 24-hour day to children, elderly, handicapped or infirm persons in accordance with the applicable regulations of the State of Alabama. 
2.2.50.  Density: The minimum required lot area per dwelling unit or the maximum number of dwelling units per acre of site area. 
2.2.51.  Development: Any proposal to affect the use of land or structures including: subdivision; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, alteration, relocation or enlargement of a structure; any mining, dredging, fitting, grading, paving, excavation, drilling or disturbance of land; and, any use or extension of the use of the land. 
2.2.52.  Dwelling: Any building or portion thereof, which is designed and used for residential occupancy. 
2.2.53.  Dwelling, accessory: A dwelling located on the same lot of and that is subordinate to a detached, single-family dwelling. Accessory dwellings are commonly referred to as guest houses, garage apartments, mother-in-law units or mews units. 
2.2.54.  Dwelling, caretaker: A residence, incidental to a principal use, for an on-site manager, watchman or caretaker employed on the premises. 
2.2.55.  Dwelling, duplex: A building containing two single-family dwelling units totally separated from each other by an unpierced wall extending from basement to roof. 
2.2.56.  Dwelling, garden/patio home: A detached, single-family dwelling on a small lot that is permitted a zero lot line on one side. 
2.2.57.  Dwelling, multifamily: A building containing three or more dwelling units on a commonly shared lot. 
2.2.58.  Dwelling, single-family (detached): A building containing one dwelling unit and that is not attached to any other dwelling by any means and is surrounded by open space or yards. 
2.2.59.  Dwelling, townhouse: A single-family dwelling in a row of three to eight such units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located over another, and each unit is separated by one or more vertical common fire-resistant walls. 
2.2.60.  Dwelling unit: One or more rooms occupied as separate living quarters, with cooking, sleeping, and sanitary facilities, provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of a single-family maintaining a household. 
2.2.61.  Dwelling, upper-story: A dwelling unit located on a floor above a use of another type. Upper-story dwellings may commonly be referred to as "loft apartments." 
2.2.62.  Entertainment, indoor: A commercial establishment providing spectator entertainment within an enclosed building, including movie theaters, playhouses, concert halls, etc. 
2.2.63.  Entertainment, outdoor: An establishment providing spectator entertainment in open or partially enclosed or screened facilities, including sports arenas, racing tracks, drive-in theaters, amusement parks, etc. 
2.2.64.  Family: Any one of the following arrangements when living together in a dwelling as a single-housekeeping unit: 
1.  An individual; 
2.  Two or more persons related by legal adoption, blood, or a licit marriage plus up to two unrelated individuals; 
3.  A group of not more than five unrelated persons. 
2.2.65.  Farm: Land used primarily for agricultural purposes. 
2.2.66.  Farm support business: A commercial establishment engaged in the sale of farm support goods and services, including, but not limited to, the following: the sale of feed, grains, fertilizers, pesticides and similar farm support goods; the provision of warehousing and storage facilities for raw farm products; and the provision of veterinary services to farm animals. 
2.2.67.  Fence: An artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land. 
2.2.68.  Floor area, gross: The total area of a building measured using the outside dimensions of the building at each floor level intended for occupancy or storage. 
2.2.69.  Fowl: Chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese, quail, guineas, etc. 
2.2.70.  Front-accessed: Having vehicular access from the front of the property, requiring a driveway along a front lot line. 
2.2.71.  Freight depot or truck terminal: An area and building where trucks load and unload cargo and freight and where the cargo and freight may be broken down or aggregated into smaller or larger loads for transfer to other vehicles or modes of transportation. 
2.2.72.  Garden center or nursery: The growing, cultivation storage and sale of garden plants, trees, flowers, shrubs, and fertilizers, as well as the sale of garden tools and similar accessory and ancillary products, to the general public. 
2.2.73.  Gas station: An establishment dispensing automotive fuels at retail. A gas station that includes minor vehicle repair activities is considered a "service station." 
2.2.74.  Grade level: For buildings, the average level of the finished grade at the front building line. For trees, landscaping, signs and light fixtures, the level of finished grade at the base of the tree, plant, sign or fixture. 

2.2.75.  Grocery store: A retail establishment primarily selling food for off-premises consumption and/or preparation, as well as other convenience and household goods. 
2.2.76.  Group care home: A dwelling for the sheltered care of persons, which, in addition to providing food and shelter, may also provide some combination of personal care, social or counseling services, and transportation. Group care homes are further defined and regulated by the State of Alabama. 
2.2.77.  Home occupation: A business, profession, occupation or trade conducted for gain or support as an incidental activity within a dwelling. 
2.2.78.  Home improvement center: A place of business providing building, yard and garden materials, appliances, tools and supplies at retail or wholesale. 
2.2.79.  Hospital: An establishment providing primary health services and medical or surgical care to persons, primarily inpatients, suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity, and other abnormal physical or mental conditions and including as an integral part of the institution related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient facilities, training facilities, medical offices and staff residences. 
2.2.80.  Hotel: A lodging establishment, in which guest rooms are accessed from the interior of the building. Hotels may also include, as an incidental use, a liquor lounge. 
2.2.81.  Improvement: Any permanent item that becomes a part of, is placed upon or is affixed to real estate. 
2.2.82.  Independent living facility: A multifamily residential facility for the elderly. These facilities may provide meals and other services such as housekeeping, linen service, transportation, and social and recreational activities. Such facilities do not provide, in a majority of the units, assistance with activities of daily living such as supervision of medication, bathing, dressing, toileting, etc. 
2.2.83.  Industry or industrial use: Economic activities including resource extraction; construction; manufacturing; transportation, communication, electric, gas, and sanitary services; wholesale trade; and warehousing. 
2.2.84.  Industry, heavy: Meat or poultry processing, slaughterhouses, resource extraction, the storage or manufacturing of flammable, explosive or toxic materials or other materials generally considered to be hazardous or offensive in nature. 
2.2.85.  Industry, light: An industry characterized by one or more of the following: 
1.  Smaller in bulk and area, employing fewer employees, and having lesser noise and other environmental impacts than heavy industries; 
2.  Produce goods for end users rather than as intermediates for other industries; 
3.  Produce goods of relatively high value per weight using moderate amounts of partially processed materials. 
2.2.86.  Institutional use: Structures or land occupied by a group, cooperative, or other entity created for nonprofit purposes or for public use or services; but not including those of an industrial nature such as garages, repair or storage yards, and warehouses. Institutional uses are further categorized as follows: 
1.  Low intensity: places of assembly up to 250 seats; day care centers and group care homes; and nursing care facilities and other homes for the aged up to 10,000 sf. 
2.  Medium intensity: government buildings up to 12,500 sf.; elementary and junior high/middle school; places of assembly up to 500 seats; and health and other institutions up to 35,000 sf. 
3.  High intensity: government buildings greater than 12,500 sf.; places of assembly greater than 500 seats; high schools, universities, colleges, and junior colleges; health and other institutions greater than 35,000 sf.; and stadiums and arenas. 
2.2.87.  Internal street: A street completely contained within the boundaries of a planned development whether dedicated for public use or not. 
2.2.88.  Junk yard: See "Salvage yard." 
2.2.89.  Kennel: An establishment in which domesticated animals are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained, or sold, all for compensation. 
2.2.90.  Landfill: A State-approved site for solid waste disposal employing an engineering method of disposing of solid wastes in a manner that minimizes environmental hazards by spreading, compacting to the smallest volume and applying cover material over all exposed waste at the end of each operating day. 
2.2.91.  Laundering plants: Establishments primarily engaged in high volume laundry and garment services, including commercial and industrial laundries; garment pressing and dry cleaning; linen supply; diaper service; carpet and upholstery cleaners, but excluding laundromats and dry cleaning pick-up stations without dry cleaning equipment. 
2.2.92.  Laundry services: Laundromat, laundry and dry cleaning pick-up stations, dryer, and clothing storage, but excluding laundering plants. 
2.2.93.  Liquor lounge: A licensed establishment engaged in the preparation, sale or serving of liquor for consumption on the premises only. This includes but is not limited to the following terms: taverns, bars, cocktail lounges, nightclubs and similar uses where liquor consumption is a primary or incidental activity on the premises of the establishment. 
2.2.94.  Livestock sales: The sale of animal livestock within an enclosed yard or structure, including livestock markets, horse or cattle auctions and similar activities. 
2.2.95.  Lot: A parcel of land in one ownership, used or set aside and available for use as the site of one or more buildings and accessory structures or for any other permitted purpose. 

2.2.96.  Lot, corner: A lot abutting two or more streets at their intersections or on two parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. 
1.  Non-standard corner lot: A corner lot on other than a double-tiered block. Non-standard corner lots have two front yards, each abutting the front yards of the two interior lots adjoining it. 
2.  Standard corner lot: A corner lot, for single-family detached and duplex dwellings, on a double-tiered block. A standard corner lot has a front yard, abutting the front yard of the adjoining interior lot, and a street side yard abutting the same of the adjoining standard corner lot. 
2.2.97.  Lot, interior: A lot other than a corner lot. 
2.2.98.  Lot, reverse frontage: A through lot fronting on both a major street and a parallel, lesser street. Reverse frontage lots may be required to have access from the lesser street. 
2.2.99.  Lot, through: A lot that fronts on two streets that do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot. 
2.2.100.  Lot area: The total area within the lot lines of a lot, excluding any rights-of-way. 
2.2.101.  Lot frontage: The lot width measured at the front lot line. 
2.2.102.  Lot line: A line bounding a lot which divides it from another lot or from a street or from any other public or private place. 

2.2.103.  Lot line, front: The lot line separating a lot from a street right-of-way. In the case of standard corner lots, there shall be a front lot line and a street side lot line. The shorter of the two shall be the front lot line. For all other corner lots, any lot line along a street frontage shall be considered a front lot line. 
2.2.104.  Lot line, rear: That lot line which is parallel to and most distant from the front line. In the case of a triangular or irregularly shaped lot, a line ten ft. in length, entirely within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line. 
2.2.105.  Lot line, side: Any lot line other than a front lot line or a rear lot line. 
2.2.106.  Lot line, street side: For standard corner lots, that lot line corresponding with the longer of the two street frontages. 

2.2.107.  Lot of record: A lot that exists as shown or described on a plat or deed that has been recorded in the Office of the Probate Judge. 
2.2.108.  Lot width: The minimum distance measured between the side lot lines at the front building line. For corner lots, lot width is the distance measured between the side lot line and the opposite lot line. 
2.2.109.  Maintenance service: An establishment providing building and yard maintenance services, such as janitorial services, exterminating services, landscaping services, window cleaning services, office cleaning services and similar uses. 
2.2.110.  Manufactured homes: 
1.  Class A manufactured home: A double-wide or larger manufactured home constructed after July 1, 1976 that meets or exceeds the construction standards promulgated by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development that were in effect at the time of construction and that satisfies the criteria in § 6.7 and where the manufactured home has a length not exceeding four times its width. 
2.  Class B manufactured home: A single-wide manufactured home constructed after July 1, 1976 that meets or exceeds the construction standards promulgated by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development that were in effect at the time of construction. 
3.  Class C manufactured home: A manufactured home built before 1976 that does not meet the definition of a Class A or Class B manufactured home. Class C manufactured homes are not allowed in the city, except as existing structures permitted prior to the adoption of this ordinance. 
2.2.111.  Manufactured home lot: A lot designed for the siting of a manufactured home in a manufactured home subdivision. 
2.2.112.  Manufactured home space: A space designed for the siting of a manufactured home within a manufactured home park. 
2.2.113.  Manufactured home subdivision: A subdivision designed and intended for the siting of Class A manufactured homes. 
2.2.114.  Manufactured home park: Land used or designed to accommodate a manufactured home community of multiple spaces for rent or lease. 
2.2.115.  Manufacturing: Industrial uses that involve the processing and manufacturing of materials or products and the incidental storage, sale and distribution of such products. 
2.2.116.  Manufacturing, heavy: The manufacture, predominantly from extracted or raw materials of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment and packing of such products. 
2.2.117.  Manufacturing, light: The manufacture, predominantly from previously prepared materials of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment and packing of such products. 
2.2.118.  Medical clinic: A facility providing medical, psychiatric or surgical services for sick or injured persons exclusively on an outpatient basis. 
2.2.119.  Medical support service: A place of business, which supplies medical support services to individuals, medical practitioners, clinics and hospitals, including, but not limited to, a pharmacy, medical and surgical supply store, and an optician. 
2.2.120.  Mini-warehouse: A structure group of structures partitioned for leasing of individual storage spaces and is exclusively used for the storage of non-volatile, non-toxic and non-explosive materials. 
2.2.121.  Mixed use or mixed use development: The combination of a residential use with commercial and/or lodging uses on the same site or within the same building. 
2.2.122.  Motel: A lodging establishment, in which guest rooms are accessed from the exterior of the building. Motels may also include, as an incidental use, a liquor lounge. 
2.2.123.  Nonconformities: Lawful uses of lots, structures or characteristics of uses, which, as a result of amendment to this ordinance, no longer conform to all applicable zoning provisions. 
2.2.124.  Nonresidential: Land uses including agricultural, institutional, commercial, lodging and industrial activities. Mixed-use developments shall also be considered nonresidential uses. 
2.2.125.  Nursing care facility: A licensed institution providing skilled nursing care and medical supervision at a lower level than that, provided in a hospital but at a higher level than, provided in an assisted or independent living facility. 
2.2.126.  Office: See "Business office." 
2.2.127.  Open air market: Retail sales of arts, crafts, produce, discount or used goods, which are located partially or wholly outside of an enclosed building. This may include produce market, craft market, farmers market or similar activities. 
2.2.128.  Open space, common: Land area within a development owned and maintained by the developer or held in common ownership and maintained by a property owner's association for all of the owners for recreation, protection of natural land features, amenities or buffers; is freely accessible to all owners of the development; and, is required by this ordinance to remain in such use. 
2.2.129.  Outdoor storage: The keeping, in an unenclosed area, of any goods, materials, merchandise, products or vehicles in the same place for more than 48 hours. 
2.2.130.  Owner: The person having the right and legal title to, beneficial interest in or a contractual right to purchase a lot or parcel of land, or their authorized designee. 
2.2.131.  Park: Publicly owned and operated parks, playgrounds, recreation facilities and open spaces. Parks owned and operated by a property owners association are referred to as "common open spaces." 
2.2.132.  Personal service: An establishment primarily engaged in providing services involving the care of a person or their personal goods or apparel. 
2.2.133.  Perimeter: The boundaries or borders of a lot, tract or parcel of land. 
2.2.134.  Place of assembly: A facility used for and providing religious, fraternal, recreational, social, educational or cultural activities. 
2.2.135.  Planning commission or commission: The planning commission of the City of Scottsboro, Alabama. 
2.2.136.  Premises: A lot, parcel, tract or plot or land together with the structures hereon. 
2.2.137.  Printing establishment: Blue printing, copying, printing, engraving or other reproduction services. 
2.2.138.  Property line: The lot line or boundary line. 
2.2.139.  Public facility: Buildings providing public services, not otherwise defined in this section, including government offices, post offices, museums, libraries, transit stations, police and fire stations, emergency service stations, civil defense operations and similar uses. 
2.2.140.  Public utility facility: A facility that provides public utility services to the public at large, including water and sewer, gas distribution, electric transmission and distribution, and cable transmission and distribution facilities. 
2.2.141.  Rear-accessed: Having vehicular access by way of an alley or similar means and without a driveway along any front lot line. 
2.2.142.  Recreation: A commercial establishment providing recreational or sports activities to participants, including bowling alleys, billiard parlors, video game centers, ice and roller skating rinks, driving ranges, miniature golf courses, conventional golf courses, swimming pools, tennis courts and other commercial recreational and sports activities. 
2.2.143.  Recreational vehicle: A vehicular type portable structure without permanent foundation that can be towed, hauled, or driven and is designed primarily as a temporary living accommodation of recreational and camping purposes. 
2.2.144.  Recycling center: Land, with or without buildings, upon which used materials are separated and processed for shipment for eventual reuse in new products. 
2.2.145.  Recycling plant: A facility, other than a junk yard, in which recoverable resources, such as newspapers, magazines, books and other paper products; glass, metal cans and other products are recycled, reprocessed and treated to return such products to a condition in which they may be used again in new products. 
2.2.146.  Research laboratory: A building or group of buildings in which are located facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing or experimentation, but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of products, except as incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory. 
2.2.147.  Resource extraction: The removal of soil, sand, stone, chert, clay, gravel, limestone, or other minerals or similar materials, for commercial purposes, including quarries, sand and gravel operations, gas extraction, and mining operations, and the loading, sizing, crushing, and processing of such materials, and the incidental storage, sale and distribution of such materials. 
2.2.148.  Restaurant, drive-in or drive-through: An establishment where food and drink are rapidly prepared for drive-through or drive-in service, but which also includes on-premises dining. 
2.2.149.  Restaurant, standard: An establishment where food and drink are prepared, served and primarily consumed within the building where patrons are seated and served. 
2.2.150.  Restaurant, take-out only: An establishment where food and drink are prepared and served for consumption off-premises only. 
2.2.151.  Retail, general: 
1.  General retail, enclosed retail sales of goods and services including, but not limited to; food sales, department stores, clothing stores, home furnishings, appliance stores, automobile parts and supply stores, video rental, gift shops, florist shops, hardware stores, specialty shops, jewelry stores, variety stores, sporting goods stores, antique shops, auction houses and similar retail activities. 
2.  General retail, unenclosed retail sales of goods and services conducted partially or fully outside of a building, including, but not limited to, flea markets and similar activities. 
2.2.152.  Salvage yard or junk yard: A lot or structure or part thereof, used primarily for the collecting, storage and sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal or discarded material or for the collecting, dismantling, storage and salvaging of machinery or vehicles not in running condition or for the sale of parts thereof. 
2.2.153.  School: A public or nonprofit school. 
2.2.154.  Screen: To visually shield or obscure a building, structure or use from adjacent property or public view by means of opaque fencing, walls, berm or densely planted vegetation. 
2.2.155.  Service station: A gas station that engages in minor vehicle repair activities. 
2.2.156.  Shopping center: A group of commercial establishments located on a lot planned and developed in a unified manner and design with shared parking and driveway facilities and under a common ownership or management authority. 
2.2.157.  Site: Land intended to have one or more buildings or intended to be subdivided into one or more lots. 
2.2.158.  Special, exception use: A use that would not generally be appropriate in a zoning district without restriction(s), but which, if controlled as to number, area, location or relation to the neighborhood, would not be detrimental to public health, safety and general welfare. See § 13.6. 
2.2.159.  Story: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, the ceiling next above and including basements used for the principal use. A top floor, in which the floor area with eight ft. or more of head clearance is 50 percent or less than the floor area of the story next below, is considered a "half story." A basement is considered a story if its ceiling is more than five ft. above grade level or if it is used for residential purposes. 
2.2.160.  Street: A vehicular way dedicated for public use including all land within the right-of-way. Streets are further classified as: 
1.  Arterial: A major street serving as a primary artery, intended to mainly carry through traffic and to connect major activity centers in the city, and as further classified following: 
a.  Major arterials include US 72, AL 279 (south of Broad Street), and AL 35 (from B.B. Comer Bridge to US 72). 
b.  Minor arterials include AL 79, AL 279 (north of Broad Street), AL 35 (north of US 72), and Broad Street. 
2.  Collector: A street that collects traffic from an area and moves it to the arterial network while providing some access to abutting property, including, but not limited to: Bob Jones Road, Goose Pond Drive, County Park Road, Clemons Road, Woods Cove Road, Snodgrass Road, Scott Street, and Jefferson Drive. 
3.  Local street or minor street: A minor street used primarily for access to abutting properties. 
2.2.161.  Street line: The right-of-way line of a street. 
2.2.162.  Structure: A combination of materials that form a construction for use, occupancy, or ornamentation whether installed on, above or below the surface of land or water. All buildings are structures but not all structures are buildings. 
2.2.163.  Studio: A place of work for an artist, photographer or craftsman, including instruction, display, production and retail sales of materials produced on the premises. 
2.2.164.  Subdivision: The division of a lot, tract or parcel or land into two or more lots, plats, sites or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or of building development. Such term includes re-subdivision of land and when appropriate to the context relates to the process of subdivision or to the land or territory subdivided. 
2.2.165.  Tree, canopy: A deciduous tree that reaches a mature height of at least 20 ft. 
2.2.166.  Tree, understory: A deciduous tree that reaches a mature height of fifteen to 25 ft. 
2.2.167.  Truck stop: An establishment involving the maintenance, servicing, storage or repair of commercial vehicles; the retail dispensing of motor vehicle fuels; and the sale of accessories or equipment for trucks and similar commercial vehicles. Truck stops may include overnight accommodations or dining. 
2.2.168.  Variance: A relaxation or waiver of the terms of this ordinance (other than use provisions) as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship. 
2.2.169.  Vehicle and equipment sales, rental and service: An establishment engaged in the sale or rental of heavy trucks (over one ton), construction equipment, tractors farm implements and similar equipment, including the storage, maintenance and servicing of such vehicles and equipment. 
2.2.170.  Veterinary hospital: A place where animals are given medical care and the boarding of animals is limited to short-term care incidental to the hospital use. 
2.2.171.  Wholesaling establishment: An establishment primarily engaged in selling merchandise to other businesses, including retailers, industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business users, other wholesalers, or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to, such individuals or companies. 
2.2.172.  Yard: A minimum open area unobstructed from the ground up extending along a lot line and inward to the structure. The yard shall be measured as the shortest distance between the structure and the lot line. 
1.  Front yard: A yard extending the full width of the lot between any building and the front lot line and measured perpendicular to the building at the closest point to the front lot line. 

2.  Rear yard: A yard extending the full width of the lot between the principal building and the rear lot line and measured perpendicular to the building to the closest point of the rear lot line. 
3.  Side yard: A yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the principal building and the side lot line and measured perpendicular from the side lot line to the closest point of the principal building. 
    In some cases, there may be lots-of-record platted along dead end streets without cul-de-sac turnarounds. In such cases there yards are defined as shown below. In such cases, the side and rear yards are determined by the zoning official based on the arrangement of abutting lots. 

4.  Street side yard: For standard corner lots, a yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the principal building and the street side lot line and measured perpendicular from the street side lot line to the closest point of the principal building. 
2.2.173.  Zero lot line: A lot line with no required setback. 
2.2.174.  Zoning official: The city official assigned by the city council to administer this ordinance, including his/her designee. 
Sec. 2.3. - Abbreviations used in this ordinance. 
2.3.1.  BR-Bedroom. 
2.3.2.  CR-County Road. 
2.3.3.  Dr.-Drive. 
2.3.4.  DU-Dwelling Unit. 
2.3.5.  EQ-Equal. 
2.3.6.  FAA-Federal Aviation Administration. 
2.3.7.  FEMA-Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
2.3.8.  ft.-Foot or feet. 
2.3.9.  GFA-Gross Floor Area. 
2.3.10.  GLA-Gross Leasable Area. 
2.3.11.  max.-Maximum. 
2.3.12.  min.-Minimum. 
2.3.13.  na-Not applicable. 
2.3.14.  oc-On center. 
2.3.15.  PL-Property line or Lot Line. 
2.3.16.  ROW-Right-of-way. 
2.3.17.  sf-Square feet. 
2.3.18.  %-Percent. 
2.3.19.  §-Section, subsection, paragraph or item within this ordinance or other regulations, as specified. 
ARTICLE 3. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 

Sec. 3.1. - Districts. 
    For the purposes of this ordinance, the city is hereby divided into the types of districts designated as follows: 
3.1.1.  AR Agricultural and Recreational. 
3.1.2.  R-1 Low Density Residential. 
3.1.3.  R-2 Medium Family Residential. 
3.1.4.  R-3 Single and Two-family Residential. 
3.1.5.  R-4 Multifamily Residential. 
3.1.6.  R-5 Group Housing Residential. 
3.1.7.  P-1 Planned Unit Development. 
3.1.8.  P-2 Planned Neighborhood Development. 
3.1.9.  P-3 Planned Industrial Development. 
3.1.10.  T-1 Manufactured Home. 
3.1.11.  C-1 Central Business. 
3.1.12.  C-2 Neighborhood Business. 
3.1.13.  C-3 General Commercial. 
3.1.14.  C-4 Regional Commercial. 
3.1.15.  INST Institutional. 
3.1.16.  M-1 Light Manufacturing. 
3.1.17.  M-2 Heavy Manufacturing. 
Sec. 3.2. - District boundaries. 
    The boundaries of the above districts are hereby established as shown on the official zoning map. 
3.2.1.  Boundary interpretations. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
1.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
2.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
3.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following such city limits. 
4.  Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be mid-way between the main tracks. 
5.  Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be construed to follow such shore lines, and in the event of change in the shore line, it shall be construed as moving with the actual shore line; boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such center lines. 
6.  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in paragraphs 1 through 5 above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
7.  When physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map or in circumstances not covered by paragraphs 1 through 6 above, the board of zoning adjustment, hereinafter referred to as "the board," shall interpret the district boundaries. 
8.  Where a district boundary line divides a lot, which was in single ownership at the time of passage of this ordinance, the board may permit, as a special, exception, the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot not to exceed 50 ft. beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot. 
ARTICLE 4. - NONCONFORMITIES 

Sec. 4.1. - Purpose of regulations. 
    Within the districts established by this ordinance, as amended, there exist lots, structures, uses of land and structures and characteristics of use which were lawful before this ordinance was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this ordinance or future amendment. It is the intent of this ordinance to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. It is further the intent of this ordinance that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
4.1.1.  Nonconforming uses are declared by this ordinance to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. A nonconforming use of a structure, land, or structure and land in combination shall not be extended or enlarged after the passage of this ordinance by attachment on a building or premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off-premises, or by the addition of other uses, of a nature that would be prohibited generally in the district involved. 
4.1.2.  To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance and upon which actual building construction has been carried on diligently. 
1.  Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. 
2.  Where excavation or demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to building, such excavation or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be carried on diligently. 
Sec. 4.2. - Nonconforming lots of record. 
4.2.1.  In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any lot of record at the effective date of this ordinance, or amendment thereto, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this ordinance. Such lot must be in separate ownership and not continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership. This provision shall apply even though a lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the districts, provided that yard dimensions and requirements other than those applying to area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the applicable district. 
4.2.2.  Variance of yard requirements shall be obtained only through action of the board. 
4.2.3.  If two or more lots or combination of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the effective date of this ordinance, or amendment thereto, and if all parts of the lots do not meet the requirements established for lot width and area, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this ordinance, and no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this ordinance nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with width or area below the requirements stated in this ordinance. 
Sec. 4.3. - Nonconforming uses of land. 
    Where at the time of passage lawful use of land exists, which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this ordinance, and where such use involves no individual structure with a replacement cost less than $1,000.00 (determined by the building official), the use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, provided: 
4.3.1.  No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased or extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of this ordinance or amendment thereto. 
4.3.2.  No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or part to any portion of the lot or parcel than that occupied by such use at the effective date of this ordinance or amendment thereto. 
4.3.3.  If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than 30 consecutive days, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this ordinance for the applicable district. 
4.3.4.  No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this ordinance shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming use of land. 
Sec. 4.4. - Nonconforming structures. 
    Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of this ordinance, or amendment thereto, that could not be built under the terms of this ordinance by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its location on the lot, or other requirements concerning the structure, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
4.4.1.  No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its nonconformity. 
4.4.2.  Should such nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of structure be destroyed by any means to a condition exceeding more than 50 percent of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed, except in conformity with this ordinance. 
4.4.3.  Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the applicable district. 
Sec. 4.5. - Nonconforming uses of structures or of structures and premises in combination. 
    If lawful use involving individual structures with a replacement cost of $1,000.00 or more (determined by the building official) or of structures and premises in combination, exists at the effective date of this ordinance, or amendment thereto, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to: 
4.5.1.  No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this ordinance in the applicable district shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the applicable district. 
4.5.2.  Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the effective date of this ordinance, or amendment thereto, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building. 
4.5.3.  If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of structure, or structure and premises, may as a special, exception be changed to another nonconforming use, provided that the board, either by general rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the board may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
4.5.4.  Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for this ordinance, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed. 
4.5.5.  When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six consecutive months or for 18 months during any three-year period (except when government action impedes access to the premises), the structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used, except in conformity with this ordinance. 
4.5.6.  Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. Destruction for the purpose of this subsection is defined as damage to an extent of more than 50 percent of the replacement cost at the time of destruction. 
Sec. 4.6. - Nonconforming improvements. 
    When there exist nonconforming improvements on a developed site, such as driveway access points, landscaping, buffers, screening, or off-street parking or loading facilities, such improvements shall be made to conform to the applicable provisions of this ordinance in the following circumstances: 
1.  When the premises remains vacant for a period of two or more years; 
2.  When the use of the premises is expanded or changes to a more intensive use. 
Sec. 4.7. - Repairs and maintenance of nonconforming structures. 
    On any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding ten percent of the replacement cost of the nonconforming portion of the structure as the case may be, provided that the cubic content existing when it became nonconforming shall not be increased. 
4.7.1.  If a nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to the lack of repairs and maintenance, and is declared by any duly authorized officials to be unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall not therefore be restored, repaired or rebuilt, except in conformity with this ordinance. 
4.7.2.  Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. 
Sec. 4.8. - Uses under special, exception provisions are not nonconforming. 
    Any use, which has been approved by the board as a special, exception, other than a change through board action from nonconforming use to another use not generally permitted in the district, shall not be considered a nonconforming use. 
ARTICLE 5. - SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS 

Sec. 5.1. - Uses. 
5.1.1.  Permitted, special exception and conditional uses. In each district no other uses other than the types specified as uses permitted-by-right or by approval of a special, exception (see § 13.6) or conditional use (see § 12.11) shall be allowed. Uses permitted-by-right are permitted upon application to the zoning official. Permits shall only be issued for special, exception or conditional uses upon approval by the board or the commission, respectively. 
5.1.2.  Interpretation of uses. The use tables in this ordinance (i.e., table 6-1 and table 7-1) are not intended to be all-inclusive. Therefore, the zoning official may make interpretations so as to classify any questioned use within a listed use of most similar impact and characteristics. 
5.1.3.  Unclassified uses. In the event the zoning official finds a new or unusual use that cannot appropriately fit a listed use in any district, the following procedures shall be followed: 
1.  If compatible with the existing zoning district intent, the unclassified use shall be permitted by special, exception upon approval and subject to the conditions set by the board. 
2.  If the unclassified use would not be compatible with the intent of the existing zoning district, the applicant may request rezoning to another district in which the zoning official determines the unclassified use is best suited. If rezoning is sought, the unclassified use may only be permitted by special, exception in the requested district. Following final action on the unclassified use, the commission may initiate an amendment to this ordinance to list the use in the most appropriate district(s). 
Sec. 5.2. - Area and dimensional regulations. 
    The regulations set by this ordinance shall be the minimum regulations and shall apply to each class or kind of structure or land, and particularly, except as hereinafter, provided: 
5.2.1.  No building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered, except in conformity with this ordinance. 
5.2.2.  No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered: 
1.  To exceed the height or bulk; 
2.  To accommodate or house a greater number of families; 
3.  To occupy a greater percentage of lot area; 
4.  To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or other open spaces than herein required or in any manner contrary to the provisions of this ordinance. 
5.2.3.  Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky, unobstructed by any structure or part thereof, and unoccupied for storage, servicing or similar uses, except as otherwise specified in this ordinance. 
5.2.4.  No part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required about or in connection with any building for the purpose of complying with this ordinance shall be included as part of a yard, open space, or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building, unless specifically, provided for otherwise in this ordinance. 
5.2.5.  No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this ordinance shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this ordinance. 
5.2.6.  All territory, which may hereafter be annexed to the city, shall be considered to be in the low density residential district, unless otherwise classified. However, if an annexation petitioner desires to have property classified within any zone other than R-1, following annexation, the petitioner must obtain the approval from the commission prior to the submission of the formal annexation request to the council, and the council must approve such zoning classification. 
5.2.7.  Each structure hereafter erected or altered shall comply with the area and dimensional regulations applied by this ordinance. Exceptions to these requirements are as follows: 
1.  Where the owner of a lot of official record at the time of adoption of this ordinance does not own sufficient adjacent land to enable such owner to conform to area and dimensional requirements, one building and its accessory structures may be built, provided the setbacks and other requirements conform as closely as possible, in the opinion of the board, to the requirements of the applicable district; and further, provided that neither side yard shall be reduced to less than five ft. in width, except where a lesser or no side yard setback is required. 
2.  No building shall be required to be set back more than the average of the setbacks of the existing principal buildings within 100 ft. each side thereof. 
Sec. 5.3. - Height. 
    Height limitations shall not apply to church steeples, barns, silos, farm structures, chimneys, flag poles, public utility poles, cooling towers, water tanks, and industrial structures, when required by manufacturing process and, provided the structure does not exceed 25 percent of the lot area, except in those districts where height restrictions are for the protection of aircraft. 
Sec. 5.4. - Structures. 
    It is the intent of this ordinance that there shall be but one principal structure plus any permitted accessory structures on any lot used for single-family or duplex dwellings; however, any and all accessory structures shall not be used as living quarters, unless specifically permitted by this ordinance. This shall not apply to single-family and duplex dwelling developments under condominium ownership that otherwise meet the area and dimensional requirements of this ordinance. Protective shelters classified as accessory structures may provide temporary living quarters in times of danger or emergency. 
Sec. 5.5. - Future street lines. 
    On any lot which, as of the effective date of this ordinance or amendment thereto, may be reduced in area by widening a public street to the right-of-way width indicated on any duly adopted federal, state, regional county (sic) or municipal plan, or as same may be hereafter amended, the minimum required yards, lot area, lot width, and lot coverage area shall be measured by considering such future street lines as the lot line of the concerned lot. However, upon a recommendation by the city engineer, the commission may modify this requirement as it applies to streets under the city's jurisdiction. 
Sec. 5.6. - Rear yard abuts a public street. 
    When the rear yard of a lot abuts a public street, all buildings or structures on that rear yard shall observe the same setback from the street line or property line as required for adjacent properties which front on that street. In addition, any structure located within 25 ft. of that setback line shall observe the side yard requirements of the adjoining properties fronting on that street. 
Sec. 5.7. - Intersection visibility. 
    To provide a clear view at intersections, there shall be an unobstructed triangular area at the intersection of any two streets or a street with a driveway, alley or railroad. The size of this triangular area shall be determined in accordance with table 5-1. Such distance shall be measured from the position of a car stopped at the intersection to the centerline of the intersecting street, as shown in Figure 5.7. Within this triangular area, no structure, sign or planting shall be permitted which obstructs motorist's view between a height of 2.5 ft. and eight ft. above grade level at the intersection. 
Table 5-1 Sight Distance Requirements Design Speed of Intersecting Street (mph) Intersection Sight Distance (ft.) 1 15 170 20 225 25 280 30 335 35 390 40 445  
1 Distances are intended as a minimum guideline. Site conditions such as grades, traffic volumes, signalization types, etc. may warrant increases in desired sight distances. 

Sec. 5.8. - Rear dwelling prohibited. 
    No accessory structure or building on the lot of a single-family or duplex dwelling, other than the principal building used for such single-family or duplex dwelling, may be used for residential purposes, unless specifically approved as part of a planned development. 
Sec. 5.9. - Location of accessory buildings. 
    Accessory buildings may be erected on any lot; however, such buildings shall be located so as to comply with the following requirements: 
5.9.1.  No accessory building shall be erected in any required front or side yard and shall not occupy more than 30 percent of any required rear yard. Accessory buildings shall be at least five ft. from all lot lines and from any building on the same lot. 
5.9.2.  No accessory building not an integral part of the principal building shall be located within 60 ft. from the front lot line. 
5.9.3.  In the case of a corner lot adjoined in the rear by a lot facing the side street, the accessory structure shall be located in such a manner as to conform with the front and side yard requirements of the adjoining lots. 
Sec. 5.10. - Access to public streets. 
    Every use, building or structure established after the effective date of this ordinance shall be on a lot or parcel with street frontage. All structures shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection and required off-street parking. 
Sec. 5.11. - Fences, walls, hedges. 
    Notwithstanding other provisions of this ordinance, fences, wall and hedges may be permitted in any required yard, or along the edge of any yard, provided no fence, wall, or hedge shall exceed 2.5 ft. in height within the clear sight triangle required by § 5.7. 
Sec. 5.12. - Essential community facilities. 
    Nothing in this ordinance shall prohibit the provision of essential services, provided the installation of such facility or service does not violate any other applicable provision of this ordinance. 
    Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to permit the erection, construction or enlargement of any building, tower, or maintenance depot for provision of an essential community facility or service, except as otherwise permitted in this ordinance. 
Sec. 5.13. - Access streets. 
    The following regulations shall apply to all commercial and industrial developments located on major arterials: 
5.13.1.  There shall be provisions made by the developer whereby adequate land shall be set aside to provide an access street parallel to the major arterial. 
5.13.2.  The developer shall provide a paved access street for the length of the lot frontage and that meets city specifications. 
5.13.3.  Ingress and egress points to the access road from private property shall be coordinated by the developer with the city engineer. 
5.13.4.  The commission may waive any parts of this provision governing access streets if it is determined by the city engineer that direct access will not adversely affect traffic safety and movement on the major arterial and any adjoining streets. 
Sec. 5.14. - Parking and storage of certain vehicles. 
    Automotive vehicles or trailers of any kind or type without current license plates, or which are inoperable or otherwise disabled for a period of seven consecutive days, shall not be stored or parked on any residentially zoned property, whether occupied as a residence or not, or on property used for residential purposes in a nonresidential district other than in a completely enclosed building. For the purposes of this section, a vehicle shall be deemed inoperable or otherwise disabled if it is unable to operate on the streets and roadways of the State of Alabama in full compliance with the various provisions of the Code of Alabama, 1975, as amended. 
    Campers, travel trailers, or recreational vehicles may be stored in any district, provided that they are parked in either the side or rear yards, or in a garage or accessory structure conforming to the requirements of this ordinance. No such vehicle shall be used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on a residential lot or in any location not approved for such use. 
Sec. 5.15. - Manufactured homes and portable buildings. 
5.15.1.  Manufactured homes not in use may be stored only in conforming manufactured home sales lots, within the confines of a building, or in individual lots in conforming manufactured home parks with only one manufactured home permitted per manufactured home space. 
5.15.2.  Portable buildings meeting the definitions of Class A or B manufactured homes may be used as bona fide construction offices on any premises for which a building permit has been issued and remains valid. 
5.15.3.  Portable buildings meeting the definitions of Class A or B manufactured homes may be used as accessory structures on lots in nonresidential districts that are already developed with a permanent structure that houses the principal use. In such cases, the portable building may only house a use that is customarily incidental to the principal use, including a caretaker dwelling, but shall only be placed behind the front building line. Where such placement is insufficient to obscure public views of the portable building, screening may be required by the zoning official, consistent with the standards in § 11.3, screening. 
5.15.4.  In accordance with § 12.3, building permit required, the placement of any manufactured home on property, whether temporarily or permanently, shall require a building permit. This shall not apply to the placement of a manufactured home on a previously approved manufactured home park space nor the placement of a manufactured home for sale on an approved manufactured home sales lot. 
Sec. 5.16. - Swimming pool. 
5.16.1.  Swimming pools shall not be located closer to any lot line than ten ft., and non-commercial pools shall be enclosed by a fence or wall not less than five ft. to prevent uncontrolled access. 
5.16.2.  Private swimming pools may be established in residential districts for the exclusive use of the occupants of the subject property and their guests and, provided that no part of the swimming pool extends into any required front or side yard. 
Sec. 5.17. - Additional regulations for areas of special flood hazard. 
    All properties within areas of special flood hazard, as defined in Ordinance 439 Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance, City of Scottsboro, shall also be subject to the applicable regulations of said ordinance in addition to the requirements of this ordinance. Wherever there is a conflict between the provisions of this ordinance and those of Ordinance 439, the more restrictive shall apply. 
Sec. 5.18. - Ownership and maintenance of common open spaces and facilities. 
    For all proposals involving the creation of open spaces or facilities (including stormwater detention ponds and similar facilities) to be owned and maintained by a developer or a homeowner, property owner, or condominium association, including where such open spaces are required by this ordinance, the following shall apply: 
5.18.1.  Owner's association. In the case of an owner's association, such association shall own the common open space or facility in perpetuity. Membership in the association shall be mandatory and automatic for all owners of the subdivision or condominium and their successors. The association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection of dues from all members. The responsibility for maintaining the common open space and/or facilities located thereon shall be borne by the association. 
5.18.2.  Management plan, submittal. The applicant shall submit, along with a proposed preliminary plat or site plan, as applicable, a plan for the management of open space and/or common facilities that: 
1.  Allocates responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance and operation of the common open space/facilities including provisions for ongoing maintenance and for long-term capital improvements; 
2.  Estimates the costs and staffing requirements needed for maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the common open space/facilities and outlines the means by which such funding will be obtained or, provided; 
3.  Provides that any changes to the plan be approved by the commission; and 
4.  Provides for enforcement of the plan. 
In the event the party responsible for maintenance of the common open space fails to maintain all or any portion in reasonable order and condition, the city may enter the premises and take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance. The costs of such maintenance may be charged to the association, or to the individual owners that make up the association, and may include administrative costs and penalties. Such costs shall become a lien on all involved properties. 
Sec. 5.19. - Noise standards. 
    In addition to the separation and landscaping requirements of § 11-1, buffers, no use shall produce continuous, recurring, scheduled or intermittent noise beyond its property and that exceeds the levels indicated in table 5-2. 
5.19.1.  Any use which may produce noise levels in excess of those permitted at the property line as indicated in table 5-2 shall be required to incorporate noise baffles or other noise suppression techniques in order to comply with these requirements. 
Table 5-2. Noise Standards Use or Zoning of 
Abutting Property Daytime 
7:00 a.m.-9:00 p.m. Nighttime 
9:00 p.m.-7:00 a.m. Residential 75 dB 70 dB Commercial or Institutional 80 dB 75 dB Industrial 85 dB 80 dB  
5.19.2.  Exemptions. The following uses and activities shall be exempt from this § 5.19: 
1.  Noise from safety signals, warning devices, and emergency pressure relief valves. 
2.  Noise from any authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency. 
3.  Noise from aircraft or railways. 
4.  Noise from utility stations, utility substations or utility plants. 
5.  Noise from construction activities occurring between 7:00 a.m. and sundown or from temporary operation of maintenance equipment or activities in residential and commercial areas between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
5.19.3.  Where a change in zoning or use occurs on abutting property, the noise from a pre-existing industrial or commercial use shall be subject to the pre-existing restrictions, as if the zoning or use of the abutting property had not changed. 
Sec. 5.20. - Lighting standards. 
    The intent of these standards is to reduce the impacts of glare, light trespass and light pollution while promoting safety and energy conservation. For all nonresidential and multifamily developments, the following shall apply: 
5.20.1.  Definitions. For this § 5.20, the following terms shall have the meanings, provided herein: 
1.  Floodlighting: Artificial lighting so directed or diffused as to provide comparatively uniform illumination over a large area. 
2.  Full cut-off light fixture: A light fixture that, by design of the housing, does not allow any light dispersion or direct glare to shine above [a] 90-degree horizontal plane from the base of the fixture. 
3.  Glare: The sensation produced by a bright light source that is sufficiently brighter than the level to which the eyes are adapted, which causes annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance. 
4.  Glare, direct: Glare resulting from direct line-of-sight eye contact with a direct light source. 
5.  Light trespass: Light from an artificial source that is intruding into an area where it is not wanted or does not belong. 
6.  Light fixture shield: A non-reflective covering, canopy or other such device fitted over a light source preventing light from illuminating an area not intended to be illuminated. 
7.  Uplighting: Any light source that distributes illumination above a horizontal plane. 
5.20.2.  Standards. 
1.  All outdoor lighting fixtures shall be designed, shielded, aimed, located and maintained to prevent light trespass and glare onto adjacent properties or roadways. 
2.  The intensity, location, and design of lighting shall be such that not more than one footcandle of light is cast upon adjacent residential property. 
3.  Light fixtures shall be full cut-off fixtures, with the following, exceptions: 
a.  Holiday lighting from November 15 to March 1. 
b.  Sensor activated lights, provided that: 
1)  It is located in such a manner as to prevent glare and lighting onto properties of others or into the public right-of-way; 
2)  The light is set to illuminate only when activated and to extinguish within five minutes after activation has ceased; and 
3)  The light must not be triggered by activity that occurs off of the subject property. 
c.  All temporary emergency lighting needed by fire and police departments or other emergency agencies. 
d.  Floodlights with external shielding if the luminaire does not cause glare or light to shine on adjacent property or public rights-of-way. 
e.  Uplighting for flags, address markers, and architectural features and low-voltage landscape lighting, provided that direct illumination is focused exclusively on the object and away from adjoining properties and public streets and sidewalks. In all cases, uplighting must not cause glare or light trespass. 
f.  Light fixtures that have a maximum output of 1,000 lumens per fixture (equal to a single 60-watt incandescent light), regardless of the number of lamps, provided: 
1)  The bulb of the fixture is not visible; 
2)  The fixture uses frosted, opalescent, clear or iridescent glass; 
3)  The fixture has an opaque top or is under an opaque portion of the building; 
4)  If the fixture utilizes clear glass, the output of the fixture must be shielded by the architecture of the structure; and 
5)  All fixtures must not cause glare or light trespass beyond the property. 
g.  Floodlighting used for outdoor recreational facilities, provided: 
1)  To the extent practicable, all light fixtures/light poles used to illuminate playing fields, courts and other outdoor recreational facilities shall be set back a minimum of one foot for every foot in height from any residential property line or right-of-way. 
2)  In any case, floodlighting shall be turned off no later than one hour after an event is concluded. The fixtures must be aimed so that their beams are directed and fall within the primary playing or performance area. All sports and event lighting must be equipped with a glare-control package (louvers, shields or similar devices), and the fixtures must be aimed so that beams are directed and fall within the primary playing area and light trespass is minimized. 
4.  In parking lots, light fixture poles shall not be more than 30 feet in height. 
5.  Light fixtures under any canopy shall be recessed into the canopy ceiling with a flat lens to prevent glare. The bottom of the fixtures may protrude a no more than two inches from the ceiling. No other portions of the canopy not included in the sign area shall be illuminated. 
5.20.3.  Lighting plan required. For all nonresidential and multifamily developments involving off-street parking areas in excess of 20 spaces, a lighting plan shall be submitted as part of the required site plan. The lighting plan shall be prepared by a registered engineer, design or lighting professional and shall include the information listed in appendix 5. 
ARTICLE 6. - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
    The following sections present the specific regulations which govern development within each of the city's residential zoning districts. 

Sec. 6.1. - Residential district regulations, generally. 
6.1.1.  Uses permitted. Uses shall be permitted in each residential district as indicated in table 6-1. Any use not specified in table 6-1 as permitted is prohibited (except as, provided in § 5.1, uses). Any additional uses shall be allowed only through amendment of this ordinance. Refer to the specific district regulations for any limitations that may apply to certain uses. 
6.1.2.  General development criteria. All developments shall comply with the area and dimensional requirements in table 6-2, the provisions specified in the regulations of the applicable district and the provisions referenced following, where applicable: 
1.  See article 5, supplementary regulations. 
2.  See article 9, supplementary use regulations. 
3.  See article 10, parking and loading requirements. 
4.  See article 11, landscaping, screening and buffers. 
a.  Buffers shall be, provided, pursuant to § 11.1, when a new use of higher intensity is developed abutting an existing use of lesser intensity. 
b.  Landscaping shall be, provided around and within vehicular areas pursuant to § 11.2. 
c.  Screening shall be, provided for outdoor storage areas, dumpsters, and similar site elements pursuant to § 11.3. 
Sec. 6.2. - Low Density (R-1) Residential District. 
6.2.1.  Intent. The R-1 district is designed to facilitate the development of single-family, low-density residential areas, with additional facilities limited to those which enhance and preserve the residential neighborhood environment. 
6.2.2.  No new R-1 district may be established which contains less than five acres. 
Sec. 6.3. - Medium Density (R-2) Residential District. 
6.3.1.  The R-2 district is designed to facilitate the development of single-family, medium-density residential areas, with additional facilities limited to those which enhance and preserve the residential neighborhood environment. 
6.3.2.  No new R-2 district may be established which contains less than five acres. 
Sec. 6.4. - Single- and Two-Family (R-3) Residential District. 
6.4.1.  Intent. The R-3 district is designed to facilitate the development of single-family and low-density multifamily dwelling units, not to exceed two dwelling units per structure, and additional uses which enhance the residential environment of the district. 
6.4.2.  No new R-3 district may be established which contains less than five acres. 
6.4.3.  Development criteria. 
1.  More than one two-family unit structure may be erected on the same lot, provided there shall be a minimum distance of 20 ft. between structures, and, provided all other area and dimensional requirements are satisfied. 
Table 6-1. Uses Permitted in Residential Districts Districts R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 T-1 Residential Uses Boarding House SE SE Duplex Y Y Conservation Subdivision, § 9.7 Y Y Y Y Family Day Care Home, § 9.12 Y Y Y Home Occupation, § 9.3 Y Y Y Y Y Independent Living Facility SE Manufactured Home Park C Manufactured Home Subdivision C Multifamily Dwelling Y Residential Accessory Structure Y Y Y Y Y Y Single-family Detached Dwelling Y Y Y Y Y Y Townhouse Y Nonresidential Uses Assisted Living Facility, Nursing Care Facility C C C C C C Bed and Breakfast, § 9.8 SE SE SE Cemetery, § 9.2 SE SE SE SE SE Communications Tower, § 9.9 C C C C C C Country Club SE SE SE SE SE Day Care Center, § 9.12 SE SE SE SE SE Group Care Home, § 9.12 R Place of Assembly, Public or Semi-Public C C C C C C Public Buildings (fire stations, libraries, etc.) C C C C C C Public Recreational Facility (parks, playgrounds, stadiums) C C C C C C Public Utility Facility, § 9.6 C C C C C C Public Utility Service Y Y Y Y Y Y School, Public or Private C C C C C C  
Y - The use is permitted by right, subject to any limitations of the applicable district. Similar uses to those listed may also be permitted subject to § 5.1.2 and § 5.1.3. 
SE - Special, exception use, requires approval by the board of zoning adjustment (see § 13.6). May also be subject to district limitations. 
C - Conditional use, required approval by the commission (see § 12.11). May also be subject to district limitations. 
A use followed by a numeric cross-reference is also subject to the supplementary use regulations referenced. 
A blank cell indicates that the use is prohibited. 
Table 6-2. Area and Dimensional Requirements for Residential Districts Refer also to the applicable district regulations for any development criteria that may modify or supplement the requirements shown herein. District R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 1 R-5 T-1 2 townhouse patio home Min. Lot Size 15,000 sf. 10,500 sf. 7,000 sf. 10,000 sf. plus 1,600 sf. per unit for over 4 units 1,500 sf. 6,000 sf. 8,000 sf. Min. Lot Width (at Building Line) 100 ft. 70 ft. 60 ft. 100 ft. 20 ft. 60 ft. 3 60 ft. Min. Lot Frontage 50 ft. 50 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 18 ft. 35 ft. na Min. Front Yard Setback 40 ft. 35 ft. 25 ft. 25 ft. 10-15 ft. 4 20 ft. 25 ft. Min. Rear Yard Setback 45 ft. 40 ft. 25 ft. 25 ft. 25 ft. 25 ft. 25 ft.Min. Side Yard Setback One-story 15 ft. ten ft. ten ft. ten ft. 0 ft.; 12 ft. at end of group 10 ft. one side; 0 ft. other side 10 ft. Multi-story 18 ft. 12 ft. 12 ft. 12 ft. Min. Street Side Yard Setback 30 ft. 25 ft. 20 ft. na na na na Max. Lot Coverage 25% 25% 30% 35% 55% 40% naMax. Building Height Principal Buildings 21/2 stories or 35 ft. 21/2 stories or 35 ft. 21/2 stories or 35 ft. 3 stories or 45 ft. 3 stories or 45 ft. 1 story or 20 ft. Accessory Structures 20 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. Supplemental Requirements for Nonresidential Uses Min. Lot Size 30,000 sf. 30,000 sf. 30,000 sf. 30,000 sf. 30,000 sf. na Min. Yard Setbacks 40 ft. 40 ft. 30 ft. 30 ft. 30 ft. na Min. Lot Width (at Building Line) na na na na 100 ft. na  
1. Minimum lot size, minimum lot width (at building line), and minimum street side yard for single-family dwellings shall be as, provided for the R-3 district. 
2. Requirements are for manufactured home subdivisions lots. For manufactured home parks, refer to § 6.7. 
3. Minimum lot width at building line may be reduced to 50 ft. if lots are rear-accessed. 
4. See § 6.6.5.4a for specific requirement. 
Sec. 6.5. - Multifamily (R-4) Residential District. 
6.5.1.  Intent. The R-4 district is designed to facilitate the development of multifamily dwellings, and additional uses which enhance the residential environment of the district. 
6.5.2.  No new R-4 district may be established which contains less than ten acres. 
6.5.3.  Development criteria. 
1.  More than one multifamily dwelling may be erected on the same lot, provided there shall be a minimum distance of 20 ft. between structures, and, provided all other area and dimensional requirements are satisfied. 
2.  Multifamily dwellings shall be buffered from any single-family and duplex dwellings as required in § 11.1. 
Sec. 6.6. - Group Housing (R-5) Residential District. 
6.6.1.  The R-5 district is designed to facilitate the development of garden/patio homes and townhouses, and additional uses which enhance the residential environment of the district. 
6.6.2.  No new R-5 district may be established which contains less than five acres. 
6.6.3.  Patio home developments and townhouse developments shall not share the same block frontage with detached single-family dwellings or duplexes unless separated by an alley, watercourse or buffer. Patio home developments and townhouse developments shall be similarly separated. 
6.6.4.  All lots shall be served by water and sewer. All utilities shall be placed underground or in an alley for rear-accessed lots. 
6.6.5.  Development criteria for townhouses. 
1.  All lots shall front on a street; and each townhouse shall have a front entrance facing a street and be accessible from the rear. 
2.  No less than three nor more than eight townhouses shall be located within a continuous building group. 
3.  Each townhouse shall be located on a separate platted lot, except where developed under condominium ownership. 
4.  Except as, provided herein, minimum dimensional requirements shall be as shown in table 6-2. 
a.  Front yard: Townhouses shall be set back no less than ten ft. from the nearest edge of a required sidewalk. Where the front yard is less than 15 ft., the ground floor of the unit shall be no less than two ft. above grade level at the sidewalk. 
b.  Rear yard: Where an alley is present at the rear of the lot, the minimum rear yard setback for accessory buildings shall be 12 ft. from the alley centerline. 
c.  A side yard shall only be required at the end of a row of townhouses, in which case the minimum width shall be 12 ft. However, when the end unit abuts a street, the minimum front yard setback shall apply. 
d.  Each townhouse shall have its own yard containing not less than 400 sf., exclusive of paved parking space, reasonably secluded from view from streets and from neighboring property. 
5.  Off-street facilities shall be, provided on and to the rear of the individual townhouse lots, or grouped in bays in the interior of blocks. 
6.  Common open spaces and facilities shall comply with § 5.18. 
6.6.6.  Development criteria for patio homes. 
1.  No patio home shall be located less than 25 ft. from any boundary of the development that abuts an R-1, R-2 or R-3 district. 
2.  Though a zero lot line is permitted on one side, there shall be a minimum spacing of ten ft. between the sides of all patio homes. 
Sec. 6.7. - Manufactured Home (T-1) District. 
6.7.1.  Intent. The T-1 district is designed to provide locations within the city for the development of planned manufactured home parks. The areas are developed and located to provide safe and sanitary living conditions for occupants and are conveniently located near shopping centers, schools and other community facilities. 
6.7.2.  No new T-1 district may be established which contains less than five acres. A site plan shall be submitted with all requests for establishment of a manufactured home district including those materials listed in appendix 1. 
6.7.3.  Manufactured home classifications. Only Class A manufactured homes and site-built homes shall be permitted in manufactured home subdivisions. Only Class A and Class B manufactured homes shall be permitted in manufactured home parks. Class C manufactured homes and non-manufactured homes are prohibited in manufactured home parks. 
6.7.4.  Development criteria for manufactured home subdivisions. 
1.  Area and dimensional requirements shall be as shown in table 6-2. 
2.  Only site-built single-family detached dwellings and Class A manufactured homes shall be permitted. Class A manufactured homes shall comply with the following: 
a.  The manufactured home shall have a minimum of 960 sf. of enclosed and heated living area. 
b.  The roof shall have a minimum vertical rise of three ft. for each 12 ft. of horizontal run and shall be finished with a type of shingle commonly used in standard residential construction. 
c.  All roof structures shall have an eave projection of no less than six inches, which may include a gutter. 
d.  The exterior siding shall consist predominantly of vinyl or aluminum horizontal siding, wood, or hardboard, comparable in composition, appearance and durability to the exterior siding commonly used in standard residential construction 
e.  All manufactured homes shall be blocked and tied down in conformance with the standards set forth in section 11-49-219, Code of Alabama, 1975, as amended [Code of Ala. 1975, § 24-5-30 et seq.], and shall have skirting installed between the base of the structure and the ground. This skirting shall be made of concrete block, wood, vinyl, or other approved materials. 
f.  The moving hitch, wheels and axles, and transporting lights shall be removed prior to occupancy. 
6.7.5.  Development criteria for manufactured home parks. 
1.  Only Class A and Class B manufactured homes shall be permitted. 
2.  The main service roadway for the manufactured home park shall have access to a public street. All streets and rights-of-way within manufactured home parks shall comply with the city subdivision regulations and all other applicable street construction standards of the city. 
3.  All off-street parking shall have access to an interior roadway within the park. No direct access shall be allowed between manufactured home spaces and any exterior street. 
4.  Requirements for manufactured home spaces: 
a.  Min. area: 2,800 sf. 
b.  Min. width: 32 ft. 
c.  Min. front and rear yards: 25 ft. 
d.  Min. side yard: ten ft. 
5.  No more than ten manufactured home spaces may be developed per gross acre of land area. 
6.  Accessory uses may not constitute more than ten percent of the total site. 
7.  No manufactured home shall be less than 25 ft. from the property lines of the park where it adjoins a residential district. 
8.  All manufactured homes shall be blocked and tied down in conformance with the standards set forth in section 11-49-219, Code of Alabama, 1975, as amended [Code of Ala. 1975, § 24-5-30 et seq.], and shall have skirting installed between the base of the structure and the ground. This skirting shall be made of concrete block, wood, vinyl, or other approved materials. 
9.  Signage shall be identified on the site plan and allowable as approved through the review process. 
10.  No permanent addition of any kind shall be built onto or become a part of any manufactured home, unless wheels and axles of the manufactured home are removed and the manufactured home is mounted on a permanent foundation. All construction shall comply with the requirements of the city building code. 
11.  Utilities. 
a.  A sanitary sewer collection system shall be extended to every manufactured home space. 
b.  Every home space shall be, provided with an individual branch water line in accordance with all applicable standards of the city and service provider. Each lot shall have a water meter. 
c.  Every home space shall be, provided with individual electrical service in accordance with all applicable standards of the city and service provider. A primary service line shall not be located across the top of any manufactured home. 
12.  Density incentive for storm shelters. The commission may increase the maximum allowed density (§ 6.7.5.5) to 12 manufactured home spaces per gross acre when the developer and/or park operator installs and maintains storm shelters in accordance with the following: 
a.  Storm shelters: 
1)  Have a minimum floor area of seven sf. for each manufactured home space and be located no farther than 1,320 linear ft. from the furthest home space in the manufactured home park. 
2)  Be designed for compliance with all applicable city building, mechanical, plumbing and electrical codes by a licensed structural engineer or architect and built in accordance with plans as approved by the building inspector. 
3)  Be designed and constructed to meet all FEMA requirements and guidelines if located in a floodplain. 
4)  Be designed and constructed to meet all applicable requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). 
b.  The park operator shall be responsible for making the storm shelter accessible and usable in times of need. It is unlawful for any required storm shelter to be used for storage purposes if such storage reduces the minimum floor area available for shelter of persons below the requirements of this subsection. 
13.  Future additions. Additions of ten or more manufactured home spaces to the park shall comply with either the normally allowed maximum density in § 6.7.5.5 or the increased density allowed pursuant to § 6.7.5.12. If the addition will include storm shelter provisions as specified in § 6.7.5.12, the density calculation shall be based on the gross park acreage including the proposed new spaces. Otherwise, the density calculation shall be based only on the acreage of the area containing the spaces proposed to be added. 
ARTICLE 7. - NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
    The following sections present the specific regulations that govern development within the city's nonresidential zoning districts. 

Sec. 7.1. - Nonresidential district regulations, generally. 
7.1.1.  Uses permitted. Uses shall be permitted in each residential district as indicated in table 7-1. Any use not specified in table 7-1 as permitted is prohibited (except as, provided in § 5.1, uses). Any additional uses shall be allowed only through amendment of this ordinance. Refer to the specific district regulations for any limitations that may apply to certain uses. 
7.1.2.  General development criteria. All developments shall comply with the area and dimensional requirements in table 7-2, the provisions specified in the regulations of the applicable district and the provisions referenced herein, where applicable: 
1.  See article 5, supplementary regulations. 
2.  See article 9, supplementary use regulations. 
3.  See article 10, parking and loading requirements. 
4.  See article 11, landscaping, screening and buffers. 
a.  Buffers shall be, provided, pursuant to § 11.1, when a new use of higher intensity is developed abutting an existing use of lesser intensity. 
b.  Landscaping shall be, provided around and within vehicular areas pursuant to § 11.2. 
c.  Screening shall be, provided for outdoor storage areas, dumpsters, and similar site elements pursuant to § 11.3. 
5.  Lot frontage. It is intended that each nonresidential development front on and be visible from a public street and that accesses to abutting developments are either shared or adequately separated for safety and legibility. Therefore, while the lot frontage requirements in table 7-2 allow flexibility in the design and arrangement of nonresidential developments, no lot or site plan shall be approved when the narrowness of a lot frontage, from which access is to be taken, conflicts with these intents and the requirements of § 10.4, driveway spacing. 
6.  Portable buildings may be permitted for temporary construction offices and as accessory structures in nonresidential districts pursuant to § 5.15. 
Sec. 7.2. - Agricultural (AR) District. 
7.2.1.  Intent. The AR district is designed to facilitate the continued use of property for an encourage the new development of agricultural and recreational related uses. 
7.2.2.  No new AR district may be established which contains less than five acres. 
7.2.3.  Any structure used for the housing of livestock or poultry of any kind, including any facilities for watering, feeding and animal waste/manure storage and disposal shall not be located closer than 100 ft. to any property line. 
Sec. 7.3. - Central Business (C-1) District. 
7.3.1.  Intent. The C-1 district is designed to facilitate and preserve a central area of intensive commercial, financial, professional, governmental and cultural activities scaled to pedestrian needs. 
7.3.2.  No new C-1 district may be established which contains less than four acres. 
7.3.3.  Development criteria. 
1.  Rear yard requirement shall be waived if the lot abuts a public alley and if loading and unloading facilities are, provided. 
2.  Requirements for upper-story dwellings. 
a.  Minimum size of 800 sf. of living space per dwelling unit. 
b.  Maximum of one resident per 300 sf. of living space; maximum of two unrelated individuals per dwelling unit. 
c.  Developers shall furnish the building inspector with architectural or engineered building plans complying with all adopted editions of the building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, fire and life safety codes. 
d.  The removal of solid waste, size and location of cans must be approved by the Scottsboro Sanitation Superintendent. 
Sec. 7.4. - Neighborhood Commercial (C-2) District. 
7.4.1.  Intent. The C-2 district is designed to facilitate the unified grouping of retail and personal service facilities that provide for the daily needs of residential neighborhoods. The facilities are intended to blend with residential uses. 
7.4.2.  No new C-2 district may be established which contains less than three acres. 
7.4.3.  Development criteria. Single-family detached dwellings, existing prior to the effective date of this ordinance, shall be subject to article 4, Nonconformities, except as follows: If damaged by fire or natural disaster, such dwellings may be renovated, repaired or replaced, on the existing foundation only, regardless of the amount of damage. 
Sec. 7.5. - General Commercial (C-3) District. 
7.5.1.  Intent. The C-3 district is designed to facilitate the development of general and personal business activity, with an orientation toward vehicular accessibility. 
7.5.2.  No new C-3 district may be established which contains less than five acres. 
7.5.3.  Development criteria. 
1.  Rear yard requirements shall be waived if a lot abuts an alley and if loading and unloading facilities are, provided. 
2.  The minimum front yard setback shall be 100 ft. along U.S. Highway 72 and 60 ft. along all other arterials. 
Sec. 7.6. - Regional Commercial (C-4) District. 
7.6.1.  Intent. The C-4 district is designed to facilitate the development of commercial establishments which cater specifically to motor vehicle use. 
7.6.2.  No new C-4 district may be established which contains less than 15 acres. 
7.6.3.  Development criteria. The minimum front yard setback shall be 100 ft. along U.S. Highway 72 and 60 ft. along all other arterials. 
Sec. 7.7. - Institutional (INST) District. 
7.7.1.  Intent. The INST district is designed to facilitate the development of community and regional-scale institutional uses. 
Sec. 7.8. - Light manufacturing (M-1) District. 
7.8.1.  Intent. The M-1 district is designed to facilitate the development of light industrial uses, including light manufacturing and assembly plants. 
7.8.2.  No new M-1 district may be established which contains less than ten acres. 
Sec. 7.9. - Heavy manufacturing (M-2) District. 
7.9.1.  Intent. The M-2 district is designed to facilitate the development of industrial uses, including heavy industrial and manufacturing uses, which are more acceptably operated in a defined area due to their community impact. 
7.9.2.  No new M-2 district may be established which contains less than ten acres. 
Table 7-1. Uses Permitted in Nonresidential Districts Districts AR C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 INST M-1 M-2 Agricultural Uses Dairy Farm with on-site retail sales Y Farm Y Farm Support Business SE Y Y Y Y Fruit and Produce, Wholesale SE Grain and Feed Manufacturing Y Hatchery, Aquaculture Y Kennel Y Livestock Sales SE Residential Uses Caretaker Dwelling, as an accessory use SE SE SE SE SE Home Occupation, § 9.3 Y Independent Living Facility Y Upper-Story Dwelling, § 9.10 Y Residential Accessory Structure Y Single-Family Detached Dwelling Y Institutional Uses and Utilities Animal Shelter SE Y Y Assisted Living Facility, Nursing Care Facility C C C C Y Bus Station Y Y Y Y Y Cemetery, § 9.2 SE Y Y Y Y Y Y Club, Private Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Communications Tower, § 9.9 C C C C C C C C Country Club SE Y Y Y Day Care Center, § 9.12 Y Y Y Y Y Y Hospital C C C C C Military Installation C Y Y Penal Institution C Y Y Place of Assembly, Public or Semi-Public C C C C C Y C Public Recreational Facility (parks, playgrounds, stadiums) C C C C C Y C Public Utility Facility, § 9.6 C C C C C C C C Public Utility Service Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y School, Public or Private C C C C C Y C Commercial and Industrial Uses Airport C C C Ambulance, Security Service SE SE Y Y Y Y Amusement, Indoor or Outdoor Y Y Y Automotive Parts Sales Y Y Y Y Automotive Repair, Major Y Y Automotive Repair, Minor Y Y Y Y Y Y Automotive Sales or Rental Y Y Y Bakery, Retail Y Y Y Y Bank or Financial Service Y Y Y Y Y Y Bed and Breakfast, § 9.8 SE SE Boat Sales and Service Y Y Y Y Broadcast Studio, Radio or Television Y Y Y Y Y Y Business or Professional Office Y Y Y Y Y Y Business Support Service Y Y Y Y Y Campground SE C C Car Wash Y Y Y Y Caterer Y Y Y Y Commercial Parking Y Y Y Y Y Commercial School Y Y Construction Supply, Lumber Yard Y Y Y Y Contractor Storage Yard Y Y Dairy or Creamery Y Y Y Drive-in Theater, § 9.4 C SE Entertainment, Indoor (comedy club, movie theater, etc.) Y Y Y Food Products Manufacturing, Light SE Y Y Freight Depot, Truck Terminal Y Funeral Home Y Y Garden Center, Nursery SE Y Y Y Y Y Gas Station, § 9.5 Y Y Y Y Y Y General Retail, Enclosed Y Y Y Y General Retail, Unenclosed SE SE Y Y Home Improvement Center Y Y Y Y Hotel Y Y Y Landfill C C C Laundering Plant Y Y Y Y Laundry Service (pick-up station) Y Y Y Y Y Liquor Sales for off-premises consumption only Y Y Y Y Liquor Sales with on-premises consumption Y Y Y Y Maintenance Service (janitorial, plumbing, exterminator) Y Y Y Y Manufactured Home Sales, Repair Y Y Y Y Manufacturing, Heavy Y Manufacturing, Light Y Y Medical or Dental Clinic Y Y Y Y Y Medical Support Services Y Y Y Y Mini-warehouse, § 9.11 Y Y Y Y Motel Y Y Pawn Shop Y Y Y Y Personal Services (barber, salon, tailor, shoe repair, etc.) Y Y Y Y Printing Service Y Y Y Y Y Repair Service, Major (large appliances) Y Y Repair Service, Minor (small engine, electronics, etc.) Y Y Y Y Y Y Recreation, Indoor (spa, gymnasium, health club, etc.) Y Y Y Recycling Center SE SE SE SE SE SE Recycling Plant SE Y Research Laboratory Y Y Resource Extraction and Processing Y Restaurant, Fast Food (with drive-through or drive-in) Y Y Y Restaurant, Standard Y Y Y Y Salvage or Junk Yard Y Y Seafood Store, Retail Y Y Y Y Studio (artist, photography, dance, etc.) Y Y Y Y Y Textiles Production Y Y Y Truck and Heavy Equipment Sales, Rental, Repair Y Y Y Y Truck Stop Y Y Veterinary Hospital Y Y Y Y Warehousing and Distribution, Enclosed Y Y Y Warehousing and Distribution, Unenclosed Y Wholesaler, no on-site storage Y Y Y Y Wholesaler, with on-site storage Y Y Y Wood or Lumber Processing (sawmills, planning mills, etc.) Y  
Y - The use is permitted by right, subject to any limitations of the applicable district. Similar uses to those listed may also be permitted subject to § 5.1.2 and § 5.1.3. 
SE - Special, exception Use, requires approval by the board of zoning adjustment (see § 13.6). May also be subject to district limitations. 
C - Conditional use, required approval by the commission (see § 12.11). May also be subject to district limitations. 
A use followed by a numeric cross-reference is also subject to the supplementary use regulations referenced. 
A blank cell indicates that the use is prohibited. 
Table 7-2. Area and Dimensional Requirements for Nonresidential Districts Refer also to the applicable District Regulations for any Development Criteria that may modify or supplement the requirements shown herein. District AR C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 INST M-1 M-2 Min. Lot Size 1 1 acre na 5,000 sf. na 15,000 sf. 5,000 sf. 1 acre 1 acre Min. Lot Width (at Building Line) 200 ft. 25 ft. 50 ft. 25 ft. 75 ft. 25 ft. 75 ft. 75 ft. Min. Lot Frontage 50 ft. 25 ft. 25 ft. 25 ft. 25 ft. 25 ft. 75 ft. 75 ft. Min. Front Yard Setback 2 50 ft. 10 ft. 3 25 ft. 25 ft. 20 ft. na 50 ft. 50 ft. Min. Rear Yard Setback 50 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. 25 ft. 50 ft. Min. Side Yard Setback 25 ft. na na na 15 ft. na 15 ft. 25 ft. Max. Lot Coverage 5% na 35% 75% 75% 50% 50% 50% Max. Building Height 21/2 stories or 35 ft. 5 stories or 65 ft. 3 stories or 45 ft. 5 stories or 65 ft. 5 stories of 65 ft. 3 stories of 45 ft. 4 stories or 50 ft. 4 stories or 50 ft.  
1. It is the intent of this ordinance that lots of sufficient size be used for any commercial, industrial or related use to provide adequate parking and loading space and buffers, if applicable, in addition to the space required for the other normal operations of the business or service. 
2. Refer to district regulations for, exceptions to these general front yard requirements. 
3. In the C-1 district, no front yard setback is required for lots fronting on the courthouse square. 
ARTICLE 8. - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 8.1. - Planned development regulations, generally. 
8.1.1.  Procedure. The procedure to be followed in the creation of a planned development district shall conform to the regulations for any other zone change with the following, exceptions: 
1.  Any petition for the establishment of a planned development district shall be made in the form of a master plan as prescribed in this section and shall be submitted to the commission for review and recommendation. It shall be the burden of the applicant to show through the master plan: 
a.  That the proposed development is consistent with the intent and purpose of the Scottsboro Strategic Plan and of this ordinance to promote public health, safety and the general welfare. 
b.  That the value and character of property adjacent to the planned development will not be adversely affected. 
c.  That the proposed master plan meets the requirements of all other regulating bodies. 
2.  The establishment of a planned development district will be for the express purpose of improving the land for uses in accordance with an approved master plan. 
3.  After a recommendation by the commission, rezoning to a planned development district may be considered by the council concurrently with consideration of the master plan. Such rezoning, if approved, shall remain valid for the duration of the master plan approval (see § 8.1.5). 
4.  Unless specific variations are noted on the master plan and approved by the commission, the most restrictive requirements for parking, loading, yards and dimensional regulations for the proposed use as, provided in this ordinance shall apply. 
8.1.2.  Master plan submittal. Any application for a planned development district shall be submitted to the zoning official and shall include a conceptual plan showing the entire development site and all phases of the proposed development, and shall graphically express the overall development concept for the site at completion. The master plan shall also include a proposed schedule for completion of the overall development and any individual phases. The master plan shall be drawn to scale by an engineer, architect or landscape architect registered in the State of Alabama and shall include the information listed in appendix 2. 
8.1.3.  Effect of the plan, amendment. Once approved, a master plan shall become a binding condition upon the site, and each phase shall be substantially consistent with the plan. The building inspector may not issue a building permit unless the proposed improvements are substantially as shown in the approved master plan. Minor changes may be approved by the zoning official. Major changes shall require approval by the commission. Any of the following shall constitute a major change: 
1.  Any increase or reduction in the land area of the project site; 
2.  A change of five percent or more in the total number, or in the type, of dwelling units approved; 
3.  A reduction of five percent or more of the approved amount of resource protection area or recreation or open space; 
4.  Any significant addition, removal, or rearrangement of land uses or streets. 
8.1.4.  Effect on prior zoning. Approval of a planned development district by the council replaces the prior zoning of the site. 
8.1.5.  Duration of master plan approval. 
1.  If, within 365 days from the effective date of the master plan approval, the building inspector has not received an application for a building permit, the master plan approval shall become void and the property shall revert to the zoning classification assigned to the property prior to the PDD approval. Upon receipt of a written request from the applicant, the council may extend this period for one year. 
2.  Once a building permit is issued, the improvements set forth in the master plan shall be completed within the time period set forth in the schedule approved as part of the master plan. 
Sec. 8.2. - Planned Unit Development (P-1) District. 
8.2.1.  Intent. The P-1 district is designed to provide flexibility, in contrast with the regulations of conventional zoning districts, for the creation of a variety of residential and mixed-use developments in order to encourage innovation, creativity and efficiency in the use of land and the creation of usable open spaces. 
8.2.2.  Site requirements. Each P-1 district shall contain at least 15 acres. 
8.2.3.  Uses permitted. Residential, institutional and commercial uses shall be allowed. At least 60 percent of the site shall be planned for residential use. Any use not specified above as permitted is prohibited. Any additional uses shall be allowed only through amendment of this ordinance. 
8.2.4.  Off-street parking requirements. Parking standards are determined through the review process, with minimum standards consistent with the normal parking requirements of this ordinance. Joint usage of parking facilities is encouraged and may be, at the option of the commission and council, serve as a basis for the reduction of total parking spaces required. 
8.2.5.  Development criteria. 
1.  Similar uses and densities of uses should face one another across streets, i.e., detached single-family dwellings should face other single-family dwellings. The following relationships are also acceptable: 
a.  Any uses may face recreational or other open spaces. 
b.  High-density residential uses may face nonresidential uses. 
2.  Nonresidential and higher density residential uses should be located on major internal streets and/or near to major external streets. Higher density residential uses should be placed to provide a transition between lower density residential uses and nonresidential uses, if applicable. 
3.  The development should be planned and designed to minimize disruption of floodprone areas, steep slopes, tree canopy, and sensitive plant and animal habitats. As much as possible, such natural spaces should be linked together, which may be in the form of a greenway trail system. 
4.  An interconnected network of pedestrian routes should be, provided, which may consist of sidewalks and off-road paths. Such pedestrian facilities are most critical in areas with high-density residential, retail and mixed-use development. 
5.  At least ten percent of the site shall be retained, improved and maintained as open space for the recreational use of residents. Small remnant spaces and linear strips less than 40 ft. in average width, and other spaces with limited accessibility, shall not be counted toward this criteria. 
6.  Landscaping. Trees, shrubs and other landscaping treatments should be included where buildings are set back from frontages. 
7.  Buffers and screening. Uses within the development that are incompatible with existing adjacent uses shall be buffered and/or screened in a manner consistent with § 11.1, buffers, and § 11.3, screening. Alternative methods for buffering and screening of uses internal to the development may be proposed by the developer. 
8.  Commercial development may not be started until residential development is 25 percent complete and occupied. 
Sec. 8.3. - Planned Neighborhood (P-2) District. 
8.3.1.  Intent. The P-2 district is designed to facilitate the development of neighborhoods that, through the arrangement, proximity and interconnection of varied residential densities and neighborhood-serving nonresidential uses, create an attractive, safe and comfortable neighborhood environment that encourages walking, bicycling, accessibility and community interaction and recreation. A planned neighborhood: 
1.  Is compact and designed for the human scale; 
2.  Provides a mix of uses in close proximity to one another within the neighborhood; 
3.  Provides a mix of housing styles, types, and sizes to accommodate households of all ages, sizes, and incomes; 
4.  Incorporates a system of relatively narrow, interconnected streets with sidewalks and bikeways that offer multiple routes for motorists, pedestrians, and bicyclists and provides for the connections of those streets to existing and future developments; and 
5.  Incorporates significant environmental features into the design. 
8.3.2.  Site requirements. For new development, a planned neighborhood shall include 40 acres or more, or 2) 30 acres or more for development contiguous to existing neighborhoods. 
8.3.3.  Definitions. The following definitions shall be observed, unless otherwise indicated by context: 
1.  Building scale: The relationship between the size of a building and its surroundings, including street width, open space, and surrounding buildings. 
2.  Commons: An open space, predominantly softscaped, and enclosed on at least two sides by attached or detached single-family dwellings. 
3.  Plaza: A civic space, predominantly hardscaped, and enclosed on at least two sides by building facades. Plazas may be publicly or privately owned but, in either case, are designed and maintained for public use. 
4.  Square: A common open space that serves as the focal point for a traditional neighborhood. It is typically surrounded by commercial, institutional or mixed-uses. 
8.3.4.  Master plan submittal. In addition to the requirements of § 8.1.2, master plan submittal, applications shall also include: 
1.  A pattern book representing the site design and architectural patterns of typical residential and nonresidential buildings. Design patterns may be conveyed with illustrations of typical proposed elevations including building heights, widths and facade treatments; 
2.  The location of sidewalks, trails, passages and other pedestrian and bicycle circulation elements; and 
3.  A utilities plan showing underground and aboveground lines and structures for sanitary sewers, electricity, gas telecommunications, etc. 
8.3.5.  Ownership and maintenance of open spaces. See § 5.18. 
8.3.6.  Permitted uses and arrangements. A planned neighborhood should consist of a mix of residential areas, one or more neighborhood center(s), and common open space(s). 
1.  Open space. At least ten percent of the gross acreage must be open space. At least 25 percent of the open space shall be common open space or dedicated for public use. All medium- and high-density residential blocks shall be within 1,400 ft. from a common open space or park. 
2.  Residential areas. A mix of the following land uses may be located with flexibility throughout the residential portions of the site. Higher density residential uses should be located nearest a neighborhood center. For infill development, the mix of residential uses may be satisfied by existing residential uses adjacent to the development. 
a.  Residential uses. Single-family detached dwellings, duplexes and row houses; townhouses; multifamily dwellings; independent and assisted living, group care homes, and similar residential care facilities; and accessory buildings (including accessory dwellings). 
b.  Open space uses. The following are permitted: neighborhood parks; commons; playgrounds; and stormwater retention/detention facilities (where incorporated into one of the above). 
3.  Neighborhood centers. A planned neighborhood will include a neighborhood center composed of a mix of the following uses. The development should be laid out such that all residential blocks are within 2,800 ft., measured along pedestrian routes, from a neighborhood center. 
a.  Commercial uses. Individual businesses should generally not exceed 6,000 sf. In addition, the following uses are permitted and encouraged: 
1)  Food services, including, but not limited to, neighborhood grocery stores; butchers and bakeries; restaurants; coffee shops; neighborhood bars. 
2)  Retail uses, including, but not limited to, florists; nurseries; hardware stores; book stores; studios and shops of artists; clothing and home décor stores. 
3)  Services, including, but not limited to, day care centers; music, dance or exercise studios; business and professional offices; barber; hair salon; dry cleaning. 
4)  Bed and breakfasts and other small lodging uses. 
b.  Residential uses. The following are permitted: single-family detached dwellings, duplexes, townhouses and row houses; multifamily dwellings, including independent and assisted living facilities and group living quarters; and upper-story dwellings. 
c.  Civic or institutional uses. The following are permitted: municipal offices, fire stations, libraries, museums, and post offices; places of assembly; and schools. 
d.  Open space uses. The following are permitted: squares; plazas; pocket parks; playgrounds; stormwater retention/detention facilities (where incorporated into one of the above). 
8.3.7.  Density, height and design standards. P-2 developments shall comply with table 8-3 and: 
1.  One accessory dwelling per single-family lot shall be permitted in addition to the permitted densities, provided in table 8-3. 
2.  Nonresidential GFA. The total ground floor area of nonresidential uses, including off-street parking areas, shall not exceed 25 percent of the development, except where the planned Neighborhood is oriented around and integrated with, through the interconnection of vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian ways, adjacent residential development. 
3.  Lot and block standards. 
a.  Blocks shall be 400-800 ft. long. Blocks longer than 600 ft. shall have a permanent pedestrian passage across the depth of the block. The passage shall be located not more than 300 ft. from the nearest cross street and shall be, provided in an easement not less than 12 ft. in width. The walkway shall be no less than eight ft. in width. 
b.  Residential lot sizes should be varied to allow for diverse housing types. 
c.  Lots less than 60 ft. in width shall be rear-accessed. 
4.  Building frontage standards. Setbacks shall be consistent along a block frontage and as follows: 
a.  For single-family detached dwellings, unenclosed porches may extend no closer than eight ft. to the back of [the] sidewalk. 
b.  For any dwellings located closer than ten ft. to the back of sidewalk, the first floor level shall be at least two ft. above or at least three ft. below sidewalk level. 
c.  Nonresidential buildings are not required to be set back from front lot lines, but shall abut directly on a public sidewalk or be set back at the edge of a plaza. Civic or institutional buildings may also be set back at the edges of squares, lawns or similar frontages. 
5.  Side and rear building spacing, except as required in table 8-3, side and rear building spacing shall be proposed in the master plan and in accordance with the city building code. Accessory structures shall be set back from side and rear lot lines as required in § 5.9. 
Table 8-3. Density, Height and Dimensional Standards, P-2 District Residential Areas Uses Single-family detached and duplex dwellings Single-family attached dwellings Multifamily dwellings Max. Density per gross acre 6 DU/acre 8 DU/acre 15 DU/acre Front Yard Setback (measured to back of sidewalk) 12 ft. min. 25 ft. max 12 ft. min. 18 ft. max. 12 ft. min. 18 ft. max. Min. Side Building Spacing ten ft. from any other dwelling ten ft. from single-family detached and duplex dwellings 20 ft. from single-family detached and duplex dwellings Min. Rear Building Spacing 20 ft. from any other principal building Max. Building Height 3 stories of 45 ft. 3 stories or 45 ft. 4 stories or 65 ft. Neighborhood Centers Uses Single-family attached dwellings Multifamily dwellings Nonresidential and Mixed-uses Max. Density per gross acre 10 DU/acre 20 DU/acre na Front Yard Setback (measured to back of sidewalk) 0 ft. min. and 18 ft. max.; see also § 8.3.7.4 Min. Side Building Spacing 10 ft. from single-family detached and duplex dwellings 20 ft. from single-family detached and duplex dwellings Min. Rear Building Spacing 20 ft. from any other principal building Max. Building Height 3 stories or 45 ft. 4 stories or 65 ft. 4 stories or 65 ft.  
8.3.8.  Circulation standards. The circulation system shall support multi-modal transportation; interconnect residential areas, neighborhood center(s), and open spaces; and shall be connected to existing and proposed external development. The circulation system shall provide adequate traffic capacity, provide access from streets of lesser classification, and promote safe and efficient mobility. 
1.  Pedestrian circulation. Where feasible, any existing pedestrian routes through the site shall be preserved and enhanced. Sidewalks shall be, provided as follows: 
a.  Public sidewalks shall be, provided on both sides of any street within a neighborhood center or medium- or high-density residential area and only on one side of any street within low-density residential areas in accordance with the following: 
1)  Neighborhood centers: Sidewalks shall be at least ten ft. wide with a clear pedestrian zone of at least six ft. in width 
2)  Medium and high density residential areas (four or more DU/acre): Sidewalks shall be at least five ft. wide and buffered from the street by a planting strip at least four ft. wide 
3)  Low density residential areas (less than four DU/acre): Sidewalks shall be at least four ft. wide and buffered from the street by a planting strip or swale at least six ft. wide 
b.  In neighborhood centers, well-lit walkways of at least five ft. in width shall connect building entrances to public sidewalks and to associated parking areas. 
c.  Sidewalks shall comply with the applicable requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
d.  Crosswalks shall be well-lit and clearly marked. 
2.  Vehicular circulation shall be designed to minimize conflicts with pedestrians and bicycles. Traffic calming features such as on-street parking, narrow travel lanes, horizontal curves, curb extensions, roundabouts, and medians may be used to encourage slow traffic speeds. 
3.  The development plan should maintain the existing street grid, where present, and restore any disrupted street grid where feasible. In addition: 
a.  Corner curb radii should be kept to the minimum practicable, given the size of vehicles expected to use the particular intersection and the intended rate of speed at which turns will be taken. 
b.  All streets shall terminate at other streets or at public land, with the following, exceptions: 
1)  Local streets may terminate in stub streets; 
2)  Local streets may terminate at a connection to the pedestrian and bicycle path network. 
3)  Where circumstances prevent the local street from terminating at another street or public land and the, exceptions under items 1) and 2) above are not practical, the local street may terminate in a cul-de-sac or "close" in accordance with the standards contained in the subdivision regulations. 
8.3.9.  Parking standards. Parking areas for shared or community use should be encouraged. In addition: 
1.  In multifamily and nonresidential areas, parking lots shall be located at the rear or side of buildings. 
2.  Off-street parking shall be accessed from an alley or shared driveway, except that single-family dwellings with lots wider than 60 ft. may have individual driveways. 
3.  Parking lots and parking garages should be separated from intersections by a building containing a use other than parking. 
4.  On-street parking, if created as a part of the development, may apply toward minimum parking requirements. 
5.  Parking for residential uses shall be, provided on-site. 
6.  Paving shall be as normally required by the city, except as follows: 
a.  Ribbon driveways may be used for single-family detached dwellings, duplexes, and row houses to reduce impervious surfaces. 
b.  To reduce impervious surfaces, interlocking pavers, grid pavers, or other pervious paving systems may be required for remote parking lots and parking areas for periodic uses. 
8.3.10.  Outdoor lighting. Street lighting shall be, provided along all streets. Generally, a larger number of smaller lights-as opposed to fewer, high-intensity lights-should be used. Streetlights shall be installed on both sides of the street at intervals of no greater than 80 ft. 
8.3.11.  Architectural standards. A variety of architectural features and building materials is encouraged to give each building or group of buildings a distinct character. 
1.  The architectural features, materials, and the articulation of a facade shall be continued on all sides visible from a public street or common area. 
2.  Principal buildings and their main entrances shall face a public street; except, however, that up to five percent of the total number of single-family dwelling units may front directly on a commons. 
3.  Porches, stoops or other architectural elements should define the front entrance to residences. 
4.  For commercial buildings, at least 50 percent of the street level facade shall be window or door openings. 
5.  Buildings on opposite sides of the same street should be similar in scale and setback. 
8.3.12.  Landscaping and screening standards. 
1.  Street trees. A minimum of one canopy street tree per 40 ft. of street frontage shall be, provided and evenly spaced. Street trees shall be located in a continuous planting strip, or in tree wells, adjacent to the curb. In the case of existing overhead utility lines, understory street trees may be substituted. 
2.  Screening shall be, provided as required in § 11.3. 
8.3.13.  Stormwater management. The design and development of the planned neighborhood should minimize off-site stormwater runoff, promote on-site filtration, and minimize the discharge of pollutants to ground and surface water. Natural topography and existing land cover should be protected/maintained to the maximum extent practicable. Planned neighborhood developments shall be subject to the following, in addition to any other applicable regulations: 
1.  Untreated, direct stormwater discharges to wetlands or surface waters are not allowed. 
2.  Post-development peak discharge rates should not exceed predevelopment peak rates. 
3.  Erosion and sediment controls must be implemented to remove 80 percent of the average annual load of total suspended solids. 
4.  Redevelopment stormwater management systems should improve existing conditions and meet standards to the extent practicable. 
5.  All treatment systems or BMPs must have operation and maintenance plans to ensure that systems function as designed. 
8.3.14.  Utilities. Overhead utilities shall only be permitted in easements or alley rights-of-way at the rear of lots. Overhead utilities are permitted to cross streets as necessary to comply with this requirement. Otherwise, utilities shall be located underground. 
Sec. 8.4. - Planned Industrial Development District. 
8.4.1.  Intent. The PID district is designed to facilitate the development of industrial and compatible nonresidential uses within integrally planned, multi-tenant industrial sites. The PID district provides flexibility from normally required Manufacturing district regulations to encourage creative and efficient site planning; to encourage shared and cross access within industrial developments; and to promote the development of stable, high-quality employment centers. Furthermore, provisions for common open spaces and on-site pedestrian circulation are encouraged. 
8.4.2.  Site requirements. Each PID district shall contain a minimum of 15 acres and a minimum frontage of 200 ft. on a public street. 
8.4.3.  Master plan submittal. The master plan shall be prepared in accordance with § 8.1 and shall include the information listed in appendix 2. 
8.4.4.  Ownership and maintenance of open spaces. See § 5.18. 
8.4.5.  Permitted uses. All those uses permitted by right, upon special, exception and as conditional uses in the M-1 and M-2 districts in table 7-1 may be permitted subject to approval of the master plan, including any conditions attached thereto. Additional nonresidential uses, including, but not limited to, dining, meeting facilities and personal service establishments, may be approved as a part of the master plan, provided they are designed and arranged exclusively for the use of businesses within the PID, their employees and visitors. 
8.4.6.  Development criteria. 
1.  Building setbacks shall only be required as follows: 
a.  No front setback shall be required along the developed side of internal streets when a planting strip at the back of curb and a sidewalk, each five ft. in width, are, provided. Otherwise, the minimum front setback shall be 75 ft. 
b.  No side or rear yards are required, except: 
1)  Buildings shall be separated in accordance with city building and fire codes. 
2)  Buffers shall be, provided where normally required by § 11.1. Any uses involving the manufacturing, storage or use, in any manner, of explosives or volatile materials shall be set back from internal and external property lines as required by the commission upon a recommendation from the fire marshal. 
c.  Any vehicular use area located forward of the front building line shall be separated from any public or internal streets by frontage landscaping as normally required by § 11.2.3. 
2.  Building heights. The maximum building height shall be five stories or 75 ft., whichever is less. However, all buildings located within 200 ft. of the nearest boundary line of an R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-5 district shall not exceed three stories or 45 ft. in height, whichever is less. 
3.  Open space. At least 20 percent of the PID acreage shall be, provided as open space and improved for the recreational use of PID tenants, employees and their visitors. Required buffers or other required landscaping shall not be counted toward this requirement. 
4.  Internal streets shall comply with the design requirements of the subdivision regulations and any applicable city specifications. Internal streets may be dedicated to the city or privately maintained. 
5.  Parking, loading and access. 
a.  Off-street parking shall be, provided consistent with the requirements of article 9. Parking may be, provided on individual sites, in common areas, and as on-street parking on internal streets. 
b.  Abutting sites should use shared and/or cross access. Parking and loading areas should be located to the side or rear of buildings. 
6.  Design standards. The master plan shall include design standards consistent with the following: 
a.  All-metal facades are discouraged. One or more masonry materials (i.e., concrete, concrete block, stucco/EIFS, brick, and stone) should be used on all building elevations visible from public and internal streets. 
b.  Building entrances, if not fronting on public or internal streets, should be identifiable from such streets. 
c.  Attached signage is recommended. The master plan shall establish specific height and placement standards on any freestanding signage. 
d.  The master plan shall provide for landscaping, buffers and screening as normally required in article 11, except: 
1)  Landscaping along the perimeter of vehicular use areas shall not be required, except along street frontages. 
2)  Buffers shall not be required between uses internal to the PID. 
7.  Noise standards. PID developments shall comply with the noise standards in § 5.19. 
ARTICLE 9. - SUPPLEMENTARY USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 9.1. - Automobile wrecking, salvage and junk yards. 
9.1.1.  No operation shall be located nearer than 300 ft. from any established residential district. 
9.1.2.  All outdoor storage of salvage and wrecking operations shall be conducted within an enclosed solid fence or wall as required by § 11.3, screening. 
9.1.3.  The storage of salvaged or junk materials shall not exceed six ft. in height from grade level. 
Sec. 9.2. - Cemetery. 
9.2.1.  All cemeteries hereafter established shall have direct access to major streets with ingress and egress so designed to minimize traffic congestion. 
9.2.2.  Any new cemetery shall be located on a site containing not less than ten acres. Structures shall be set back as required in the applicable district. All grass or burial lots shall be set back no less than 25 ft. from any lot line. 
Sec. 9.3. - Home occupation. 
9.3.1.  A home occupation shall be limited to the gainful occupation or profession conducted by members of the family residing entirely within the dwelling unit. 
9.3.2.  No internal or external alterations shall be made which are not customary to dwellings. In any dwelling unit, all home occupations, collectively, shall not occupy more than 25 percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling nor exceed 500 sf., whichever is more restrictive. 
9.3.3.  The entrance to the space devoted to the home occupation shall be from within the dwelling. 
9.3.4.  No display shall be permitted or goods or services that are visible from the outside of the structure, except for one non-illuminated sign having an area of not more than two sf., which may be placed flat on a door, wall or window only. 
9.3.5.  Home occupations shall be limited to goods and services, provided to individuals or groups not exceeding, at any given time, five in number. 
Sec. 9.4. - Drive-in theater. 
9.4.1.  The site must have direct access to a major street with ingress and egress separated and marked to minimize traffic congestion. 
9.4.2.  The theater screen shall not be visible from any public street within 1,500 ft. 
9.4.3.  Automobile parking in the viewing area shall be effectively screened on all sides consistent with the standards in § 11.3, screening. 
9.4.4.  All accessory structures shall comply with the yard setbacks required for principal structures in the applicable district. 
9.4.5.  Off-street admission waiting space for patrons shall be equal to 20 percent of the capacity of the theater. The sale of refreshments and play area shall be limited to the use of patrons of the theater. 
9.4.6.  No central loudspeaker system is permitted. 
9.4.7.  All parking and access ways shall be adequately lighted; however, all lighting shall be shielded to prevent glare or reflection onto a public street or adjoining property. 
Sec. 9.5. - Service stations. 
9.5.1.  Buildings shall be set back no less than 50 ft. from all street lines, except where pump islands and vehicular areas are located to the side and/or rear of the building, in which cases the normal district setbacks shall apply. 
9.5.2.  Gasoline pumping islands shall not be located closer than 30 ft. to any street line; however, when pump islands are constructed perpendicular to the street, the pump island shall be located no less than 45 ft. from the street line. 
9.5.3.  Attached and detached canopies shall not extend closer than 15 ft. from the street line. 
Sec. 9.6. - Utility stations and substations. 
9.6.1.  All electrical power substations shall be enclosed within a fence or wall or be so designed to be inaccessible to unauthorized persons. Electrical power substations in all zones, except manufacturing districts shall be enclosed by a planting screen with a minimum height of six ft. and otherwise in accordance with § 11.3, screening. 
9.6.2.  Required setbacks for buildings shall apply to power substations and shall be measured from the fencing enclosure, except that setbacks along property lines adjacent to streets and alleys shall not be less than 15 ft. regardless of other setback requirements, and that such enclosures shall not be constructed closer than ten ft. to adjoining properties. 
9.6.3.  Utility lines shall approach the substation from the side opposite the main traffic artery where possible. Distribution lines may be run underground from any orientation. 
9.6.4.  Public or privately owned utility stations other than electrical power substations shall be enclosed by a planting screen of such height, depth and density to screen the structure from view. Fencing shall be required where such structures present hazards to animals or people. Structures extending above the ground in excess of two ft. shall comply with the same regulations as required for power substations. 
9.6.5.  Should the public utility company not be able to comply with the above regulations, it may submit a proposed site plan of the desired installation to the commission for approval and recommendations to the council. The site plan shall include those materials listed in appendix 1, as applicable. 
Sec. 9.7. - Conservation subdivision. 
9.7.1.  Intent. 
1.  To provide flexibility to achieve the most effective development on lands constrained by natural hazards or environmental regulations, which may limit the amount or type of development; 
2.  To enhance quality of life by promoting the creation of accessible green space; 
3.  To protect sensitive, environmental land features to protect the health and safety of residents and neighboring property owners; 
4.  To reduce erosion, sedimentation, land disturbance, and removal of vegetation; 
5.  To promote construction of convenient walking trails, bike paths, and greenways within new developments that are connected to adjacent neighborhoods and activity centers to increase accessibility for pedestrians and bicyclists; and 
6.  To reduce perceived density by providing access to and views of open space. 
9.7.2.  Applicability. The conservation subdivision/development option is permitted for detached single-family and duplex development on-sites of at least 15 acres and otherwise in accordance with table 6-1. The applicant shall comply with all other provisions of this ordinance and all other applicable regulations, except those incompatible with the provisions herein. 
9.7.3.  Ownership of development site. If held in multiple ownership, the site shall be developed according to a single plan with common authority and common maintenance responsibility as approved by the city attorney. 
9.7.4.  Density determination. The maximum number of lots shall be determined by dividing the total area of the proposed subdivision by the most restrictive of the following: minimum lot size of the applicable district or by regulations as determined by city and/or county health department standards for septic tanks, or by any regulations applicable to the site that may limit its development density. In making this calculation, the following shall not be included in the total area of the parcel: 
1.  Bodies of open water over 5,000 sf. of contiguous area; and 
2.  Wetlands, as defined by the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act. 
9.7.5.  Application requirements. 
1.  Site analysis map. Concurrent with the submission of a preliminary plat or site plan, the applicant shall prepare and submit a site analysis map. The purpose of the site analysis map is to ensure that important site features have been adequately identified prior to the creation of the site design, and that the proposed open space will meet the requirements herein. The plan shall include the following: 
a.  Property boundaries; 
b.  All streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands, flood hazard boundaries, and other hydrologic features; 
c.  All boundaries of applicable regulated buffer areas, easements, and ROWs; 
d.  Topography at five ft. or smaller intervals; 
e.  All primary and secondary conservation areas labeled by type, as described in § 9.7.6; 
f.  General vegetation characteristics; 
g.  General soil types; 
h.  Planned location of protected open space; 
i.  Existing roads and structures; and 
j.  Potential connections with existing greenspace and trails. 
2.  Conservation subdivision plan. The developer shall prepare a conservation subdivision plan, which yields no more lots than identified under § 9.7.4. The conservation subdivision plan may include lots that do not meet the size and setback requirements of the applicable district. The conservation subdivision plan shall identify all open spaces to be protected and include an open space management plan pursuant to § 9.7.6. The conservation subdivision plan shall be submitted, in full, prior to the issuance of a grading permit. 
3.  Instrument of permanent protection. An instrument of permanent protection, such as a conservation easement or permanent restrictive covenant and as described in § 9.7.7, shall be placed on the open space at the time of issuance of a grading permit. 
4.  Other requirements. The applicant shall adhere to all other applicable requirements of the applicable district and the subdivision regulations. 
9.7.6.  Open space management plan. For the purposes of conservation subdivisions, [the term] "open space" is defined as the portion of the conservation subdivision that has been set aside for permanent protection. Activities within the open space are restricted in perpetuity through the use of a legal instrument approved by the city attorney. Such open spaces shall be in accordance with the following: 
1.  The minimum restricted open space shall comprise at least 25 percent of the gross tract area. 
2.  The following are considered primary conservation areas and are required to be included within the open space, unless the applicant demonstrates that this provision would constitute an unusual hardship and be counter to the purposes of the conservation subdivision: 
a.  The 100-year floodplain; 
b.  Riparian zones of at least 75 ft. [in] width along all perennial and intermittent streams; 
c.  Slopes above 25 percent of at least 10,000 sf. contiguous area; 
d.  Wetlands, as defined by the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; 
e.  Existing trails that connect the site to neighboring areas; and 
f.  Archaeological sites, cemeteries and burial grounds. 
3.  The following are considered secondary conservation areas and should be included within the open space to the maximum extent feasible: 
a.  Important historic sites; 
b.  Existing healthy, native forests of at least one acre [of] contiguous area; 
c.  Individual existing healthy trees greater than eight inches caliper; and 
d.  Other significant natural features and scenic viewsheds, particularly those that can be seen from public roads. 
4.  Utility ROWs and small areas of impervious surface may be included within the protected open space but cannot be counted towards the 25 percent minimum area requirement (exception: historic structures and existing trails may be counted). Large areas of impervious surface shall be excluded from the open space. 
5.  At least 33 percent of the open space shall be suitable for passive recreational use. 
6.  At least 75 percent of the open space shall be in a contiguous tract, which may be divided by a local street whose area shall be excluded from the open space. The open space shall adjoin any neighboring areas of open space, other protected areas, and non-protected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected open space. 
7.  The open space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots and/or buildings within the site. Non-abutting lots shall be, provided with safe, convenient access to the open space. 
8.  Open spaces may contain the following: 
a.  Conservation of natural, archeological or historical resources; 
b.  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas; 
c.  Walking or bicycle trails constructed of porous paving materials; 
d.  Passive recreation areas, such as open fields; 
e.  Active recreation areas, provided that they are limited to no more than ten percent of the total open space and are not located within primary conservation areas. Active recreation areas may include impervious surfaces. Active recreation areas in excess of this limit must be located outside of the protected open space. 
f.  Landscaped stormwater management facilities, community and individual wastewater disposal systems located on soils particularly suited to such uses. Such facilities shall be located outside of primary conservation areas; 
g.  Easements for drainage, access, and underground utility lines; 
h.  Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this section. 
9.  Open spaces may not contain the following: 
a.  Golf courses; 
b.  Roads, parking lots and similar impervious surfaces, except as specifically authorized in the previous subsections; 
c.  Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted best management practices; 
d.  Impoundments; and 
e.  Other activities as determined by the applicant and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent protection. 
10.  Ownership and maintenance of open space. See § 5.18. 
9.7.7.  Legal instrument for protection of open space. The open space shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument recorded with the deed. The instrument for permanent protection shall include clear restrictions on use of the open space, including all restrictions contained in this section, and any restrictions the applicant chooses to place on the open space. The instrument shall be one of the following: 
1.  A permanent conservation easement in favor of either: 
a.  A land trust or similar conservation-oriented nonprofit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence, and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for retransfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; or 
b.  A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this section, and if the entity accepting the easement is not the city, then a third right of enforcement favoring the city shall be included in the easement. 
2.  A permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity. 
3.  An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection, as approved by the city attorney. 
9.7.8.  Tax assessment of open space. Once a legal instrument for permanent protection has been placed upon the open space, the county tax assessor shall be requested to reassess the open space at a lower value to reflect its more limited use. 
Sec. 9.8. - Bed and breakfasts. 
9.8.1.  Bed and breakfasts shall only be permitted in single-family detached dwellings, shall only be operated by the owner and resident of the dwelling, and shall comply with the following provisions: 
9.8.2.  Use regulations. 
1.  All guest rooms shall be located within the principal structure. 
2.  Bed and breakfasts located in residential districts shall be limited to four guest rooms and shall not employ any individuals not residing on the premises. 
3.  Individual guest rooms shall contain no cooking facilities, and no food preparation or cooking shall be allowed. 
9.8.3.  Parking. For each and every approved guest room, there shall be, provided one parking space, in addition to the spaces required for the residence. Such additional required parking spaces shall be screened from adjacent properties and arranged so that each space has direct access to a driveway. No parking shall be permitted forward of the front building line, except upon a driveway. Recreational vehicle parking shall be prohibited. 
Sec. 9.9. - Communication towers. 
9.9.1.  Purpose. The purpose of these guidelines is to establish minimum considerations and criteria for the review of communication towers, hereafter referred to as towers. It is the commission's express intent that the construction of new towers be an option of last resort. To the extent feasible, location of antennas on existing towers, building rooftops, and other suitable structures should first be sought. These guidelines are designed to ensure the compatibility of towers with and avoid adverse impacts to nearby properties and discourage the proliferation of towers throughout the city. 
9.9.2.  Applicability. All communication towers are subject to these guidelines, except the following: 
1.  Amateur radio, receive and transmit, antennas. This section shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is 100 ft. or less in height and is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator from the operator's residence, or used exclusively and incidentally for the purposes to support a commercial business. 
2.  Existing towers and antennas. If an additional antenna is collocated on an existing tower after the adoption of this ordinance, then security fencing and landscaping requirements are applicable as part of the permitting process, except that operating existing towers shall not be subject to this provision if there is no increase in the height of the tower or of the antenna on such towers up to the towers' present structural capability. 
3.  Residential satellite dish less than four ft. in diameter. 
9.9.3.  Definitions. 
1.  Alternative-tower structure: Clock towers, bell towers, church steeples, light/power poles, electric transmission towers, and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. 
2.  Communication tower: Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative communication tower structures, and the like. A tower compound is a tower(s) and other facilities. 
3.  Antenna: An electromagnetic device, which conducts radio signals, through an attached cable or waveguide, to or from a radio transmitter or receiver. Typically this includes whips, panels and parabolic dishes. An electromagnetic device includes any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, or television. 
4.  Antenna support structure: Any structure on which radio antennas and cabling can be attached. Typically this includes steel towers with guy-wires (guy towers), wooden, steel or concrete single poles (monopoles); self-supporting steel towers with three or four leg, (towers); rooftops of existing buildings or structures such as elevated water storage tanks. 
5.  Cellular site: A parcel of land or building (leased or purchased) on which is located one or more transmitter/receiver stations for wireless communication systems, including accessory facilities for equipment storage and operations. In cases involving vacant land, or low-lying existing structures, a support structure for transmitter/receiver antennas are usually required. 
6.  Height: Vertical distance from nominal ground elevation at base of tower to top of antenna or tower, whichever is higher. 
7.  Mini-cellular site: A parcel of land or building (leased or purchased) on which is located one or more transmitter/receiver stations for wireless communication systems, such that towers and/or antennas do not exceed 20 ft. in height above the existing structure, and whips, panels, and parabolic dishes do not exceed 100 sf. A mini-cellular site accommodates the use of existing structures such as buildings, billboards and water towers. 
9.9.4.  Objectives. The proposed locations and designs of all communications towers shall duly consider the following public health, safety, and general welfare objectives: 
1.  Structural safety. The proposed tower will comply with wind loading and other structural standards contained in the city building code or other applicable standards as adopted by the city; so as not to endanger the health and safety of residents, employees, or travelers in the event of structural failure of the tower due to extreme weather conditions or other acts of God. 
2.  View protection. The proposed tower facility will be designed to minimize adverse visual impacts to surrounding properties and the public right-of-way, given the topography of the proposed site and surrounding area. 
3.  Land use compatibility. The proposed tower facility will be compatible with the surrounding land uses, given the character of use and development of the location. 
4.  Design harmony. The proposed tower facility will be designed in harmony with the natural setting and the surrounding development pattern as well as to the highest industry standards 
5.  Existing communication services. The proposed tower facility will comply with FCC and other applicable agency standards so as not to interfere with existing communications services to the area. 
6.  Health effects. The proposed tower will comply with all applicable federal, state and county health standards so as not to cause detrimental health effects to persons in the surrounding area. 
9.9.5.  Development criteria. The zoning official shall review all communications towers requesting permits for compliance with the applicable criteria listed below. Any of these criteria may be waived or adjusted by the commission if the circumstances of a particular case so warrant. In any event, these criteria are considered the minimum necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare; the commission may impose higher standards if it deems necessary to further the objectives of these guidelines. 
1.  Collocation. No new tower shall be established if space is structurally, technically and economically available on an existing tower, which would serve the area that the new tower would serve. Documentation that reasonable efforts have been made to achieve collocation shall be submitted in accordance with § 9.9.6.4, Towers, shall be designed to maximize share use to the extent possible, given the structural and technical limitations of the type of tower proposed. If feasible, each tower shall, at a minimum, be designed to accommodate a minimum of two shared users. 
2.  Removal of obsolete towers. Any tower that is no longer in use for its original communications purpose shall be removed at the owner's expense. The owner shall provide the Scottsboro Planning Department with a copy of the notice to the FCC of intent to cease operations and shall be given 90 days from the date of ceasing operations to remove the obsolete tower and accessory structures. In the case of multiple operators sharing use of single tower, this provision shall not become effective until all users cease operation. In the event an abandoned or unused tower and related facilities are not removed within 12 months of the cessation of operation at a site, the tower and related facilities may be removed by the city and the costs of removal assessed against the property. 
3.  Setbacks. Towers shall be setback from all property lines a distance equal to its height. Guy wires and accessory buildings and facilities shall meet the minimum setback requirements of the zoning district. As an alternative to setback requirement for towers located in nonresidential zoning districts, a statement from a registered engineer may be, provided certifying that, in the event of structural failure, the tower would fall within the boundaries of the property. In all cases, towers shall be set back a distance equal to the height of the tower from a public right-of-way. 
4.  Appearance. 
a.  Towers shall maintain a galvanized steel, concrete finish or similar neutral finish so as to reduce the visibility or camouflage the structure, unless other standards are required by the FAA. 
b.  The design of towers shall be of a type that has the least visual impact on the surrounding area. 
c.  The design of a tower compound shall, to the extent possible, maximize use of building materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that effectively blend the tower facilities with the surrounding natural setting and built environment. These guidelines are also required of roof-mounted towers, antennas, and related equipment collocating on existing towers. 
d.  Where communications towers are deemed appropriate for a given location, the type of tower shall be restricted to monopoles in or within 1,000 ft. of residential areas and areas of special aesthetic concerns such as commercial revitalization areas, historic districts and scenic corridors. 
e.  No signs or other forms of advertising is permitted on an antenna or tower unless for safety/security precautions. 
5.  Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted unless required by the FAA or other authority for safety purposes. Where required, the commission shall review the available lighting alternatives and approve that design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. "Dual lighting" (red at night/strobe during day) shall be preferred unless restricted by the FAA. Security lighting may be permitted in accordance with § 9.9.5.9, Security devices, below. 
6.  Landscaping. 
a.  A landscaped buffer shall effectively screen the view of the tower compound from adjacent public ways and residential properties. 
b.  The standard buffer shall consist of a minimum eight-foot-wide landscaped strip outside the perimeter security fencing. The buffer strip shall be planted with an attractive combination of trees, shrubs, vines, and/or groundcovers that can achieve the full height of the fence at maturity and enhances the outward appearance of the security fence. For sites within 1,000 ft. of a residence, additional buffering may be imposed to include: a decay resistant, solid wood fence, earth berms and brick or masonry walls in addition to the security fencing. All fencing and landscaping shall be maintained by the lessor/owner. The commission shall approve buffer plan and type of plants proposed. 
c.  In isolated nonresidential areas, alternative landscaping methods may be accepted, such as the use of earth tone colored security fencing in combination with evergreen shrubs, trees, and/or other plantings. 
d.  In certain locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, such as remote, agricultural or rural locations or heavy industrial areas, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived. 
e.  Existing mature tree growth and natural landforms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots, preservation of substantial natural growth around the property perimeter may be a sufficient buffer. 
f.  Cellular facilities utilizing underground vaults in lieu of aboveground switching gear buildings shall be exempted from any buffer requirements. 
7.  Roof mounted towers and antennas. 
a.  Rooftop mounted towers and antennas may be located on any nonresidential building. 
b.  Such tower or antenna shall be setback from any residential zoning district a minimum distance equal to two times the full height of the tower and antenna, but in no event less than 100 ft. 
c.  The building on which such tower or antenna is placed shall be at least 50 ft. high and the tower or antenna will add no more than 20 ft. total to the height of the building. 
d.  Antennas shall not be mounted to extend horizontally beyond the face of the building. 
8.  Principal, accessory and joint uses. 
a.  Accessory structures used in direct support of a tower shall be allowed but not for offices, vehicle storage or other outdoor storage. Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a tower facility shall not be stored or parked on the site of the tower, unless repairs to the tower are being made. 
b.  Towers may be located on-sites containing another principal use in the same buildable area. In determining requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may be located on leased parcels within a lot. 
    As long as all siting, setback, separation and general requirements of this ordinance are met, towers may occupy a parcel meeting the minimum lot size requirements for the zoning applicable district. 
    The minimum distance between a tower and the principal use located on the same lot shall be, for a monopole or lattice tower the greater of 20 percent of the tower height or 25 ft., and for a guy tower, the greater of 100 percent or 25 ft. 
c.  Joint use of a site is prohibited when a proposed or existing principal use includes the storage, distribution or sale of volatile, flammable, explosive or hazardous materials such as propane, gasoline, natural gas and dangerous chemicals. 
d.  Towers constructed or antennas installed in accordance with this ordinance shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or structure. 
9.  Security devices. The facility shall be fully secured. A minimum eight-foot-high fence shall be installed around the perimeter of the compound. Security fencing shall require screening in accordance with § 9.9.5.4, above. Other security measures shall include locks and alarms. 
10.  Access. 
a.  Driveways and parking shall be, provided to ensure the operator's access to the facility for maintenance or emergency services. In some cases, parking/access may be from an adjoining alley, public street, or off-street parking area. 
b.  Equipment at a transmission facility shall be automated to the greatest extent possible to reduce traffic and congestion. Where the site abuts a collector and local street, access for maintenance vehicles shall be exclusively by means of the collector street, except in nonresidential areas, in which case access may be from the local street. 
9.9.6.  Application. Any application submitted for approval shall submit the following items, in addition to any other required items, to show compliance with these review guidelines: 
1.  Statement of impact on health, safety and welfare. A brief written statement shall address conformance with the health, safety and welfare objectives of these guidelines. 
2.  Site plan. A scaled site plan shall show the location and dimensions of all improvements, including setbacks, drives, parking, fencing, landscaping, existing land uses and zoning districts of the surrounding area, and other information necessary to access compliance with the development criteria of these guidelines. 
3.  Rendering. A rendering of the tower, accessory facilities, and compound shall show colors, materials, and treatment. If lighting or other FAA requirement for tower color is proposed, evidence of such requirement shall be submitted. 
4.  Justification for new tower. A proposal for a new tower shall be documented by the applicant stating the planned equipment for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing tower or other alternative structure within the proposed service area. The applicant shall submit a written affidavit showing what attempts have been made to share an existing tower or that no such tower exists. The affidavit shall include evidence from a licensed professional engineer or qualified industry expert supporting such claim. The evidence shall include one or more of the following: 
a.  That no existing towers or suitable alternative tower structures are located within the geographic antenna placement area to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
b.  That existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height or strength to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
c.  That the applicant's proposed antenna or existing towers and/or antennas would cause electromagnetic interference as a result of the installation of the proposed antenna. 
d.  That the costs or contractual provisions required by the tower owner to share an existing tower or structure are unreasonable. 
e.  That the applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable. 
5.  Certification of shared use design. A qualified professional engineer, registered in the State of Alabama, shall certify that the proposed tower's structural design can accommodate a minimum of two shared users, in accordance with § 9.9.5, Development criteria. 
6.  As built survey. A qualified professional engineer, registered in the State of Alabama, shall certify that the completed cellular site was built in accordance with the submitted site plan including the installation of any required buffer strip. 
Sec. 9.10. - Upper-story dwellings. 
9.10.1.  Upper-story dwellings in mixed-use buildings shall be located on a floor level above a use of another type. Emergency egress and fire separation shall comply with all requirements of the building and fire codes. 
9.10.2.  All upper-story dwellings, whether or not intended for occupancy by the owner of the use located below the dwelling, shall have an entrance separate from the associated use. 
9.10.3.  Multifamily dwellings in a mixed-use building. 
1.  No nonresidential use shall be located on the same floor in the same building with any multifamily dwelling units. 
2.  Multifamily dwelling units shall be accessible from a shared exterior entrance or one interior entrance commonly shared between the different uses housed in the upper floors of the building. 
3.  Dwelling units shall not be accessible directly from another unit or use within the building. 
Sec. 9.11. - Mini-warehouses. 
9.11.1.  No storage of volatile, toxic or explosive materials shall be permitted, either inside the structure(s) or on the premises. 
9.11.2.  Storage spaces shall not be used for commercial activities. However, this shall not include periodic auctions, which are held on the premises to dispose of items which have been abandoned and/or for which the lease time has expired. 
9.11.3.  Screen fencing shall be installed around the perimeter of the development meeting the requirements of § 11.3, screening. 
Sec. 9.12. - Day care facilities. 
9.12.1.  Application of regulations. The provisions of this section shall apply to day care facilities providing service for part of a 24-hour day for children under 16 years of age, for the aged, or for persons who are disabled, by persons giving care (excluding care, provided by relatives). Day care facilities shall include family day care homes, group day care homes, and day care centers. This section does not apply to baby-sitting or child day care service furnished in places of worship during religious services or related activities. 
9.12.2.  General provisions. 
1.  State regulation. All day care facilities shall comply with all applicable state regulations. 
2.  Inspections. The building official shall have the right to enter and inspect the premises for compliance purposes after advance notice to the property owner. 
3.  Hours of outside play shall be limited to between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and sunset, as defined by the National Weather Service, and an outdoor play area shall be, provided for child day care facilities and shall not be located in the front yard. 
4.  Sewage facilities. Day care facilities using, or proposing to use, an on-site sewage disposal system shall obtain a written approval from the county health department. 
5.  Fencing shall be, provided to restrict children from hazardous areas, such as open drainage ditches, wells, holes, and adjacent streets. Natural or physical barriers may be used in place of fencing so long as such barriers functionally restrict children from these areas. 
6.  Expansion to day care center. The care of more than 12 individuals at a time constitutes a day care center, which may require, in the case of expansion of a family day care home, to a district in which day care centers are permitted. When applying for rezoning, the applicant shall submit a plan showing any existing or proposed outdoor play areas, outdoor play equipment, fencing, access drives, adjacent streets, adjacent hazardous land uses, on-site hazardous areas (as previously defined), on-lot sewage disposal facilities, parking spaces, and the drop-off circulation pattern. 
7.  Application and permitting procedure. Any individual proposing a family day care home shall submit an application for a day care home permit to the building official. If the application demonstrates compliance with this section, the building official shall grant the permit. Group day care homes shall only be permitted as special, exception uses in accordance with § 13.6 and the provisions of § 9.12.3, below. 
9.12.3.  Family day care homes and group day care homes. Day care facilities, operated within a residence, are not subject to the requirements for home occupations but shall comply with the general provisions of § 9.12.2 and of this § 9.12.3. 
1.  Family day care homes shall: 
a.  Only be permitted in single-family detached dwellings. 
b.  Have a current state registration certificate (proof of registration renewal must be supplied to the city every two years). 
c.  Have no external signage. 
d.  Be limited to the care of no more than six children. 
e.  Not receive children for care before 7:00 a.m. nor continue care after 7:00 p.m. 
2.  Group day care homes shall be limited to no more than 12 individuals receiving care in accordance with applicable state regulations. 
9.12.4.  Day care centers. In addition to the other provisions of this section, day care centers shall comply with the following: 
1.  The facility shall have an approved and currently valid state license. Proof of state annual license renewal must be supplied to the city every year. 
2.  A fence with a minimum height of four ft. shall physically contain the children within the outdoor play area. Natural or physical barriers may be used in place of fencing so long as such barriers functionally contain children. 
3.  On corner lots, access shall only be from the street of lesser classification. 
4.  Play equipment shall be located at least ten ft. from all lot lines. 
5.  All pedestrian pathways shall be adequately lit for safety if utilized during non-daylight hours. Specific areas for lighting are entranceways, pedestrian access to the outdoor play areas, sidewalks, drop-off areas, and all parking lots. Such lighting shall not produce objectionable glare on adjacent properties. 
ARTICLE 10. - PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 10.1. - Off-street parking and loading terms. 
10.1.1.  The following off-street parking and loading terms, when used in this article, shall have the meanings defined in this section: 
1.  Employee. The maximum number of persons employed at the facility regardless of the time period during which this occurs or whether the persons are full-time employees. The major shift may be a particular day of the week or a lunch or dinner period in the case of a restaurant. 
2.  Gross leasable area (GLA). The total floor area for which the tenant pays rent and that is designed for the tenant's occupancy and exclusive use. GLA does not include public or common areas, such as utility rooms, stairwells and corridors. 
3.  Loading area. That area used to satisfy the requirements of this ordinance for truck loading and unloading. 
4.  Loading space. An off-street space or berth used for the unloading or loading of commercial vehicles. 
5.  Occupancy load. The maximum number of persons, which may be accommodated by the use as determined by its design or by fire code standards. 
6.  Parking aisle. That portion of the parking area consisting of lanes providing access to parking spaces. 
7.  Parking area. An improved area on a lot exclusively used or designed for use as a temporary storage area for motor vehicles, containing access driveways, parking aisles and parking spaces. 
8.  Parking space. That portion of the parking area set aside for the parking of one vehicle. 
9.  Stacking space. An off-street space for the temporary stacking of vehicles with an aisle intended to serve a drive-in teller window, take-out food window, dry cleaning/laundry pick-up or similar type activity station. 
Sec. 10.2. - Required off-street parking spaces. 
    In all zoning districts there shall be, provided, at the time any permitted use is established, enlarged or increased in capacity, off-street parking spaces in accordance with the requirements set forth in this article pursuant to table 10-1. For uses not specifically mentioned in the table, parking requirements shall be determined by the zoning official using the most analogous use in the table. Fractional off-street parking space requirements shall be counted as a whole space if the fraction is greater than one-half. 
    Off-street parking areas shall not be considered as loading or unloading areas. No off-street parking facility, in existence at the effective date of these regulations, shall be reduced to less than the amount required for the use involved. 
10.2.1.  Site plan review. All off-street parking areas with six or more parking spaces shall be subject to site plan review by the commission. 
10.2.2.  Off-street parking design requirements. 
1.  The minimum parking space dimensions shall be as shown in table 10-2 and figure 10.2.2. 
2.  In parking areas of 20 or more parking spaces, up to 20 percent of the spaces may be reserved for compact cars. Such spaces shall contain a minimum rectangular area of eight ft. in width and 16 ft. in length. These spaces shall be conspicuously marked for compact cars only. 
3.  Stacking space shall contain a minimum rectangular area of ten ft. in width and 20 ft. in length and be separate from parking aisles and spaces. 
4.  Handicapped parking spaces shall be, provided and designed in accordance with the applicable provisions of the city building code. 
5.  All off-street parking areas shall be so designed and be of such size that no vehicle is required to back into a public street for egress, except for lots devoted to single-family and duplex dwellings. However, backing into arterials shall be prohibited in all cases. 
6.  Parking areas for all developments shall be so designed that sanitation, emergency and other public service vehicles can adequately and safely serve such developments without the necessity of backing unreasonable distances or making other dangerous maneuvers. Fire lanes may be required by the fire code. 
7.  All permanent off-street parking areas shall be of a hard surface or in such a manner that no dust will result from continuous use. All parking areas shall be maintained in good condition, i.e., free of potholes, weeds, trash, refuse, etc. 
8.  Parking spaces, except those serving single-family and duplex dwellings, shall be clearly marked and meet all city specifications. 
9.  Drainage in parking areas shall direct stormwater back into the site from adjacent properties toward adequate drainage channels. Drainage plans shall be subject to approval by the city engineer. 
10.  The area between the street and an off-street parking lot shall have a curb, or similar barrier, as approved by the zoning official, separating the parking lot from the sidewalk to prevent the encroachment of vehicles onto the sidewalk. 
10.2.3.  Location of required parking. 
1.  All required parking spaces shall be located on the same lot as the use served by the parking, except as, provided below: 
a.  Required parking within planned residential developments may be, provided in common parking areas. 
b.  If the number of required parking spaces cannot reasonably be, provided on the same lot as the served use, remote parking may be permitted by a special, exception if within 500 ft. of the concerned lot. Such special, exception requires legal documentation that the applicant has the right to use such remote spaces. 
2.  No off-street parking shall extend beyond any lot line, unless approved by the city engineer for common parking areas with cross access between uses on abutting lots. 
10.2.4.  Joint and shared parking. Joint off-street parking facilities for two or more uses may be established so long as the required number of off-street parking spaces shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the individual uses computed separately. However, subject to approval by the commission, minimum parking requirements for a mixed-use development may be reduced by calculation of shared parking requirements using the shared parking demand information in table 10-3. 
10.2.5.  Parking prohibitions. 
1.  The use of off-street parking in any residential district for nonresidential purposes is prohibited. 
2.  The use of any required parking space for the storage of any motor vehicle for sale or for any purpose other than parking is prohibited. 
Table 10-1. Required Off-Street Parking Spaces by Use Agricultural Uses Farm 1 per 1.05 employees Farm Stand 1 per 250 sf. of retail floor area Farm Support Business 1 per 1.05 employees, plus 1 per company vehicle Stable 1 per 3 persons of occupancy load plus 1 per 1.05 employees Residential Uses Accessory Dwelling 1 per DU Boarding House 1 per BR Duplex 2 per DU Independent Living Facility 2 per 3 DUs plus 1 space per employee Manufactured Home 2 per Manufactured Home Multifamily Developments 1 per studio, efficiency or 1-BR unit; 1.75 per 2-BR unit; 2.0 per 3+ BR unit Single-family Dwelling, attached or detached 2 per DU Institutional Uses Assisted Living Facility 1 per 4 residents plus 1 per employee Club 1 per 100 sf. of non-storage and non-service floor area Community Center 1 per 300 sf. of GLA Country Club 1 per 3 persons of occupancy load Day Care Center 1 per employee, plus 1 stacking or parking space per 8 persons enrolled of occupancy load Group Care Home or Rehabilitation Facility 1 per 4 beds plus 1 per employee Hospital 1 per 2 patient beds plus 1 per emergency room bed plus 1 per employee Library 1 per 500 sf. of GLA Nursing Care Facility 1 per 4 beds plus 1 per employee Place of Assembly 1 per 3 seats in the main assembly space Public Facility 1 per 300 sf. of GLA School, Commercial 1 per 3 students plus 1 per employee School, Elementary or Junior High/Middle 1 per classroom, plus either 1 per employee or 1 per 3 seats in the main assembly space (whichever is greater) School, High 1 per 8 students of occupancy load, plus either 2 spaces per classroom or 1 per 3 seats in the main assembly space (whichever is greater) Commercial Uses Animal Hospital 1 per 300 sf. of GLA Appliance Store 1 per 400 sf. of GLA Art Gallery 1 per 350 sf. of GLA Automotive Sales 1 per 200 sf. of interior sales area plus 1 per 4,000 sf. of outdoor display area plus 1 stacking space per service bay Automotive Parts Store 1 per 400 sf. of GLA plus 1 per employee Automotive Rental Establishment 1 per 400 sf. of GLA plus 1 per rental vehicle Automotive Repair, Major and Minor 1 per employee plus 2 stacking spaces per service bay plus 1 per company vehicle Bank (no drive-thru) 1 per 250 sf. of GLA Bank (drive-thru only) 1 per 2 employees plus 3 stacking spaces per teller Bank (with drive-thru) 1 per 350 sf. GLA plus 3 stacking spaces per teller Barber or Beauty Shop 2.5 per chair Bed and Breakfast 1 per guest bedroom plus 2 spaces Bowling Alley 3.5 per bowling lane Call Center, Telemarketing Office 1 per 150 sf. of GLA or 1 per employee, whichever is greater Car Wash (full service or automated) 1 per employee plus 4 stacking spaces per bay Car Wash (self-service) 3 stacking spaces per approach lane plus 2 drying spaces per stall Clinic 6 per practitioner Commercial School 1 per 3 students of occupancy load plus 1 per employee Dry Cleaning Pick-Up 1 per 300 sf. of GLA Funeral Home 1 per 1 employee plus 1 per 3 seats of occupancy load plus 1 per company vehicle Furniture Store 1 per 600 sf. of GLA Gas Station/Convenience Store 1 per 300 sf. of GLA plus 1 stacking space per fuel island General Retail Business Under 50,000 sf.: 1 per 200 sf. of GLA; 50,000-99,999 sf.: 1 per 250 sf. of GLA; 100,000+ sf.: 1 per 300 sf. of GLA Home Improvement Center 1 per 400 sf. of GLA Hotel or Motel 1 per room plus 1 per employee Laundromat 1 per 2 washing machines Liquor Lounge (freestanding) 1 per 100 sf. of GLA Mini-Warehouse 5 spaces adjacent to leasing office (if any) Office, business or professional 1 per 250 sf. of GLA Movie Theater 1 per 3 seats Open Air Market 1 per 500 sf. of display area plus 1 per employee Outdoor Recreation Golf Course: 4 per hole Miniature Golf: 2 per tee Golf Driving Range: 1 per tee Other: 1 per 3 persons of occupancy load Pool Hall 1 per table Restaurant, Carry-Out and/or Delivery 1 per employee plus 1 per 300 sf. of GLA Restaurant, Drive-in 1 per ordering station plus 1 per employee Restaurant, Drive-thru 1 per 100 sf. of GLA plus 4 stacking spaces per drive-thru window Restaurant, Standard 1 per 3 seats of occupancy load Service Station 2 per service bay plus 1 per company vehicle plus 1 per employee plus 1 stacking space per fuel island Industrial Uses General Industry and Manufacturing, Research Laboratory and similar uses 1 per 1 employee plus 1 per company vehicle, but not less than 1 per 1,000 sf. of GLA Warehouse, distribution and wholesale business 1 per 1 employee plus 1 per company vehicle, but not less than 1 per 500 sf. of GLA  
Table 10-2. Parking Lot Dimensional Requirements Parking Angle Stall Width (A) Stall Length (B) Stall Depth (C) Curb Length (D) Aisle Width (E) Interlock (F) One-Way Two-Way 0° 8 ft. 22 ft. 8 ft. 22 ft. 12 ft. 20 ft. na 30° 9 ft. 20 ft. 17.4 ft. 17 ft. 15 ft. 20 ft. 3.9 ft. 45° 9 ft. 20 ft. 20.2 ft. 12 ft. 15 ft. 20 ft. 3.2 ft. 60° 9 ft. 19 ft. 21 ft. 10.4 ft. 20 ft. 24 ft. 2.3 ft. 90° 9 ft. 19 ft. 19 ft. 9 ft. 20 ft. 24 ft. na  

Table 10-3. Typical Shared Parking Demand by Use and Time of Day Parking Demand* by Use Weekday 8:00 a.m.-5:00 p.m. Weekday 6:00 p.m.-12:00 a.m. Weekday 12:00 a.m.-6:00 a.m. Weekend 8:00 a.m.-5:00 p.m. Weekend 6:00 p.m.-12:00 a.m. Weekend 12:00 a.m.-6:00 a.m. Residential 60% 100% 100% 80% 100% 100% Office 100% 20% 5% 5% 5% 5% Commercial 90% 80% 5% 100% 70% 5% Lodging 70% 100% 100% 70% 100% 100% Restaurant 70% 100% 10% 70% 100% 20% Entertainment 40% 100% 10% 80% 100% 50% Movie Theater 40% 80% 10% 80% 100% 10% Institutional (non-church) 100% 20% 5% 10% 10% 5% Institutional (church) 10% 5% 5% 100% 50% 5%  
*Different parking demands may be used than the typical shown here if documented in a parking demand study. 
Sec. 10.3. - Off-street loading. 
    In all zoning districts where permitted uses require the receipt or distribution of material or merchandize by truck or similar vehicle, off-street loading and unloading space shall be, provided. Such requirements shall apply to new structures or that portion of existing structures that are altered or expanded after the effective date of this ordinance. 
10.3.1.  One space shall be required for the first 20,000 sf. of floor area plus one additional space for each 20,000 sf. of floor area up to 100,000 sf. and one space for each additional 40,000 sf. thereafter. However, the approving authority may waive loading requirements for uses under 8,000 sf. 
10.3.2.  Off-street loading design standards. 
1.  The minimum size of a loading space shall be 15 ft. by 50 ft., exclusive of driveway and maneuvering space. Each space shall allow vertical clearance of 14 ft. 
2.  Joint or combined off-street loading space for two or more buildings on the same lot can be, provided as long as the amount of such combined off-street space is equal in size and capacity to the combined requirements of the buildings to be served. 
3.  No street or alley shall be considered as part of the off-street loading area. 
4.  All loading areas shall be so designed and located to permit traffic to exit facing a street or alley. Off-street loading spaces may occupy required yard areas, provided that no loading space shall be located within ten ft. of the front lot line nor within five ft. of any side or rear lot line. 
5.  No loading space shall be used to meet parking requirements, interfere with the on-site circulation of traffic, nor allow a truck to extend into any right-of-way or over any property line. 
Sec. 10.4. - Driveway spacing. 
    The following regulations shall govern ingress and egress to all lots: 
10.4.1.  Within the first 15 ft. of the lot (measured from the front lot line along which a driveway is proposed) driveways shall not exceed the following widths: 
1.  Single-family and duplex dwellings: 13 ft. 
2.  Multifamily dwellings: 25 ft. (for two travel lanes). 
3.  Nonresidential uses: 30 ft. (for two travel lanes). 
10.4.2.  Access points shall be in accordance with table 10-4, driveway spacing, and the following: 
1.  Single-family and duplex dwellings with greater lot frontage may only have a second access if approved by the city engineer after a determination that traffic safety and movement at the particular location will not be adversely impacted by the additional access. 
2.  Corner lots-of-record may have a driveway with less than the above-required distance from the intersecting street, provided the driveway will be located along the street of lesser classification (as applicable) and as far as practicable from the intersection, and that, in the opinion of the city engineer, the driveway will not adversely affect traffic safety and movement on adjoining streets. 
10.4.3.  No two access points on the same lot frontage shall be closer than 50 ft. from their nearest edges. 
10.4.4.  The area between the street and a driveway parallel to the street shall have a curb at least six inches in height and six inches in width separating the drive from the sidewalk to prevent encroachment of vehicles onto the sidewalk area. 
10.4.5.  No curbs on public streets or rights-of-way shall be cut or altered without written approval of the city. 
10.4.6.  Where access to a state or federal highway is controlled by regulations other than those stated herein, those rules and regulations shall prevail. 
Table 10-4. Driveway Spacing Regulations Minimum Spacing Max. number of driveways per frontage length From intersections From other 
driveways All Uses Major Arterial 250 ft. 200 ft. 1 per 200 ft. Minor Arterial 200 ft. 150 ft. 1 per 150 ft. Single-Family and Duplex Dwellings Collector 125 ft. 25 ft. 1 per 100 ft. Local 75 ft. ten ft. 1 per 100 ft. All Other Uses Collector 150 ft. 125 ft. 1 per 125 ft. Local 100 ft. 75 ft. 1 per 75 ft.  
ARTICLE 11. - LANDSCAPING, SCREENING AND BUFFERS 
    The intent of this article is to require a minimum number of trees in residential areas, to establish standards for buffers required between incompatible land uses and to provide for landscaping surrounding and within vehicular areas in high traffic corridors. For the purposes of this article, [the terms] "fences" and "walls" shall have the same meaning. Landscaping shall not be planted in a manner or location which causes a hazard to vehicles entering or within the public right-of-way. Required landscape plans shall include the information listed in appendix 3. 

Sec. 11.1. - Buffers. 
    Buffers shall be, provided in accord with the requirements of table 11-1 and as described herein. 
11.1.1.  Applicability. , except as otherwise, provided herein, buffer requirements shall be based on the developing land use and the existing, abutting use. 

11.1.2.  General standards. To decrease incompatibility between neighboring land uses, the following standards shall apply to all required buffers: 
1.  Required yards, where corresponding with the buffer area, may overlap and may be counted toward a buffer width requirement. 
2.  The buffer requirement, if any, shall be the responsibility of the developing land use. 
3.  Buffer requirements may be modified by the approving authority in certain cases as follows: 
a.  If the land use relationships between two abutting lots changes so that a lesser buffer would be required, the width of the previously, provided buffer may be reduced accordingly. 
b.  Up to one-half of the width of an abutting alley may be counted toward the buffer width requirement, but the landscaping density requirements shall not be reduced. 
c.  Whenever the proposed use abuts vacant land, buffer requirements shall be based on the zoning of the abutting property or the use projected by the comprehensive plan, whichever requires a lesser buffer. 
4.  Buffers shall not be used for parking, recreational use or any other purpose, except as, provided herein. The approving authority may permit a pedestrian access-way through a required buffer where appropriate. Public utilities and storm drainage facilities may be constructed in a required buffer, provided the buffer is otherwise installed in compliance with the approved landscaping plan. The city may require supplemental plantings to mitigate the effect of any such land disturbance in the buffer. 
Table 11-1. Buffer Requirements By Use Developing Land Use Existing Abutting Uses or Zoning Single-family Multifamily Lodging Institutional Business Parks & greenways detached attached low/medium/high Residential and Lodging Buffer Class Required Detached, Single-family na na na na na na na Attached, Single-family A na na na na na na Multifamily B A na na na na na Lodging B B A na na na na Manufactured home/RV parks B B B B A B AInstitutional Low Intensity A A na na na na na na na Medium Intensity A A A na na na na na A High Intensity B B B A A na na na A Business/Commercial Offices up to 50,000 sf. A A A na A na na na A Offices greater than 50,000 sf. B B B A B A na na A Amusement, Outdoor Entertainment B B B A B A na na A Retail, Shopping Centers, and Restaurants up to 50,000 sf. B B A A A A na na A Retail, Shopping Centers, and Restaurants Greater than 50,000 sf. B B B A B A na na A Heavy Commercial, Including Repair, Contractor and Automotive Uses B B B A B A na na A Industry Warehousing, Storage, Telecommunications Towers and Public Utility Facilities C C C C C B B A B Other Industrial Uses C C C C C C C B B  
Buffer Class Width Required trees per 100 linear feet With fence/wall Without fence/wall A 10 ft. 15 ft. 8 B 15 ft. 20 ft. 10 C 22 ft. 30 ft. 12  
11.1.3.  Design standards. 
1.  Prior to occupancy of the premises, the buffer shall provide a visually impervious barrier from the ground to five ft. above grade level throughout the entire length of the buffer through the use of shrubs and trees. Fences may also be used in combination with shrubs and trees (see paragraph 3 below). Within one year after installation, the buffer shall be at least six ft. above grade throughout the entire length of the buffer. 
2.  Required plantings shall be evergreen. 
3.  The required buffer width may be reduced as, provided in table 11-1 when a fence is, provided that is five to seven ft. tall and that meets the requirements in § 11.4. With a fence, maximum shrub spacing may be reduced to not more than eight ft. 
Sec. 11.2. - Landscaping for vehicular areas. 
11.2.1.  Applicability. These regulations apply to areas used for off-street parking and loading; vehicular storage, display, maneuvering and washing; and the dispensing of motor fuels. 
11.2.2.  A landscaping plan shall be required as part of every development application for new construction, which includes vehicular areas as herein described. This section shall apply to new vehicular areas for all uses, except single-family dwellings, duplexes and multiplexes. If the size of an existing, applicable vehicular area is increased by ten percent or ten spaces, whichever is greater, the new vehicular area shall be made to comply with the requirements of this section. 
11.2.3.  Requirements. 
1.  The primary landscaping materials used in vehicular areas shall be canopy trees. Shrubs and other planting materials may be used to complement the required trees. 
2.  Required plantings shall be set back from the edge of the planted area or as otherwise needed to prevent damage by vehicles. 
3.  Interior landscaping. Each vehicular area shall have interior landscaping covering not less than five percent of the total vehicular area. 
4.  Street frontage landscaping. 
a.  A landscaped strip at least ten ft. wide shall be located between the vehicular area and the street line. The width may be reduced to five ft. when a fence, meeting the requirements of § 11.4 and that is between 2.5 to 3.5 ft. tall, is, provided. 
b.  Shrubs shall be evergreen and spaced no more than five ft. on center. If used in combination with a fence meeting the requirements of § 11.4, shrubs, may be deciduous and may be spaced no more than eight ft. on center. 
c.  At least one understory tree for every 40 linear ft. or one canopy tree for every 50 ft. of required landscape strip shall be planted. Only canopy and understory trees, as defined in article 2, shall be counted toward these requirements. 
5.  Perimeter landscaping. A five-foot-wide landscaping strip shall be, provided along the parking lot perimeter and shall be planted with evergreen shrubs and one understory tree per each 40 ft. of frontage (the width of any cross access drives may be discounted). Where this overlaps or conflicts with other landscaping requirements, the greater requirement shall govern. 
Sec. 11.3. - Screening. 
    Screening is intended to provide visual separation of certain uses from public areas and adjoining properties. 
11.3.1.  Applicability. For all multifamily, nonresidential and mixed use developments, the following shall require screening: 
1.  Garbage collection, recycling and refuse handling areas. 
2.  Maintenance areas or utility structures associated with a building or development. 
3.  Water meters, gas meters, electric meters and air conditioners/mechanical units. 
4.  Loading areas. 
5.  Outside runs for veterinary clinics, animal shelters, and kennels. 
6.  Outdoor storage of materials, stock, equipment, and vehicles (such as those stored for repair). 
7.  Any other uses for which screening may be required by the reviewing authority. 
11.3.2.  Design requirements. The design of screening shall be in accord with the following and as approved by the reviewing authority: 
1.  Location on-site should be the first consideration in providing screening. The reviewing authority may lessen screening requirements when the location of the use to be screened reduces its visibility to the public and neighboring properties. Uses requiring screening, when collocated, may be screened together. 

2.  Screening shall not be placed so as to impede any drainage-way and shall not block access to any aboveground, pad-mounted transformer and shall provide the minimum clear distance required by the utility company. 
3.  The method of screening, including height and materials, shall be that which is sufficient to visually screen the use. The minimum height needed is preferred. 
4.  Fences, berms, or landscaping used for other purposes, but that are proposed as part of a required screen and that meet the requirements of this section, may count toward these requirements. 
5.  Uses that produce objectionable noise or odors shall be located so as to minimize such impacts to the public and abutting properties. 
6.  Shrubs shall be evergreen and spaced no more than five ft. on center. If used in combination with a fence, shrubs may be deciduous and may be spaced no more than eight ft. on center. 
7.  Trees shall be evergreen and, when used in the absence of a fence, shall be used together with shrubs to provide a continuous, opaque screen. 
11.3.3.  Requirements for specific uses. 
1.  Refuse and recycling containers shall not be located forward of the front building line. Such containers shall be screened by a combination of opaque fence and plant material on three sides. Opaque gates shall be installed for access. The fence shall be at least two ft. taller than the container. 
2.  For restaurants, enclosures shall be sized, as needed, to accommodate the storage of grease containers. 
3.  Mechanical equipment on roofs or on-site shall be screened so as to not be visible from public streets or adjacent properties. The screening of building-mounted mechanical equipment shall be an integral component of the building design. Mechanical equipment installed on-site shall be adequately screened by plant materials and/or fences to blend in with site landscaping. 
4.  Outdoor storage, where permitted, shall be screened to a height of six ft. or two ft. taller than the material or equipment to be screened, whichever is greater. 
5.  Service areas, loading docks, work yards, and similar uses should be located to minimize their visibility to the public and to any abutting properties to which such functions would be objectionable. Where their location is insufficient to effectively screen the use, required screening shall be at least six ft. in height. 
Sec. 11.4. - Design standards for fences. 
    Fences used as a part of any required buffer, screen, or perimeter landscaping shall comply with the following: 
11.4.1.  No more than 25 percent of the fence surface shall be left open. The finished side of the fence shall face abutting property. 
11.4.2.  Required shrubs and trees shall be planted on the exterior side of the fence. 
The commission shall approve the design of fences to assure their functions, as required by this article, are properly served. In particular, the commission shall not approve a reduced buffer width pursuant to § 11.1.3.3 without also approving the design of the fence. 
Sec. 11.5. - Modifications. 
    The planting requirements of this article shall be applied equally to similarly classified and situated properties, but may be modified or waived altogether in certain cases where a building site is subject to any of the following circumstances determined by the commission: 
11.5.1.  Existing natural vegetation, which meets, in whole or in part, buffer or screening requirements, may be applied toward the requirements of this article. Where natural vegetation (trees and/or shrubs) exist on a piece of property, when application is made for a building permit, such natural vegetation shall be left undisturbed until the zoning official has evaluated it for its suitability as a buffer or screen, as applicable. The zoning official may require that the developer retain such natural vegetation. However, additional planting may be required to fully achieve the requirement. 
11.5.2.  Where impending development of adjacent property would make these standards unreasonable or impractical. 
11.5.3.  Where, after inspection by the zoning official, it is found that the view from adjoining properties is blocked by a change in grade or other natural or manmade features. 
11.5.4.  Where planting cannot, in the professional opinion of an expert, be expected to thrive due to poor soil conditions, intense shade or similar conditions. 
Sec. 11.6. - Maintenance and irrigation. 
11.6.1.  All plant material shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition, replaced when dead and kept free of weeds, refuse and debris. 
11.6.2.  All fencing shall be permanently maintained in good condition and, whenever necessary, repaired or replaced by the party required to provide such fence. 
11.6.3.  All required landscaping shall be drought-tolerant, native species or shall be irrigated by an automatic irrigation system. 
ARTICLE 12. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 

Sec. 12.1. - Administration. 
    The provisions of this ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the zoning official, except as herein, provided. 
Sec. 12.2. - Administrator. 
    The council shall designate a zoning official to administer this ordinance. In addition, the zoning official and/or building official shall have the right to enter upon any premises during a reasonable period of time for the purpose of making inspections of the buildings or premises necessary to administer and enforce this ordinance. 
Sec. 12.3. - Building permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful to commence the excavation for or the construction of any building or other structure, including accessory structures, or to store building materials or erect temporary field offices, or to commence the moving, alteration, or repairs (except repairs not changing the character of the structure and not exceeding $500.00 in cost, or painting or wallpapering) of any structure, including accessory structures, until the building official has issued for such work a building permit including confirmation by the zoning official that the plans, specifications and intended use of such structure in all respects conform with the provisions of this ordinance., except on the written order of the board, no building permit shall be issued for any building where the construction, addition, alteration or use thereof would be in violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance. Application for a building permit shall be made to the building official on forms, provided for that purpose. 
Sec. 12.4. - Application requirements. 
    It shall be unlawful for the building official to approve any plans or issue a building permit for any excavation or construction until such plans have been inspected in detail and have been found to be in conformity with this ordinance. To this end, the building official shall require that every application for a building permit for excavation, construction, use of land, moving or alteration be accompanied by a plan or plat, drawn to an appropriate scale, including those materials listed in appendix 4. 
    If the proposed excavation, construction, moving, or alteration, as set forth in the application are in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, the building official shall issue a building permit accordingly. If an application for a building permit is not approved, the building official shall state in writing on the application the cause for such disapproval. Issuance of a building permit shall in no case be construed as waiving any provision of this ordinance. 
Sec. 12.5. - Voiding of building permit. 
    Any building permit granted under this section shall become null and void on one year from the date of issuance of the permit. Exceptions may be made if the proposed development or construction has passed the first building inspection. The building official shall make every reasonable effort to notify a holder of a building permit, which is liable for voiding action before voidance is actually declared. 
Sec. 12.6. - Inspection. 
    The construction or usage affected by any building permit shall be subject to four inspections: the first, when the foundation has been excavated; the second, when the foundation has been completed and the building lines have been established; the third, when all electrical and mechanical elements are in place; and the fourth, when the building or structure has been completed. 
    It shall be the duty of the holder of the permit to properly notify the building official as to the time when the construction will be ready for inspection. Failure to make proper notification of the time for such inspection shall automatically cancel the permit, requiring the issuance of a new permit before construction may proceed or occupancy may be permitted. 
Sec. 12.7. - Certificate of occupancy. 
    No land or building or other structure or part thereof hereafter erected, moved, or altered in its use shall be used until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy stating that such land or structure or part thereof is found to be in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. Within three days after the owner or his agent has been properly notified [by] the building official that a building or premises or part thereof is ready for occupancy or use, it shall be the duty of the building official to make a final inspection thereof, and to issue a certificate of occupancy if the building or premises or part thereof is found to conform with the provisions of this ordinance, or if such certificate is refused, to state the refusal in writing with the cause. 
Sec. 12.8. - Unlawful structure. 
    Any uses of land or dwellings or construction or alteration of buildings or structures erected, altered, razed or converted in violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be a nuisance per se. The zoning official is hereby authorized to apply to a court of competent jurisdiction to abate the nuisance created by such unlawful use of a structure, land or building. Whenever the zoning official has declared a structure to be in violation of any applicable provisions of this ordinance, the owner or occupant shall, within 72 hours from receipt of notification from the zoning official to vacate such premises, accomplish such vacation of said structure or premises until such structure or premises has been made to conform to the provisions of this ordinance. Such notification shall be: 
12.8.1.  By delivery to the owner personally, or by leaving notice at the owner's residence with a person of suitable age and discretion; or 
12.8.2.  By depositing the notice as first class certified mail; or 
12.8.3.  By posting and keeping posted for 72 hours a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place on the premises to be repaired. 
Sec. 12.9. - Penalties and remedies of violations. 
    Any person, firm, corporation, or other organization which violates any provisions of this ordinance shall be fined, upon conviction, not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00 plus court costs for each offense. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. The conviction of a violation and imposition of any fine shall not constitute an exemption from compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. In case any building or other structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained; or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this ordinance, the building official, zoning official or any other appropriate authority or any adjacent or neighboring property owner, who would be especially damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may seek an injunction or writ of mandamus or take other appropriate action or proceedings to stay or prevent occupancy of such building, structure or land. 
Sec. 12.10. - Amendment. 
12.10.1.  Zoning amendment petition. The council may amend, supplement, change, modify, or repeal the regulations, restrictions, boundaries of districts or any provisions of this ordinance. Any member of the council may introduce such amendment; or any official, board, commission or any other person may present an application to the council requesting an amendment to this ordinance. 
12.10.2.  Commission review. No such amendment shall become effective unless such be first submitted to the commission for its approval, disapproval, or recommendation. If the commission disapproves an amendment after such submittal, it shall require the favorable vote of the majority of the council to become effective. Within 30 days of the public hearing on the application, unless an extension of time is agreed to by the applicant, the commission shall issue a recommendation to the council. Failure of the commission to act within this time period shall constitute a positive recommendation. 
    The commission upon its own initiative may hold public hearings, public notice of which shall be given, for the consideration of any proposed amendment to the provisions of the ordinance, or to the official zoning map, and then report its approval, disapproval, or recommendations to the council. 
12.10.3.  Public hearing on proposed amendments. Upon the introduction of any amendment to this ordinance or upon the receipt of a petition to amend this ordinance, the council shall publish notice of such request for an amendment, together with a notice of the time and place set for public hearing by the council on the requested change. Said notice shall be published in full, for one insertion, in a newspaper of general circulation. One week after the first insertion, the council shall publish a synopsis of the proposed amendment. Both insertions must be published at least 15 days in advance of passage of the amendment. After the amendment is adopted, it shall be published in the same manner as all municipal ordinances pursuant to section 11-45-8 of the Code of Alabama, 1975, [Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-8] as amended. 
    Within 30 days of the public hearing on the application, unless an extension of time is agreed to by the applicant, the council shall approve the request, approve it with conditions or deny the request. Failure of the council to act within this time period shall constitute approval. 
12.10.4.  Time limit. After the council has voted on an application for rezoning or other amendment of the zoning ordinance, another application for rezoning of the same tract or parcel of land, or change of the same portion of the zoning ordinance will not be considered for a period of one year from the date of such action, provided, however, that the council may adjust this time period if, in the opinion of a majority of the council, an unusual situation or circumstance exists. 
Sec. 12.11. - Conditional use procedures. 
    Conditional uses are those that have some special effect, which differs from the potential impacts of permitted or special, exception uses or exceeds them in intensity, or have uniqueness such that their effect upon the surrounding environment cannot be determined in advance of a use being proposed in a particular location. As such, conditional uses must be reviewed in terms of existing zoning and land use in the vicinity of the proposed use; whether, and to what extent the use at the proposed location is consistent with the comprehensive plan, the intent of this ordinance, and any other development policies and/or regulations of the city; and whether and to what extent all steps possible have been taken by the developer to minimize any adverse effects of the proposed use on the immediate vicinity and on the public health, welfare and safety in general. 
12.11.1.  All conditional uses require the submission of an application to the commission. Such application shall be filed with the zoning official by the property owner or designee at least 30 days prior to the date on which the application is to be heard, and shall include a site plan including those materials listed in the appendix. At least 15 days prior to the hearing, the zoning official shall give written notice to all adjoining property owners. Such notice shall be deemed given when deposited in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to such property owners at their addresses submitted with the request. Such addresses shall be obtained by the applicant from the most recent records of the county tax assessor and submitted as part of the application. 
12.11.2.  The commission shall review the proposed conditional use for compliance with this ordinance and other applicable codes and ordinances, and for compatibility with the purposes of the applicable district. In particular the commission shall determine that satisfactory provisions have been made concerning the following: 
1.  Access to and from the property and the proposed structure and/or uses, with particular attention to vehicular and pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow and control, and emergency access. 
2.  The location and accessibility of off-street parking and loading areas. 
3.  The location and accessibility of refuse and service areas and their potentially adverse affects upon surrounding properties. 
4.  The screening and buffering of potentially adverse views and activities from surrounding properties. 
5.  Control of noise, glare, odor, surface water runoff, and other potentially disturbing impacts upon surrounding properties. 
6.  The availability, location, and capacity of utilities. 
7.  The location and scale of signs and lighting with particular reference to traffic safety, glare, and visual compatibility with surrounding properties. 
8.  The bulk, density, and lot coverage of structures, and yards and open areas, with reference to their compatibility with the character of the surrounding area. 
12.11.3.  The commission may impose such conditions as it deems necessary in the particular case to protect the public interest and further the purposes of this ordinance, in relation both to the items listed above and to any other factor it deems relevant. Such approval and conditions shall be granted to the property, structure, and/or use for which conditional use is approved and not to a particular person. Violations of conditions attached to any conditional use shall be deemed to be violations of this ordinance. 
12.11.4.  Within 60 days of the public hearing on the conditional use application, unless an extension of time is agreed to by the applicant, the commission shall approve the application for a conditional use, approve it with conditions, or deny it. The failure of the commission to act within this time period shall constitute approval of the conditional use. 
Sec. 12.12. - Fees. 
    Every applicant or petitioner seeking an amendment to the zoning ordinance or official zoning map, other than amendments initiated by the city, or seeking approval of a building permit, conditional use, variance or special, exception shall pay to the city clerk at the time of filing of petition or application, a fee as set from time to time by the council to cover the cost of technical study, investigation and publication necessary in connection with such application. No such application shall be filed for consideration until such fee has been paid. 
ARTICLE 13. - BOARD OF ZONING ADJUSTMENT 

Sec. 13.1. - Appointments, duties and responsibilities. 
    A board of zoning adjustment, hereinafter referred to as "the board," is hereby established. The appointment, procedure, powers and action of said board shall be governed by section 11-52-80 and section 11-52-81, Code of Alabama 1975, as amended [Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-52-80 and 11-52-81]. All members of the board shall be citizens and residents of the city. 
Sec. 13.2. - Meetings, procedures and records. 
    Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman at such times and places as the board may determine. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. The board shall adopt and publish its own rules of procedure and keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact; and shall keep records of its examinations and of other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. 
Sec. 13.3. - Powers and duties. 
    The board, in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, shall have the following powers: 
13.3.1.  Interpretation of boundaries. To hear and decide upon interpretation of the boundaries of districts established and shown on the map in accord with criteria specified in § 3.2. 
13.3.2.  Appeals. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by a city official, other than the city council, acting under the authority of this ordinance. 
13.3.3.  Variances. To hear and decide requests for a variance from the provisions of this ordinance where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of such provisions would result in unnecessary hardship as defined in this article, but where the spirit of the ordinance can be observed and substantial justice done. 
13.3.4.  Special, exceptions. To hear and decide special, exceptions, as specified in this ordinance, upon which the board is required to act. 
Sec. 13.4. - Administrative appeals. 
13.4.1.  Appeals to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved or affected by any provision of the ordinance or by any decision of the zoning official relating to this ordinance. Any such appeal shall be filed with the zoning official within 15 days of the date of the action being appealed. The zoning official shall forthwith transmit to the board papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken. 
13.4.2.  An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the zoning official certifies to the board after the notice of the appeal has been filed that by reason of facts cited in such certification a stay would, in the zoning official's opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the board or by a court of record. 
13.4.3.  All appeals shall be filed in writing on forms, provided by the board and made available by the zoning official. At least 15 days prior to the scheduled board hearing the zoning official shall give written notice to all adjacent property owners. Such notice shall be deemed given when deposited in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to such property owners at their addresses submitted with the appeal. The notice shall state the name of the appellant, the location of the property, the decision of the zoning official being appealed, and the time, date, and location of the board hearing. 
13.4.4.  The board may affirm, reverse wholly or in part, or modify the zoning official's decision, order, or determination as, in its opinion, ought to be done, and, to that end, shall have all the powers of the zoning official. 
Sec. 13.5. - Variances. 
    Any property owner may file an application for a variance from the requirements of this ordinance where it is claimed that, by reason of, exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape or by reason of, exceptional topographic conditions, or other extraordinary and, exceptional conditions of such piece of property existing at the time of the adoption of this ordinance, the strict application and literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance would result in peculiar, exceptional and unnecessary hardship upon such owner. 
13.5.1.  It is the intent of this ordinance that variances be used only to overcome some physical condition of a parcel of land, which poses a practical difficulty to its development and prevents its owner from using the property in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance. Any variance granted shall be the minimum adjustment necessary for the reasonable use of the land. 
13.5.2.  Applications shall be filed with the zoning official at least 30 days before the scheduled hearing date before the board. The property owner shall file the application on a form made available by the city. At least 15 days prior to the scheduled hearing, the zoning official shall give written notice to all adjacent property owners. Such notice shall be deemed given when deposited in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to such property owners at their addresses as submitted with the application. Such notice shall state the name of the applicant, the location of the property, the nature of the variance requested and the applicable sections of this ordinance, and the time, date, and location of the hearing. 
13.5.3.  The applicant must prove that the variance will not be contrary to the public interest and that practical difficulty and unnecessary hardship will result if it is not granted. In particular, the applicant shall establish and substantiate that the variance, if granted, will conform to all of the following: 
1.  The variance will not permit the establishment of a use not otherwise permitted in the district. 
2.  There must be proof of unique and special circumstances and conditions, fully described in the application, applicable to the land or building for which the variance is sought, which are peculiar to such land or buildings and do not apply generally to land or buildings in the vicinity, and which circumstances or conditions are such that the strict application of the provisions of this ordinance would deprive the applicant of reasonable use of such land or buildings. 
3.  There must be proof of unnecessary hardship. It must result from the application of this ordinance and must be suffered directly by the property in question, and evidence of other variances granted under similar circumstances shall not be considered. It is not sufficient proof of hardship to show that greater value or profit would result if the variance were granted. Furthermore, the hardship claimed cannot be self-created; nor can it be established on this basis by one who purchases the property with or without knowledge of the restrictions. 
4.  The variance will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, substantially increase congestion in the public streets, endanger the public safety, or substantially diminish or impair property values within the adjacent neighborhood. 
5.  The variance will not confer upon the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this ordinance to other land or structures in the same district. 
6.  The variance is necessary for the reasonable use of the land or building, and the variance is the minimum variance that will accomplish this purpose. 
7.  The variance shall be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the regulations imposed by this ordinance on the applicable district, and shall not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
13.5.4.  The board may prescribe any safeguards or conditions that it deems necessary to secure substantially the objectives of the regulations or provisions of this ordinance to which the variance applies. 
Sec. 13.6. - Special, exceptions. 
13.6.1.  All uses permitted by special, exception shall require the submission of an application to the board. Such application shall be filed with the zoning official at least 30 days before the hearing, and shall include a site plan including those materials listed in the appendix. The application shall be filed by the property owner or authorized agent on a form made available by the zoning official. At least 15 days prior to the scheduled hearing, the zoning official shall give written notice to all adjacent property owners. Such notice shall be deemed given when deposited in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to such property owners at their addresses as submitted with the application. Such notice shall state the name of the applicant, the location of the property, the proposed use, and the time, date and location of the board hearing. 
13.6.2.  The board shall review the application for compliance with this ordinance and all other applicable codes and ordinances of the city. In particular, the board shall determine that satisfactory provisions have been made concerning the following, among other considerations of this ordinance: 
1.  Access to and from the property and the proposed structure and/or uses, with particular attention to vehicular and pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow and control, and emergency access. 
2.  The location and accessibility of off-street parking and loading areas. 
3.  The location and accessibility of refuse and service areas and their potentially adverse affects upon surrounding properties. 
4.  The screening and buffering of potentially adverse views and activities from surrounding properties. 
5.  Control of noise, glare, odor, stormwater runoff, and other potentially disturbing impacts upon surrounding properties. 
6.  The availability, location, and capacity of utilities. 
7.  The location and scale of signs and lighting with particular reference to traffic safety, glare, and visual compatibility with surrounding properties. 
8.  The bulk, density, and lot coverage of structures, and yards and open areas, with reference to their compatibility with the character of the surrounding area. 
13.6.3.  The board may impose such conditions that it deems necessary in the particular case to protect the public interest, and the intent of the comprehensive plan, and this ordinance regarding the items listed above and as may otherwise be reasonably necessary. Such conditions shall apply to the land, structure, and use for which the special, exception is granted and not to a particular person. Violations of conditions lawfully attached to any special, exception shall be deemed to be violations of this ordinance. 
13.6.4.  The board may also grant special, exceptions for business use of a manufactured home in a nonresidential district upon showing of catastrophic circumstances created by [an] act of God or casualty damage. Such special, exceptions will be valid for a period not exceeding one year and are not transferable. Such special, exception may be granted only if all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  At the termination of the granted period, the property owner must either remove the manufactured home from this location, or apply for another special, exception. 
2.  Such special, exceptions are not transferable. If there is a change of land ownership, the new property owner must apply for a new special, exception if desired. 
Sec. 13.7. - Abatement of nuisance. 
    The board may require the conduct of any use, conforming or nonconforming, which results in unreasonable noise, smoke, vibration, fumes, dust, dire, radio interference, or explosion hazard or nuisance to surrounding property to be modified or changed to abate such hazard to health, comfort and convenience. The board may direct the building official to issue an abatement order, but such order may be directed only after a public hearing by the said board, notice of which shall be sent by registered mail to the owners and/or operators of the property on which the use is conducted in addition to due notice of advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation. A hearing to consider issuance of an abatement order shall be held by the board either upon petition signed by any person affected by the hazard or nuisance or upon the initiative of the board. An abatement order shall be directed by the board of [zoning adjustment] only upon reasonable evidence of hazard or nuisance, and such order shall specify the date by which the hazard or nuisance shall be abated. 
Sec. 13.8. - Rehearings. 
13.8.1.  All decisions rendered by the board shall be final and binding upon all parties. No appeal of an administrative decision, or decision on a request for a variance or a special, exception shall be reheard, and no further application shall be accepted once a decision has been rendered, except under one or more of the following conditions: 
1.  New evidence or information pertinent to the request has been discovered, which was not available to the applicant at the time of the original hearing. 
2.  The decision resulted from an error in procedures required by this ordinance or state law and made by the board, the zoning official, or any other city officials. 
3.  The decision resulted from an error in substantive law under the provisions of this ordinance or the Code of Alabama, 1975, as amended. 
13.8.2.  Where no error is alleged and no new evidence is available, a new presentation by the applicant shall not constitute grounds for rehearing. Any applicant wishing a rehearing shall appear before the board to present one or more of the qualifying conditions listed in this section. 
13.8.3.  If the board finds that one or more of the qualifying conditions exist, the applicant may submit a new application. This new application shall be heard at a subsequent board meeting, subject to all regular posting and procedural requirements. Allowing a new application does not obligate the board to grant the request. 
Sec. 13.9. - Appeals from action of the board. 
    Any party aggrieved by any final judgment or decision of the board may, within 15 days thereafter, appeal therefrom to the circuit court or court of like jurisdiction by filing with the board a written notice of appeal specifying the judgment or decision from which the appeal is taken. In case of such appeal, the board shall cause a transcript of the proceedings in the case to be certified to the court to which the appeal is taken, and the cause in such court shall be tried de novo. 
\APPENDIX 
APPENDIX 1. - SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS FOR CONDITIONAL AND SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES 
1.  One or more scaled drawings or maps (one inch equals 20 feet unless size dictates a more appropriate scale), clearly showing the following: 
2.  Vicinity map, north arrow, scale, accurate shape proportion and dimensions of the site, name of property owner, developer and person drawing map. 
3.  Existing and proposed topography of the site and the surrounding area [at] at least two-foot contour intervals showing the location of existing woodlands, streams, and other significant features of the land. 
4.  Location and dimensions of existing and proposed buildings, structures, curb cuts, driveways, off-street parking and loading areas, signs, walls, fences, screen planting, landscaping, pedestrian walks, open space, and recreational areas for use by employees, residents, tenants or the general public. 
5.  Proposed storm drainage plan. 
6.  Proposed traffic circulation system where any part of the land is to be used by motor vehicles. 
7.  Proposed dedication of land for public use, including streets, easements, park and school sites. 
8.  The location of all existing and proposed power lines, gas lines, sewer and water lines, and the location of any easements to be granted for these utilities. 
9.  Drawings showing the proposed appearance of the buildings, structures and grounds after the completion of all buildings and structures and the establishment of the uses proposed on the land. 
10.  A statement of the area of land involved in the site, the number of acres and percentage designated for each proposed land use including public facilities, the percentage of the site proposed to be covered by buildings, the total number of dwelling units proposed, the number of dwelling units proposed per acre, the area proposed to be devoted to open space, the area proposed to be paved for parking, driveways, loading space, sidewalks, the total number of parking spaces for the use proposed, the number of employees, excepted per shift, the total floor area of proposed commercial uses (or seating capacity for places of assembly, restaurants, indoor entertainment uses, etc.) and the proposed manner of illumination of signs. 
11.  Restrictions on the use of property including proposed restrictive covenants. 
12.  Plans for the protection of abutting properties. 
13.  Written request for, exceptions to or variations from the requirements of the zoning ordinance, if any are being requested. 
14.  A statement defining the manner in which the city is to be assured that all improvements and protection devices, such as buffers, fences, etc., are to be installed and maintained. 
15.  Such other additional information as may be reasonably required by the commission to accomplish the purpose of the site plan review function. 
APPENDIX 2. - MASTER PLAN REQUIREMENTS FOR PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS 
1.  The outer boundary of the total development site, including a valid legal description; 
2.  A topographic map showing contours at five-foot or smaller intervals as required by the zoning official; 
3.  Description of the existing land uses and development adjoining the project site; 
4.  The rights-of-way and cross sections of all proposed streets, and proposed access to the surrounding public street system; 
5.  The type, number, and location of all structures; 
6.  The location, extent, and approximate acreage of all resources protection, recreation, and open spaces; 
7.  The location and nature of all common amenities such as clubhouses, swimming pools, laundries, etc. 
8.  A conceptual stormwater management plan identifying the proposed patterns of major stormwater runoff, and any proposed stormwater best management practices; 
9.  A written report, illustrated as appropriate, shall accompany the master plan addressing the following: 
a.  A general description of the proposal; 
b.  The proposed standards for the development of the project, including density standards, yard requirements, lot sizes, and restrictive covenants; 
c.  A plan for the provision of utilities and storm drainage facilities; 
d.  Plans for parking, loading, access, signage, and means of protecting adjacent areas from any potential adverse impacts; and 
e.  Presentation of the method for dedicating or reserving land or facilities for public use or for ownership and maintenance of common open spaces. 
APPENDIX 3. - LANDSCAPE PLAN SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS 
    The landscape plan shall be drawn to a scale no larger than one inch equals 50 feet and shall contain the following information: 
1.  The location and dimension of all areas proposed for landscaping and planting, including a description of the proposed plant materials. 
2.  All dimensions and distances, property lines, easements, rights-of-way and buffers. 
3.  Existing and proposed buildings and structures, including signs, garbage containers, utility and drainage structures. 
4.  Existing buildings and structures on abutting property adjacent to any required screening or buffers. 
5.  Bodies of water including detention and retention areas. 
6.  Driveways, vehicular areas, existing and proposed parking spaces, access aisles and other vehicular areas. 
7.  Sufficient information and detail to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this section. 
APPENDIX 4. - BUILDING PERMIT SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS 
1.  The location, slope, area and dimensions of the lot. 
2.  The location, dimensions, height and bulk of the structure to be erected, altered, or moved and any building or structures already on the lot. 
3.  The existing and intended use of all such buildings or other structures. 
4.  The proposed number of dwelling units, occupants, employees, or other similar users. 
5.  The setback, side yards, open spaces, parking spaces and other such requirements of the application zoning district. 
6.  Any other information deemed necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of this ordinance. 
APPENDIX 5. - LIGHTING PLAN SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS 
    The lighting plan shall be drawn to a scale no larger than one inch equals 50 feet and shall contain the following information: 
1.  The type of lamp to be used in each fixture, including the manufacturer's name and part number, lamp wattage, lumen output, and a copy of the manufacturer's lamp specifications; 
2.  Fixture heights measured from grade and locations of the same; 
3.  The type of fixtures, including the manufacturer's name and model number; wattage; a picture of the fixture; and the IES file name; 
4.  Point-to-point photometric calculations at intervals of not more than ten ft. at ground level demonstrating that the plan will provide a uniform intensity of lighting on vehicular surfaces; 
5.  The area of each photometric calculation, including an extra calculation to identify the light level produced at the property line, and all data used in each calculation; and 
6.  The seal of the qualified Alabama-registered design professional. 
Appendix B - AIRPORT ZONING[1] 
    Ordinance No. 399 
    City of Scottsboro Airport 
    Height zoning ordinance 
    Scottsboro, Alabama 
    An ordinance regulating and restricting the height of structures and objects of natural growth, and otherwise regulating use of property in the vicinity of the Scottsboro municipal airport by creating the appropriate zones and establishing the boundaries thereof; providing for changes in the restrictions and boundaries of such zones; defining certain terms used herein; referring to Scottsboro airport zoning map which is incorporated in and made a part of this ordinance; providing for enforcement; and imposing penalties. 
    This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by the Airport Zoning Act, as amended [Code of Ala. 1975, § 4-6-1 et seq.], Alabama Code, title 4: chapter 4: Municipal Airports and Regulations, section 4-4-1 through 4-4-16 inclusive [Code of Ala. 1975, § 4-4-1 et seq.], and chapter 6: Airport Zoning, sections 4-6-1 through 4-6-15 [Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 4-6-1-4-6-15]. 
    It is hereby found that an obstruction has the potential for endangering the lives and property of users of Scottsboro Municipal Airport and property or occupants of land in its vicinity; that an obstruction may affect existing and future instrument approach minimums of Scottsboro Municipal Airport; and that an obstruction may reduce the size of areas available for the landing, takeoff, and maneuvering of aircraft, thus tending to destroy or impair the utility of Scottsboro Municipal Airport and the public investment therein. Accordingly, it is declared: 
(1)  That the creation or establishment of an obstruction has the potential of being a public nuisance and may injure the region served by Scottsboro Municipal Airport; 
(2)  That it is necessary in the interest of the public health, public safety, and general welfare that the creation or establishment of obstructions that are a hazard to air navigation be prevented; 
(3)  That the prevention of these obstructions should be accomplished, to the extent legally possible, by the exercise of the police power without compensation; and 
(4)  That the Scottsboro Municipal Airport fulfills an essential community purpose. 
    It is further declared that the prevention of the creation or establishment of hazards to air navigation; the elimination, removal, alteration, or mitigation of hazards to air navigation; or marking and lighting of obstructions are public purposes for which a political subdivision may raise and expend public funds and acquire land or interests in land. 
    It is hereby ordained by the City of Scottsboro, Alabama: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed in this appendix is the city's zoning ordinance, being Ord. No. 399, adopted on November 13, 1995. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are shown in brackets. 
State Law reference- Airport zoning, Code of Ala. 1975, § 4-6-1 et seq. 

Sec. 1. - Short title. 
    This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "Scottsboro Municipal Airport Zoning Ordinance." 
Sec. 2. - Definitions. 
    As used in this ordinance, unless the context otherwise requires: 
    1. Airport - Means Scottsboro Municipal Airport. 
    2. Airport elevation - 649.2 feet above mean sea level. 
    3. Approach surface - A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth in section 4 of this ordinance. In plan the perimeter of the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone. 
    4. Approach, transitional, horizontal, and conical zones - These zones are set forth in section 3 of this ordinance. 
    5. Conical surface - A surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to one for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. 
    6. Hazard to air navigation - An obstruction determined to have a substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace. 
    7. Height - For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this ordinance and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified. 
    8. Horizontal surface - A horizontal plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides with the perimeter of the horizontal zone. 
    9. Nonconforming use - Any pre-existing structure, object of natural growth, or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance or an amendment thereto. 
    10. Obstruction - Any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in section 4 of this ordinance. 
    11. Person - An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association, or governmental entity; includes a trustee, a receiver, an assignee, or a similar representative of any of them. 
    12. Primary surface - A surface longitudinally centered on the runway. The primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of the runway. The width of the primary surface is set forth in section 3 of this ordinance. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. 
    13. Runway - A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and take-off of aircraft along its length. 
    14. Structure - An object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by man, including, but without limitation, buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formation, and overhead transmission lines. 
    15. Transitional surfaces - These surfaces extend outward at 90 degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces. 
    16. Tree - Any object of natural growth. 
    17. Visual runway - A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures. 
    18. Nonprecision instrument runway - A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area-type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned. 
Sec. 3. - Airport zones. 
    In order to carry out the provisions of this ordinance, there are hereby created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying beneath the approach surface, transitional surfaces, horizontal surface, and conical surface as they apply to the Scottsboro Municipal Airport. Such zones are shown on the zoning map which is attached to this ordinance and made a part hereof. An area located in more than one of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitations. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows: 
1.  Visual approach zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 1,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
2.  Transitional zones. The transitional zones are the areas beneath the transitional surfaces. 
3.  Horizontal zone. The horizontal zone is established by swinging arcs of 5,000 feet radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the approach and transitional zones. 
4.  Conical zone. The conical zone is established as the area that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward therefrom a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. 
Sec. 4. - Airport zone height limitations. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance, no structure shall be erected, altered, or maintained, and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone created by this ordinance to a height in excess of the applicable height herein established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows: 
1.  Runway visual approach zone. Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
2.  Transitional zones. Slopes seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach surface, and extending to a height of 150 feet above the airport elevation which is 799.2 feet above mean sea level. 
3.  Horizontal zone. Established at 150 feet above the airport elevation of 649.2 feet which is 799.2 feet above mean sea level (MSL). 
4.  Conical zone. Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at 150 feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation. 
5.  Excepted height limitations. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed as prohibiting the construction or maintenance of any structure, or growth of any tree to a height up to 50 feet above the surface of the land. 
Sec. 5. - Use restriction. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this ordinance, no use may be made of land or water within any zone established by this ordinance in such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards, or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport. 
Sec. 6. - Nonconforming uses. 
1.  Regulations not retroactive. The regulations prescribed in this ordinance shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as [of] the effective date of this ordinance, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a nonconforming use. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of this ordinance, and is diligently prosecuted. 
2.  Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this section, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the city planner to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such airport obstruction. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the City of Scottsboro. 
Sec. 7. - Permits. 
1.  Future uses. Except as specifically provided in a, b, and c hereunder, no material change shall be made in the use of land, no structure shall be erected or otherwise established, and no tree shall be planted in any zone hereby created unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined whether the resulting use, structure, or tree would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted. No permit for a use inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance shall be granted unless a variance has been approved in accordance with section 7.4. 
a.  In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and conical zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when, because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, such tree or structure would extend above the height limits prescribed for such zones. 
b.  In areas lying within the limits of the approach zones but at a horizontal distance of not less than 4,200 feet from each end of the runway, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when such tree or structure would extend above the height limit prescribed for such approach zones. 
c.  In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones beyond the perimeter of the horizontal zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when such tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, would extend above the height limit prescribed for such transition zones. 
Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction, or alteration of any structure, or growth of any tree in excess of any of the height limits established by this ordinance except as set forth in section 4.5. 
2.  Existing uses. No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an obstruction or permit a nonconforming use, structure, or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective date of this ordinance or any amendments thereto or than it is when the application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all applications for such a permit shall be granted. 
3.  Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed. Whenever the city planner determines that a nonconforming tree or structure has been abandoned or more than 80 percent torn down, physically deteriorated, or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations. 
4.  Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use property, not in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this ordinance may apply to the city planning and zoning board for a variance from such regulations. The application for variance shall be accompanied by a determination from the Federal Aviation Administration as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. Such variances shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal application or enforcement of the regulations will result in unnecessary hardship and relief granted, will not be contrary to the public interest, will not create a hazard to air navigation, will do substantial justice, and will be in accordance with the spirit of this ordinance. Additionally, no application for variance to the requirements of this ordinance may be considered by the city planning and zoning board unless a copy of the application has been furnished to the airport manager for advice as to the aeronautical effects of the variance. If the airport manager does not respond to the application within 15 days after receipt, the city planning and zoning board may act on its own to grant or deny said application. 
5.  Obstruction marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this ordinance and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to install, operate, and maintain, at the owner's expense, such markings and lights as may be necessary. If deemed proper by the city planning and zoning board, this condition may be modified to require the owner to permit the City of Scottsboro, at its own expense, to install, operate, and maintain the necessary markings and lights. 
Sec. 8. - Enforcement. 
    It shall be the duty of the city planner to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein. Applications for permits and variances shall be made to the city planner upon a form published for that purpose. Applications required by this ordinance to be submitted to the city planner shall be promptly considered and granted or denied. Application for appeals to the city planning commission shall be forthwith transmitted by the city planner. 
Sec. 9. - Appeals. 
1.  Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the city planning and zoning board, made in the administration of the ordinance, may appeal to the city planning commission. 
2.  All appeals hereunder must be taken with a ten-day period by filing with the city planner a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The city planner shall forthwith transmit to the city planning commission all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
3.  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the city planner certifies to the city planning commission, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would in the opinion of the city planner cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of the city planning commission or notice to the city planner and on due cause shown. 
4.  The city planning commission shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals, give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
5.  The city planning commission may, in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as may be appropriate under the circumstances. 
Sec. 10. - Judicial review. 
    Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the city planning commission may appeal to the circuit court as provided in ____________ of the Public Laws of the State of Alabama. 
Sec. 11. - Penalties. 
    Each violation of this ordinance or of any regulation, order, or ruling promulgated hereunder shall constitute a misdemeanor and be punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or imprisonment for not more than 180 days, or both; and each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
Sec. 12. - Conflicting regulations. 
    Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this ordinance and any other regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or trees, and the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail. 
Sec. 13. - Severability. 
    If any of the provisions of this ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstances are held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end, the provisions of this ordinance are declared to be severable. 
Sec. 14. - Effective date. 
    Whereas, the immediate operation of the provisions of this ordinance is necessary for the preservation of the public health, public safety, and general welfare, an emergency is hereby declared to exist, and this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage by the city council and publication and posting as required by law. Adopted by the city council this 13th day of November, 1995. 
    City of Scottsboro, Alabama 
    ____________ 
    President of the City Council 
    ATTEST: 
    ____________ 
    City Clerk 
    Transmitted of the Mayor of the City of Scottsboro on the 14th day of November, 1995. 
    ____________ 
    City Clerk 
    APPROVED by the Mayor of the City of Scottsboro on the 14th day of November, 1995. 
    ____________ 
    Mayor 
    ATTEST: 
    ____________ 
    City Clerk 
    (NOT PUBLISHED IN PAPER) 
Appendix C - SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed in this appendix is the city's subdivision and site plan regulations, as adopted by the planning commission on April 3, 2012 and effective on April 7, 2012. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are shown in brackets. 

ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1.1. - Short title. 
    This document shall be known and may be cited as: The subdivision and site plan regulations of the City of Scottsboro, Alabama. 
Sec. 1.2. - Purpose and authority. 
1.2.1.  The purpose of this document is to protect the public health, safety and general welfare by establishing a process and standards for the development of sites and the subdivision of land within the subdivision jurisdiction of the city. 
1.2.2.  The provisions in these regulations shall be administered to ensure orderly growth and development without danger to health, or peril from fire, flood, erosion, excessive noise, air pollution, or any other menace, and facilitate the provisions in the comprehensive plan and zoning ordinance. 
1.2.3.  This regulation is adopted pursuant to the authority of title 11, chapter 52, article 2, sections 30-54 inclusive of the Code of Alabama 1975 [Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-52-30-11-52-54] and its amendments, which sections are hereby made a part of these regulations, the Scottsboro planning commission, at its regular meeting on April 3, 2012, adopted by resolution the following regulations, a copy of which has been certified to the Probate Judge of Jackson County. These regulations shall apply only to subdivisions as defined in title 11, chapter 52, article 1 of the Code of Alabama 1975 [Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-1 et seq.] as amended. 
Sec. 1.3. - Jurisdiction. 
    From and after the date of adoption, these regulations shall govern all subdivisions of land within the boundary of the city; provided, however, that where the city is authorized to exercise subdivision control outside its municipal boundaries, such areas shall be included in the jurisdiction of these regulations. The site plan review and approval requirements in these regulations shall apply to all multifamily and nonresidential developments proposed within the city regardless of whether the development involves any subdivision of land or not. 
1.3.1.  Any owner of land within the limits of said subdivision jurisdiction wishing to subdivide land shall submit to the commission a plat of the proposed subdivision, which shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in article 3, procedure. 
1.3.2.  No plat or part thereof shall be filed or recorded in the office of the probate judge, and no subdivider may proceed with the sale of lots in a subdivision until such subdivision plat shall have been approved by the commission and such approval entered in writing on the plat by the chairman of the commission (see article 3, procedure). 
1.3.3.  No public officer, authority or county governing body shall accept, layout, open, improve, grade, pave or light any street, lay or authorize the laying of water or sewer mains or lines, or the construction of other facilities or utilities in any street within the city unless such street shall have been accepted, opened, or otherwise received the legal status of a public street prior to the adoption of these regulations, or unless such street corresponds in its location and lines to a street shown on a subdivision plat approved by the commission, or on a street plan adopted by the commission. 
1.3.4.  No building permit shall be issued and no building shall be erected on any lot in a subdivision unless a final plat of such subdivision has been approved and recorded as required by these regulations and unless the property fronts on a public street. 
1.3.5.  No grading, excavation, or other disturbance of land; and no construction of any public or private improvements for the purpose of constructing a subdivision shall take place or be commenced except in conformity with these regulations. 
1.3.6.  Any building or structure erected or to be erected in violation of this section shall be deemed an unlawful building or structure, and the building inspector, city clerk, subdivision official, city attorney or other official designated by the city may bring action to enjoin such erection or cause it to be vacated or removed. 
Sec. 1.4. - Interpretation, conflict and separability. 
1.4.1.  In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these regulations shall be held to be minimum requirements. More stringent provisions may be required if it is demonstrated that different standards are necessary to promote the public health, safety, and welfare. 
1.4.2.  Where any provision of these regulations is in conflict with another provision, regulation or law, the regulations that are more restrictive or impose higher standards shall prevail. 
1.4.3.  The provisions of these regulations are separable. If a section, sentence, clause, or phrase of these regulations is adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the decision shall not affect the remaining portions of these regulations. 
ARTICLE 2. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 2.1. - General. 
2.1.1.  Certain terms used in these regulations shall have the meanings provided herein. Terms not defined herein shall have the meaning provided in the zoning ordinance, the City Code, or sections 11-52-30 through 11-52-36 of the 1975 Code of Alabama [Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-52-30-11-52-36]. Otherwise, they shall have the customary dictionary meaning. Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses and derivative forms. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular. The word "person" includes a firm, corporation, association, organization, trust or partnership. The word "lot" includes "plot" or "parcel." The word "building" includes "structure." The word "shall" is mandatory. The word "may" is permissive. 
2.1.2.  Interpretation. The subdivision official is hereby authorized to make a final determination of any term used in these regulations. In case of a dispute over such interpretation, a written appeal of the subdivision official's determination may be filed with the commission. Such appeal must be filed within 15 days of such determination. 
2.1.3.  In case of any conflict between the text of these regulations and any caption, illustration, figure, or other graphic material, the text shall govern. 
Sec. 2.2. - Specific definitions. 
2.2.1.  Access management : The preservation of level of service, road capacity and safety on public streets through the regulation of intersections and driveways along such streets. 
2.2.2.  Aisle : The traveled way by which cars enter and depart parking spaces. 
2.2.3.  ALDOT standard specifications : The Standard Specifications for Highway Construction of the Alabama Department of Transportation, as amended. 
2.2.4.  Alley : A public way providing access to the side or rear of properties. 
2.2.5.  Applicant : A property owner, including his or her heirs, successors and assignees, or developer authorized to represent a property submitting an application for site plan approval, subdivision, resubdivision or development. 
2.2.6.  Application : The documents required when seeking approval of a subdivision plat. A complete application includes all information and materials required by these regulations. 
2.2.7.  Approving authority : The commission unless a different agency is designated by the city council by ordinance. 
2.2.8.  Bicycle path : A pathway usually separated from the roadway designed specifically to satisfy the physical requirements of bicycling in accordance with AASHTO standards. 
2.2.9.  Bike lane : An on-street lane designed and intended for use by bicyclists 
2.2.10.  Bioswale : A constructed watercourse shaped or graded in earthen materials and stabilized with specific types of vegetation for the conveyance and filtering of storm runoff. 
2.2.11.  Block : A tract or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public streets other than alleys or a combination of streets, public land, public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, bodies of water or watercourses, or any other barrier to the continuity of development. 
2.2.12.  City : The incorporated community of Scottsboro, Alabama. 
2.2.13.  City clerk : The duly designated clerk of the City of Scottsboro, Alabama. 
2.2.14.  City council : The city council of the City of Scottsboro, Alabama. 
2.2.15.  City specifications : All engineering and construction specifications for public improvements, which have been adopted by the city council, the planning commission, applicable city departments, and utility boards. 
2.2.16.  Comprehensive plan : The official public document prepared in accordance with § 11-52-8 of the Code of Alabama 1975, as amended [Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-8], consisting of maps, charts, and textual material, that constitutes a policy guide to decisions about future development and conservation within the city. 
2.2.17.  Cross access : A driveway providing access between two or more abutting lots so that a driver need not enter the public street to access one of said sites from another. In contrast to an alley, cross access is generally privately owned and maintained. 
2.2.18.  Cul-de-sac : A local street with only one outlet and having a vehicular turnaround at the closed end. 
2.2.19.  Culvert : A structure designed to convey water under a structure, street, driveway or walkway. 
2.2.20.  Curb : A vertical or sloping edge of a roadway intended to prevent encroachments and used in conjunction with gutters to aid in directing the flow of stormwater. 
2.2.21.  Dedication : The act of transmitting property or interest thereto. 
2.2.22.  Detention basin or detention pond: A basin designed to drain completely after retarding stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a predetermined rate. 
2.2.23.  Drainage easement: A right granted by a landowner to a grantee, allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes. 
2.2.24.  Drainage facilities: Structural and nonstructural elements designed to collect stormwater runoff and convey it away from structures and through the street right-of-way or off-street drainageways in a manner which adequately drains sites and streets and minimizes the potential for flooding and erosion. 
2.2.25.  Driveway : A means of access between a street and a property or between two adjacent properties. 
2.2.26.  Easement : Authorization by a property owner of the use by another and for a specified purpose of any designated part of that owner's property. These regulations recognize only those easements created through valid legal instruments and recorded in the office of the probate judge and those established by the city through continuous and historic use. 
2.2.27.  Engineer or registered engineer: A professional engineer registered and in good standing with the State of Alabama Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Surveyors. 
1.  City engineer: That engineer, whether on staff or contract, so designated by the city council, or his/her designee. 
2.  Project engineer: That engineer retained by the applicant. 
2.2.28.  Engineering plan: Plans prepared by the project engineer showing details of the design and construction of required improvements in a proposed subdivision or site plan. 
2.2.29.  Final plat approval : The official action taken by the commission on a preliminarily approved subdivision, after all conditions, engineering plans, and other requirements have been completed or fulfilled and the required improvements have been installed, or guarantees properly posted for the completion, or approval conditioned upon the posting of such guarantee. 
2.2.30.  Final plat : The final map or plan or record of all or a portion of a subdivision, and any accompanying materials, which is presented for final plat approval as required in these regulations. 
2.2.31.  Floodplain : Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any source including, at a minimum, that area subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
2.2.32.  Frontage road: See "Street, frontage road." 
2.2.33.  Grade : The slope of land or a built feature such as a street, specified in percentage terms. 
2.2.34.  Grading plan : A topographic map of a planned subdivision, prepared by a registered engineer, with sufficient perimeter area to provide a clear definition of the initial elevations, watercourses, vegetative cover and drainage patterns and which is sufficient in detail and scale to determine limits and depths of excavations, fills and removal of native vegetation. 
2.2.35.  Gutter : A shallow channel usually set along a curb or the pavement edge of a street for the purpose of catching and carrying off stormwater. 
2.2.36.  Half street : A street parallel and contiguous to a property line and of lesser right-of-way width than is required by these regulations. 
2.2.37.  Hardship : An unusual situation on a property, which prevents the full utilization of the property as enjoyed by others within the city. A hardship exists only when it is not self-created, or when it is not economic in nature. 
2.2.38.  Health department : The Jackson County and/or state health department. 
2.2.39.  Improvement bond : Financial security filed by the applicant with the city to ensure the construction of all required improvements at a specified time in the future. 
2.2.40.  Improvements: Those physical additions and changes to the land that may be necessary to produce usable and desirable development, including, but not limited to, driveways, landscaping, streets, sidewalks, and stormwater management and sewer facilities. 
2.2.41.  Lot : A parcel of land in one ownership, used or set aside and available for use as the site of one or more buildings and accessory structures or for any other permitted purpose.. 
2.2.42.  Maintenance bond: Financial security filed by the applicant with the city to secure the functionality and structural integrity of all required improvements for a specified period of time. 
2.2.43.  Major subdivision: A subdivision other than a minor subdivision. 
2.2.44.  Master development plan: A plan for a development within a P-1, P-2 or planned industrial district that has been approved by the council . 
2.2.45.  Median : That portion of a divided street separating lanes of traffic according to direction of travel. 
2.2.46.  Minor subdivision : A subdivision requiring no street improvements, utilities extensions or other public improvements and as otherwise described in § 3.3, minor subdivisions, procedure. 
2.2.47.  Monument : Any permanent object serving to indicate a limit or to mark a boundary. 
2.2.48.  Passage, pedestrian : A pedestrian-only or combined pedestrian and bicycle connector that provides transverse access through a long block or from the bulb of a cul-de-sac to an adjacent street. 
2.2.49.  Planning commission : The duly appointed planning commission of the City of Scottsboro, Alabama. 
2.2.50.  Planned development : An area to be planned, developed, operated, and maintained as a single entity containing one or more structures to accommodate a mixture of uses incidental to each other. Refer also to article 8 of the zoning ordinance. 
2.2.51.  Plat. A map of a subdivision. 
2.2.52.  Pre-application conference. An initial meeting between the applicant and city representatives which affords the applicant the opportunity to present a subdivision or site plan proposal informally. 
2.2.53.  Preliminary plat : A map and related materials indicating the proposed layout of a proposed subdivision submitted to the planning commission for its consideration. 
2.2.54.  Preliminary plat approval : The conferral of certain rights prior to final plat approval after specific elements of a proposed subdivision have been agreed upon by the planning commission and the applicant. 
2.2.55.  Probate judge : The probate judge of Jackson County, Alabama. 
2.2.56.  Public improvement : Any improvement, facility, or service, together with customary improvements and appurtenances thereto, necessary to provide for public needs such as: vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems, storm sewers, flood control improvements, water supply and distribution facilities, sanitary sewage disposal and treatment, public utility and energy services. 
2.2.57.  Reserve strip: A strip of land, smaller than a lot, serving as a means of controlling access to land dedicated or intended to be dedicated to street or other public use. 
2.2.58.  Resubdivision : A combination, recombination, or splitting of previously recorded lots or tracts of contiguous land for the purpose of creating additional lots or enlarging existing ones. 
2.2.59.  Retention basin or retention pond : A basin designed to capture and store stormwater runoff. 
2.2.60.  Right of way : A strip of land occupied by a street, pedestrian or bicycle passage, railroad, electric transmission lines, gas pipelines, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, and/or other special uses and dedicated to the city, state or federal government in fee simple, or by other legal means such as prescription. 
2.2.61.  Runoff : That part of precipitation, which flows over the land. 
2.2.62.  Setback : The distance from the property lines to the building or projections thereof, excluding uncovered steps or other projections specified by the zoning ordinance. Depending on context, setback may refer to a minimum required distance or an as-built distance. 
2.2.63.  Shared access : A driveway, alley or similar accessway connecting two or more contiguous sites to a public street. 
2.2.64.  Shoulder : A reserved, graded portion of the right-of-way, whether paved or unpaved, that lies between the edge of the main pavement and curbline or swale. 
2.2.65.  Sidewalk : A paved path or walkway constructed for use by pedestrians, usually located at the side of the street and inside the right-of-way. 
2.2.66.  Sight distance: The length of street visible to a motorist at a given point when viewing is unobstructed by traffic. 
1.  Intersection sight distance : The length of the line of sight between a motorist, stopped at an intersection, and the nearest intersection, driveway, alley or other signalized or non-signalized access point to the left or to the right of the motorist. 
2.  Stopping sight distance: The distance required by a motorist to stop a vehicle traveling at or near the design speed of a thoroughfare before reaching a traffic-controlled intersection or stationary object in their path. 
2.2.67.  Significant increase in trip generation : A change in the use of a property, including land, structures or facilities, or an expansion of the size of structures or facilities causing an increase in the trip generation of the property exceeding ten percent, either peak or daily, and 100 vehicles per day more than the existing use for all streets under city or county jurisdiction; or exceeding 25 percent, either peak or daily, and 100 vehicles per day more than the existing use for all roads under State of Alabama jurisdiction. 
2.2.68.  Site plan : A development plan of a multifamily residential or nonresidential development, drawn to scale, illustrating existing conditions and details of a proposed development. 
2.2.69.  Sketch plan : A preliminary presentation and attendant documentation of a proposed subdivision to be used for review and discussion prior to application for a preliminary plat. 
2.2.70.  Street : A vehicular way dedicated for public use including all land within the right-of-way. Streets are further classified as: 
1.  Arterial : A major street serving as a primary artery, intended to mainly carry through traffic and to connect major activity centers in the city, and as further classified following: 
a.  Major arterials include US 72, AL 279 (south of Broad Street), and AL 35 (from B.B. Comer Bridge to US 72). 
b.  Minor arterials include AL 79, AL 279 (north of Broad Street), AL 35 (north of US 72), and Broad Street. 
2.  Collector : A street that collects traffic from an area and moves it to the arterial network while providing some access to abutting property, including, but not limited to: Bob Jones Road, Goose Pond Drive, County Park Road, Clemons Road, Woods Cove Road, Snodgrass Road, Scott Street, and Jefferson Drive. 
3.  Frontage road : A minor street that parallels and [is] adjacent to an arterial and that provides access to abutting properties. 
4.  Local street : A minor street used primarily for access to abutting properties. 
2.2.71.  Street stub or stub street : A portion of a street used as an extension to an abutting property that may be developed in the future. 
2.2.72.  Subdivision : The division of a lot, tract, or a parcel of land into two or more parcels, lots, plats, sites or other divisions of land, whether described by metes and bounds or by another description, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of subdividing or resubdividing or selling. 
2.2.73.  Subdivision official : That official, designated by the city council, to administer and enforce these regulations, including his/her designee. 
2.2.74.  Subdivision regulations or these regulations : The subdivision regulations of the City of Scottsboro, Alabama, together with all applicable design and construction standards of the city. 
2.2.75.  Subgrade : The level layer of rock or earth upon which the foundation of a street is laid. 
2.2.76.  Surveyor or land surveyor : A land surveyor registered by and in good standing with the State of Alabama Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and land surveyors. 
2.2.77.  Swale : A constructed watercourse shaped or graded in earthen materials, grassed, and which conveys storm runoff. 
2.2.78.  Thoroughfare plan : That element of the comprehensive plan of the city which sets forth the freeways, arterials, and major collector streets in the city, provides for their approximate alignment, minimum right-of-way and paving width, and is to be used as a guide for all future development. 
2.2.79.  Travelway : That part of a street between the established curblines, or that part of the street devoted to vehicular traffic. 
2.2.80.  Variance : A waiver from compliance with a specific provision of these regulations granted by the planning commission because of unnecessary hardships that would be imposed by the strict application of that provision of these regulations. 
2.2.81.  Watercourse : A permanent or intermittent stream, river, brook, run, creek, channel, swale or bioswale, pond, lake or other body of surface water, carrying or holding surface water, whether natural or manmade. 
2.2.82.  Zoning ordinance : The officially adopted ordinance and map of the city which provides for the delineation of districts, permitted uses in each district, and for controls of such factors as lot coverage and density. 
Sec. 2.3. - Abbreviations used in these regulations. 
2.3.1.  AASHTO: American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. 
2.3.2.  ALDOT: Alabama Department of Transportation. 
2.3.3.  CAD: Computer aided drafting. 
2.3.4.  ft.: Feet. 
2.3.5.  lf: Linear feet. 
2.3.6.  max.: Maximum. 
2.3.7.  min.: Minimum. 
2.3.8.  mph: Miles per hour. 
2.3.9.  MUTCD: Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
2.3.10.  NFIP: National Flood Insurance Program. 
2.3.11.  PDF: Portable Document Format. 
2.3.12.  ROW: Right-of-way. 
2.3.13.  sf: Square feet. 
2.3.14.  yd.: Yard. 
ARTICLE 3. - PROCEDURE 

Sec. 3.1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish an orderly, expeditious procedure for review and action, by the planning commission, on applications for subdivisions and/or site plans. 
    Whenever any subdivision is proposed, before any contract is made for the sale of any part thereof, and before any building permit may be granted thereon, the property owner or authorized agent shall apply for and secure approval of such proposed subdivision in accordance with the following procedures: 
3.1.1.  Exempt subdivisions. The following types of subdivisions are exempt from any requirement for approval by the commission in accordance with these regulations. The city may require documentation to substantiate a claim of exemption: 
1.  Subdivision of land by testamentary or in testate provisions; and 
2.  Subdivision of land by court order, including, but not limited to, judgments of foreclosure. 
3.1.2.  For subdivisions, see § 3.2, pre-application, through § 3.7, improvements and bonding. For site plans, refer to § 3.9, site plan approval. 
Sec. 3.2. - Pre-application. 
3.2.1.  Whenever a subdivision or development within the city is proposed, the applicant is urged to consult early and informally with city staff and, as appropriate, a designated member of the planning commission. This informal consultation will usually save time and money as the application proceeds through preliminary and final approvals, as applicable. No formal application is required. 
3.2.2.  Following such consultation, the applicant may proceed to prepare the preliminary plat. Neither the applicant nor the planning commission shall be bound by the pre-application review; and it is expressly understood that favorable consideration at the pre-application stage of the process shall not be construed as preliminary or tentative approval, nor bind either party. 
3.2.3.  Submittal of a sketch plan prior to the preliminary plat application is encouraged and may be required by the subdivision official for planned unit developments and similar large-scale developments. This shall not be required of minor subdivision as defined in § 3.3, minor subdivision, procedure. Following submission to the subdivision official and tentative approval, the applicant may then apply for preliminary plat review and approval. The sketch plan shall be prepared at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet and shall include the following, at a minimum: 
1.  A vicinity map at one inch equals 400 feet or as otherwise approved by the subdivision official. 
2.  Name of the proposed subdivision and adjoining subdivisions. 
3.  Boundary of the subdivision with approximate tie points accepted corner based upon the public land survey system. 
4.  Topography at five ft. contour or smaller intervals. 
5.  Location of existing and proposed improvements within 200 ft. of the proposed subdivision. 
6.  Approximate locations and widths of all existing and proposed rights-of-way. 
7.  Approximate locations and dimension of all proposed lots. 
8.  Approximate locations of all parcels of land to be set aside for public uses and common areas. 
Sec. 3.3. - Minor subdivisions, procedure. 
3.3.1.  The following types of subdivisions shall be considered minor subdivisions and shall be subject to a streamlined review and approval process as described in this § 3.3: 
1.  The division of a tract of land of legal record into lots of not less than ten acres each, for the purpose of selling said lots but not for development of the same, and involving no street improvements, utilities extensions or other public improvements; 
2.  The division of a tract of land into no more than five lots all fronting on an existing paved public street and not requiring the construction or extension of any new streets, municipal facilities or public improvements; 
3.  The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining property in which no additional lots are created and where the resulting lots or tracts are not reduced below the minimum requirements of the zoning ordinance; or 
4.  Instruments correcting surveying data or other details of a previously recorded subdivision plat. 
3.3.2.  Procedure. Applications shall be submitted to the subdivision official 21 days in advance of the next regularly scheduled planning commission meeting. Incomplete applications shall be denied by the subdivision official, and the reasons for such denial shall be provided to the applicant. Following review of a completed application, the subdivision official shall report his findings and recommendations to the planning commission, which shall afford a public hearing on the plat. Notice of the hearing shall be provided by registered or certified mail to the applicant and owners of land adjoining the proposed subdivision at least five days in advance of the hearing. Minor subdivision applications may include a request for final approval as provided in § 3.8, combined preliminary and final plat approval. 
3.3.3.  The plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor and shall be drawn at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet and shall provide, at a minimum, the following: 
1.  The name of the proposed subdivision or the words "resubdivision of," as applicable; 
2.  The name, address and deed book and page of record of the legal owner and the name and address of the agent(s) acting for the legal owner, if any; 
3.  The name, address and seal of the project land surveyor or project engineer; 
4.  The names and addresses of owners of adjoining parcels of land as they appear on current tax records, including deed book and page; 
5.  Date, north point, graphic scale and the total acreage of the subdivision; 
6.  The location of the subdivision by public land survey system legal description including sufficient description to clearly define the lands; and lot, block, subdivision name, parcel numbers and legal deed book and page of all portions that are part of previously approved subdivision of legal record; 
7.  A vicinity map showing the location of the proposed subdivision and all existing and approved streets within 1,200 ft. of the perimeter of the proposed plat; 
8.  The exact length (to the nearest hundredth of a foot) and bearing (to the nearest tenth of a second of arc) of the exterior boundaries of the proposed plat; 
9.  Dimensions and areas of all lots and other land areas and the bearings of the respective sides with all lots and blocks numbered where applicable; 
10.  Approximate radii, central angle, arc distance, chord lengths and points of tangency of all curves; 
11.  Zoning classification of the subject land and all adjoining tracts; 
12.  The location, widths and names of all existing and platted streets, alleys, pedestrian ways or other public ways and easements, railroad and utility rights-of-way, parks, cemeteries, drainage ditches, water courses, bridges, and other permanent or temporary buildings or structures, and other public places on or adjacent to the subject land; 
13.  Private property to be held in common and land intended to be dedicated to public use, or to be reserved by deed covenant for use of all property owners in the subdivision with conditions, if any, of such dedication or reservations; 
14.  Floodplain boundaries, including the contour line of the floodway, the flood profile elevation (100-year flood) and the contour line two feet above the flood profile elevation. 
3.3.4.  The application shall also be accompanied by the following executed endorsements: 
1.  Project surveyor's or engineer's certificate and description of land platted; 
2.  Notarized dedication; 
3.  Any restrictions or special notations that may be required by these subdivision regulations; 
4.  Certification by the city engineer that the property and the plat has been inspected and reviewed and that it is found in compliance with applicable city regulations; 
5.  Certificate of approval from the electric, water, gas, and sanitary sewer providers, and any other interested city, county or state departments; 
6.  Certificate of approval form for execution following approval by the planning commission; and 
7.  Any additional certificates or endorsements as may be required. 
3.3.5.  Planning commission action. The planning commission shall approve, approve conditionally, or disapprove the plat within 30 days after the submission thereof at its regular meeting. If approved conditionally, the conditions and reasons therefor shall be stated, and if necessary the planning commission may require the applicant to submit a revised plat. If any of the requirements are modified or waived, the reasons for such shall be specified. If the planning commission should disapprove the plat, the reasons for such action shall be stated and if possible recommendations be made on the basis of which the subdivision may be approved. One copy of the plat as acted upon by the planning commission shall be retained at city hall, one copy forwarded to the city engineer, and one copy returned to the applicant. 
Sec. 3.4. - Major subdivisions, procedure. 
    For approval of a subdivision not otherwise classified as a minor subdivision, the following procedure shall apply: 
3.4.1.  The applicant shall first submit an application for preliminary plat approval in accordance with § 3.5, preliminary plat approval. Approval of the preliminary plat is authorization that the subdivider may proceed with the staking of streets and lots in preparation for construction of improvements and for final platting pursuant to the bonding requirements set forth in § 3.7, improvements and bonding. 
3.4.2.  Where the site of a proposed subdivision is believed to include natural or manmade hazards or sensitive environmental features, the subdivision official may require a site assessment be prepared as part of the preliminary plat application. Site assessments shall be prepared and submitted with the preliminary plat application as follows: 
1.  A site assessment map shall be prepared at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet and shall include the approximate locations and indication of size and condition of all natural and manmade hazards and sensitive environmental features found within the site, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Geologic formations, soil classifications, colluvium, caves, sinkholes, landslides (active or inactive), and lineaments. 
b.  Springs, streams (perennial, intermittent and wet weather), wetlands, seeps and ground water recharge points. 
c.  Endangered or threatened species habitats as determined by the subdivision official from U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service documents. 
d.  Evidence of above or below ground mining or quarry operations. 
e.  Spoils and other dumping areas, fill and excavation areas. 
f.  Wells, above or below ground storage tanks. 
g.  Historic or archaeological features. 
2.  A written and illustrated report shall clearly describe: 
a.  Names and qualifications of those performing the site assessment. 
b.  Methods used in the site assessment. 
c.  Findings for all features, including, where appropriate, descriptive lists of features, illustrations and photographs. 
d.  Conclusions as to how the findings may impact development of the site. 
e.  Recommendations for mitigating hazards and sensitive environmental features. 
3.  Site assessment certification, as provided in [the] appendix. 
4.  Geotechnical investigation and testing plan. Where construction is proposed on lands or portions of land where colluvium, evidence of mine operations, dump sites, existing fill and excavation areas and similar hazards are present or when in the professional opinion of the geotechnical engineer of record, geotechnical testing should be performed, a geotechnical investigation and testing plan shall be prepared and submitted. 
3.4.3.  Clearing, grubbing, erosion control, and rough grading may be subject to permitting by the Alabama Department of Environmental Management or other agencies and, if performed prior to preliminary plat approval, shall be at the owner's risk and may require re-work. Installation of any permanent structures such as storm pipe, utility pipe, storm structures, etc., shall not be permitted without prior approval of the city. 
3.4.4.  Preliminary plat approval is revocable and is to be considered only as tentative approval of the design, with the understanding that the planning commission, the city engineer, utility providers, and health department will examine the grades of streets, the types of improvements, the layout of drainage and sewerage systems and the water system, and may modify any engineering or construction details submitted by the applicant when required for the protection of the public interest. 
3.4.5.  Upon approval of the preliminary plat, the applicant shall then submit an application for final plat approval in accordance with § 3.6, final plat approval. 
Sec. 3.5. - Preliminary plat approval. 
    The planning commission review of the preliminary plat for major subdivisions shall be governed by the procedure set forth in section 11-52-31 and 32, Code of Alabama 1975 [Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-52-31 and 11-52-32], as amended. Prior to the cutting or grading of any street or the making of any street improvement or the installation of utilities, the applicant shall submit a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision in accordance with the following procedure: 
3.5.1.  Following pre-application review and/or sketch plan review, if applicable, the applicant shall submit to the subdivision official, at least 30 days prior to the next regular meeting of the planning commission, a preliminary plat application. The application shall include four print copies and an electronic version (in a format acceptable to the subdivision official) of the preliminary plat and other documents, as specified herein. The applicant shall consult with and request preliminary approval from all concerned utility providers and shall include documentation of such preliminary approval with the application. 
    For multi-phase subdivisions, the preliminary plat shall include all proposed phases of [the] subdivision, which shall include a phasing plan. The phasing plan shall show the order of the phases and the requirements to be satisfied in each phase. The phasing plan must show that the degree and extent of streets, water supply, sewage disposal, stormwater management, and other required improvements must be sufficient to serve or handle all development within each phase, in the event that subsequent phases are abandoned or remain undeveloped for an extended period of time. After preliminary plat approval, an individual phase may be modified, if approved by the planning commission, at the time of final plat approval for that phase as provided in § 3.8, combined preliminary and final plat approval. 
3.5.2.  The subdivision official shall check the proposed plat for conformance with applicable city regulations. Incomplete applications shall be denied by the subdivision official, and the reasons for such denial shall be provided to the applicant. Following review of a completed application, the subdivision official shall report his findings and recommendations to the planning commission, which shall afford a public hearing on the preliminary plat. Notice of the hearing shall be provided by registered or certified mail to the applicant and owners of land adjoining the proposed subdivision at least five days in advance of the hearing. 
3.5.3.  Planning commission action. The planning commission shall approve, approve conditionally, or disapprove a preliminary plat within 30 days after the submission thereof at its regular meeting unless the applicant agrees to an extension of that time. If approved conditionally, the conditions and reasons therefor shall be stated, and if necessary the planning commission may require the applicant to submit a revised preliminary plat. If any of the requirements are modified or waived, the reasons for such shall be specified. If the planning commission should disapprove the preliminary plat, the reasons for such action shall be stated and if possible recommendations be made on the basis of which the proposed subdivision may be approved. One copy of the preliminary plat as acted upon by the planning commission shall be retained at city hall, one copy forwarded to the city engineer, and one copy returned to the applicant. The approval of the preliminary plat shall not be deemed final acceptance, but rather an expression of approval of the subdivision layout as proposed on the preliminary plat. 
3.5.4.  Time limit. Preliminary plat approval shall be null and void if the final plat is not approved by the planning commission within 12 months after the date of approval, unless application for an extension of time is made in writing during said period to the planning commission and granted. If the final plat is not submitted within this time limit, the preliminary plat must be resubmitted for approval as a new application. However, if a final plat of a part of the subdivision has been approved within said period, approval of the preliminary plat shall automatically be extended for 12 months from the date of final plat approval of that part of the subdivision, and the same automatic extension shall apply in subsequent cases of submission of a final plat of part of the subdivision. In such cases and at any time after the initial 12 months during which the preliminary plat approval is effective, the planning commission may notify the applicant of changes it may require to meet new or changed conditions. A corrected preliminary plat with all conditions fulfilled shall be submitted prior to the construction or installation of any improvements. 
3.5.5.  The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor or engineer and shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
1.  A vicinity map showing the location of the proposed subdivision and all existing and approved streets within 1,200 ft. of the perimeter of the proposed plat. 
2.  The name of the proposed subdivision or the words "resubdivision of," as applicable. 
3.  The location of the subdivision by public land survey system legal description including sufficient description to clearly define the lands; and lot, block, subdivision name; parcel numbers and legal deed book and page of all portions that are part of [the] previously approved subdivision of legal record. 
4.  The name, address and deed book and page of record of the legal owner and the name and address of the agent(s) acting for the legal owner, if any. 
5.  The name, address and seal of the project land surveyor or engineer. 
6.  Date, north point, a graphic scale and the total amount of acreage in the subdivision. 
7.  The exact length (to the nearest hundredth of a foot) and bearing (to the nearest tenth of a second of arc) of the exterior boundaries of the proposed plat. 
8.  The location of existing platted property lines, streets, driveways, buildings, watercourses, railroads, sewers, bridges, culverts, drain pipes, water mains, and any public utility easements, both on the land subdivided and on the adjoining land. 
9.  The names of adjacent subdivisions and the names and addresses of owners of adjoining parcels of land as they appear on the current tax records, including deed book and page. 
10.  The names, locations, widths, and other dimensions of proposed streets, alleys, easements, parks and other open spaces, reservations, lot lines, and buildings. Dimensions, bearings and area in acres shall be provided for each lot and other land area. 
11.  Profiles of all streets showing natural and finished grades to a scale of not more than one inch equals 100 feet horizontal and one inch equals ten feet vertical when required by the planning commission, and such plans as may be specifically required under another section of these regulations. 
12.  Proposed plans or utility layouts (sewer, water, gas, electricity and street lights) showing connections to existing and proposed systems. 
13.  If the proposed subdivision does not lie within the jurisdiction of the zoning ordinance, the preliminary plat shall be accompanied by a plan which indicates the restrictions and proposed use of the lots. 
14.  Minimum building front, rear, and side yard setbacks. 
15.  The present and proposed (if applicable) zoning classification on the land to be subdivided and on adjoining properties. 
16.  Contour lines shown at five-foot intervals, except that where deemed necessary, the planning commission may require contour lines at two-foot intervals. 
17.  Drainage plan showing existing drainage conditions and proposed improvements and including engineering calculations on which the drainage design is based. 
18.  Street cross sections with right-of-way and pavement widths. 
19.  Approximate radii, central angles, arc distances, chord lengths and points of tangency of all curves. 
20.  The boundaries of any regulatory floodplain on the site with FIRM panel number and effective date. If the property is overlaid by a special flood hazard district A (unstudied), the applicant shall conduct a flood study delineating a floodway and base flood elevations. Minimum finished floor elevations shall be provided for all lots located within a 100-year floodplain 
21.  Lot numbers and block letters. 
22.  Inscription stating "NOT FOR FINAL RECORDING." 
23.  Certificates. The following certificates and any additional endorsements as may be required (refer to samples provided in the appendix): 
a.  If the proposed subdivision will not be served by municipal sewer facilities, a certificate from the state and/or county health department indicating their approval 
b.  Certificate of approval from the electric, water, gas, and sanitary sewer providers, and any other interested city, county or state departments 
c.  Certificates of approval shall be inscribed on the plat, (refer to samples provided in the appendix), which shall be signed by the planning commission chairperson, subdivision official, city engineer and others as may be required. 
3.5.6.  One copy of the preliminary plat shall be retained in the planning commission files. 
Sec. 3.6. - Final plat approval. 
3.6.1.  Following preliminary plat approval of a major subdivision, the subdivider shall submit to the subdivision official an application requesting review and approval of a final plat of the proposed subdivision. The request for final plat approval shall be submitted within one year of preliminary plat approval and 30 days prior to the next regular meeting of the planning commission. The final plat shall consist of the original plat and five printed copies with signed certifications, one copy of the final plat in reproducible form and any other documents specified herein. Submission of electronic copies of the proposed final plat in CAD, PDF or similar formats is encouraged as well. 
3.6.2.  The subdivision official shall review the plat for conformance with the approved preliminary plat and these regulations and report his findings and recommendations to the planning commission. The planning commission shall afford a public hearing on the final plat notice of the time and place shall be sent by registered or certified mail to the applicant, not less than five days prior to the date of the hearing. 
3.6.3.  Improvements. Prior to the approval of the final plat, an agreement shall be reached between the applicant and the city with regard to the installation of any street improvements or utility construction called for on the subdivision plat. The applicant shall be required to have installed at his expense the improvements specified in article 5, Improvements standards, except as otherwise approved in accordance with § 3.7, improvements and bonding. 
3.6.4.  Planning commission action. The planning commission shall approve or disapprove of the final plat within 30 days after the date of submission unless the applicant agrees to an extension of that time. If the final plat is disapproved, the grounds for disapproval shall be stated in the records of the planning commission. The action of the planning commission shall be shown on the final plat with the date of action shown over the signature of the person authorized by the planning commission to sign such plats. 
    Final plat approval carries with it the condition that the planning commission must be notified in writing by the subdivision official that either: (1) all required improvements have been satisfactorily installed and completed by the applicant, or (2) a bond has been posted to secure the same, before such final plat is signed as approved by the planning commission and before any public ways or lands are accepted by the city. 
3.6.5.  Time limit. Final plat approval shall be null and void if the plat is not recorded in the office of the probate judge within 60 days after the date of approval, unless application for an extension of time is made in writing during said period to the planning commission and granted. 
3.6.6.  Final plat specifications. The final plat shall conform to and meet the specifications of the preliminary plat with the following additions, which shall be sufficient to readily determine and reproduce on the ground the location, bearing and length of every street line, lot line, boundary line, block line, easement line and building setback line whether straight or curved. Curves shall be described by radius, central angle, point of tangency, tangent distance, arc and chord: 
1.  Bearings and distances to the nearest existing street lines or benchmarks or other permanent monuments (not less than three shall be accurately described on the plat). 
2.  Exact boundary lines of the tract, determined by a survey, giving distances to the nearest second, which shall be balanced and closed with an error closure not to exceed one to 10,000. 
3.  Exact location, widths and names of all streets and alleys, including those within adjoining tracts. 
4.  Street centerlines showing angles of deflection, angles of intersection, radii, and lengths of tangents. 
5.  Lot lines with dimensions, to the nearest 1/100 of a foot, and bearings. 
6.  Lots numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically. 
7.  Locations, dimensions and purposes of easements and any areas to be reserved or dedicated for common or public use. 
8.  Accurate location, material and description of existing and proposed monuments and markers. 
9.  A statement, either directly on the plat or in an identified attached document, concerning any private covenants. 
10.  If any portion of the land being subdivided is subject to flooding, as defined in the flood damage prevention ordinance, the limit of such area(s) and minimum finished floor elevations for all lots within a 100-year floodplain. 
11.  Any modifications, limitations and approval by the health department. 
12.  Certificates. The following endorsements, certificates and dedications shall be placed on the final plat: 
a.  Certification of title showing that applicant is the landowner. 
b.  Certificate of land surveyor and description of plat. 
c.  Mortgage holder's certificate. 
d.  Where a street or alley has been vacated, a note shall be shown on the plat indicating such and referring to the recorded instruments of vacation by deed book and page number. 
e.  Notary's acknowledgment of dedication certificates, surveyor's certificate and mortgage holder's certificate. 
f.  Certification from project engineer that all public improvements, including streets and drainage improvements, have been designed in accordance with these and all other applicable regulations and have been constructed in accordance with the approved plans. 
g.  Certificate of approval by the planning commission. 
h.  Certificates of approval by the city engineer and streets superintendent. 
i.  Certificate for utility providers. 
j.  Certificate of approval for recording by probate judge. 
k.  Certificate of dedication, indicating whether there is a dedication of property for public purposes or not. 
l.  Where an improvement bond is posted, a certificate of bond approval signed by the city engineer and city clerk. 
3.6.7.  As-built engineering plan. At the time of final plat approval, if applicable, the applicant shall also submit an as-built engineering plan, along with copies of all required permits, inspections and test data (including compaction test data for subgrade, base and core thickness), giving details of construction and locations of the improvements which have been installed. The as-built engineering plan provides the city with a record of the location, size, and design of streets, drainage facilities, utilities and other improvements for the city's use in the course of maintaining such improvements. Said as-built plan shall be presented in an electronic file format acceptable to the subdivision official and a paper hard copy. If the installation of improvements is completed under an improvement bond, the plan shall be submitted to the city upon request of release of the improvement bond by the applicant and/or the developer's request for city acceptance of the improvements. No improvements shall be accepted for city maintenance until all such materials have been received. 
3.6.8.  Recording of final plat. Planning commission approval of the final plat shall be null and void if the final plat is not recorded in the office of the probate judge within 60 days after approval, unless a request for extension is made in writing and is granted by the planning commission during said period. No lot in the subdivision shall be sold prior to recording of the final plat with the probate judge. Five copies of the final plat as recorded with the probate judge and a copy of any protective covenants or deed restrictions shall be provided by the applicant to the city for the records of the planning commission. An electronic copy of the final plat, covenants and deed restrictions, in a format acceptable to the subdivision official, shall also be provided. 
Sec. 3.7. - Improvements and bonding. 
3.7.1.  Improvements. No final plat shall be approved by the planning commission or accepted for recording by the probate judge until one of the following conditions has been met and certified by the city clerk: 
1.  All required improvements have been constructed or installed in a manner satisfactory to the appropriate department and approved by the planning commission; or 
2.  The planning commission has accepted an improvement bond in the form of a cashier's check, or irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or lending institution, or an escrow account with the City of Scottsboro in accordance with the following: 
a.  The bond method shall be approved by the city attorney and city council. 
b.  The applicant and any guarantor(s) shall be severally and jointly liable for completing the improvements according to specifications. 
c.  The request to post an improvements bond shall be made in writing at least 30 days prior to the planning commission meeting at which the final plat is to be considered. 
d.  Improvement bonds shall be equal to 125 percent of the estimated cost of the installation of the required improvements. 
e.  A schedule of estimated costs for all items to be bonded shall be submitted by the project engineer for review by the city engineer. This schedule shall clearly describe the items, quantities, unit cost and total cost of the remaining improvements. 
f.  Bonds shall be retained by the city clerk until the council accepts dedication of the improvements and maintenance bonds have been filed. 
g.  All improvement bonds required to be posted must be posted and accepted within 30 days after the date of final plat approval or the final plat shall automatically be voided. 
3.7.2.  Completion and acceptance of improvements. 
1.  Upon completion of required improvements, the city engineer and utilities providers shall file with the planning commission a statement either certifying that the improvements have been completed in the specific manner or listing the defects in those improvements. 
2.  Upon completion of the improvements, the applicant shall file with the planning commission a statement stipulating the following: 
a.  That all required improvements are complete. 
b.  That the improvements are in compliance with the standards specified for their construction. 
c.  That the applicant knows of no defects from any cause in those improvements. 
d.  That the improvements are free and clear of any encumbrances or liens. 
3.  If the project engineer has certified that the contracted improvements are complete and free from defect, and said improvements have passed inspection, then upon receipt of the other statements and agreements detailed above, the city shall accept the dedication of those improvements. The city may, at its discretion, accept the dedication of any portion of the improvements, provided that all statements and agreements specified above have been received for that portion of the improvements. Improvements to be dedicated to the Scottsboro Waterworks, Sewer and Gas Board shall be accepted by the board according to its rules. In no instance, however, shall the city accept improvements within any subdivision or part thereof until after water and sanitary sewer improvements have been accepted by said board. 
4.  Failure to be accepted. If any portion of required improvements fails to be accepted for dedication within the allocated time period, either for reason of incompletion or for reason of substandard construction, then the planning commission shall take the following action: 
    Where improvements have been guaranteed, the planning commission shall declare whatever bond has been pledged to be forfeit. Where the planning commission is not already in possession of said bond, it shall immediately take the actions necessary to obtain it. Upon receipt, the planning commission shall use them, or receipts from their sale if necessary, to finance the completion of contracted improvements or the rebuilding of such improvements to the proper specifications. Unused portions of these securities shall be returned to the applicant, bonding company, or crediting institution, as appropriate. 
3.7.3.  Maintenance bond. In the event the subdivider has constructed all of the required improvements and no improvement agreement is required, the subdivider shall execute a maintenance agreement. Such agreement shall be on a form furnished by the planning commission and shall warrant all materials and workmanship on the requirements and shall provide for maintenance on the requirements for a period of one year after the acceptance of such improvements by the city, provided that for major streets and subdivision entrance streets, a longer period may be required by the planning commission. 
    A bond shall be required to ensure the fulfillment of such agreement and shall be in the form provided by the planning commission. Such maintenance bond shall be in an amount of $5,000.00 or 25 percent of the total cost of all improvements, whichever is greater. A schedule of costs for all items to be bonded shall be submitted by the project engineer for review and approval by the subdivision official. This schedule shall clearly describe the items, quantities, unit cost and total cost of the required improvements. 
Sec. 3.8. - Combined preliminary and final plat approval. 
    An applicant may submit a combined request for both preliminary plat and final plat approval. In such cases all requirements for both preliminary and final plat approval shall be met. 
Sec. 3.9. - Site plan approval. 
3.9.1.  Whenever any multifamily or nonresidential development or change or expansion of such uses of a site is proposed or whenever any changes are proposed that differ from an existing approved site plan before any construction, land clearing, building development or change in use is begun and before any building permit or authorization for development on such site shall be granted, the property owner or his authorized agent shall apply for and secure from the planning commission site plan approval in accordance with the procedures outlined herein. 
1.  The following shall require site plan approval (Where there is any doubt as to whether or not site plan review is required, the affected party should request a determination from the subdivision official.): 
a.  New construction of nonresidential or multifamily development. 
b.  Any change of an existing use to multifamily or nonresidential. 
c.  A development proposal involving external modifications or construction, including parking lots (except for single-family or duplex residential). 
d.  A development proposal involving expansion of a building or intensification of multifamily or nonresidential uses that would result in a change in traffic volume or patterns in the area, noise, parking, lighting, etc. 
e.  A development involving a property that has never received site plan approval for previous nonresidential or multifamily use. 
2.  The following shall not require site plan approval: 
a.  Single-family and duplex residential developments. 
b.  Proposals that involve no change in use or level of activity. 
c.  Internal building modifications that do not affect the scale or impact of the existing use. 
d.  Re-use of a premises with an approved site plan, provided the new use is not different in type or impact. 
3.9.2.  Procedure, planning commission action. 
1.  The subdivision official shall review the plan for conformance with applicable regulations and report his findings and recommendations to the planning commission. 
2.  The planning commission shall approve or disapprove of the site plan within 30 days after the date of submission unless the applicant agrees to an extension of that time. If the site plan is disapproved, the grounds for disapproval shall be stated in the records of the planning commission. The action of the planning commission shall be shown on the approved site plan with the date of action shown over the signature of the person authorized by the planning commission to sign such plans. 
3.  Site plan approval shall become null and void if within one year from the date of approval, a building permit has not been applied for, unless a request for extension is made in writing and is granted by the planning commission during said period. 
3.9.3.  Clearing, grubbing, erosion control, and rough grading may be subject to permitting by the Alabama Department of Environmental Management or other agencies and, if performed prior to site plan approval, shall be at the owner's risk and may require re-work. Installation of any permanent structures such as storm pipe, utility pipe, storm structures, etc., shall not be permitted without prior approval of the city. 
3.9.4.  Submittal requirements. A site plan application shall contain the following, at a minimum: 
1.  The name, address and deed book and page of record of the legal owner and the name and address of the authorized agent, if any. 
2.  The name, address and seal of the project land surveyor, engineer, or other designer as applicable. 
3.  Names and addresses of all owners of abutting property as they appear on current tax records. 
4.  Names and addresses of all holders of restrictions and easements on the property. 
5.  A vicinity map showing the location of the development and all existing and proposed streets within 1,200 ft. of the perimeter of the development site. 
6.  Date, north point, a graphic scale and the area of the premises in square feet and acres. 
7.  Locations of property lines, streets, driveways, sidewalks, buildings, watercourses, railroads, sewers, bridges, culverts, drain pipes, and water mains on the site and on abutting property. 
8.  The names, locations, widths, and other dimensions of proposed drives, lot lines, buildings and other improvements. 
9.  Location, dimensions, and design of garbage collection areas. 
10.  Grading plan including existing and proposed contour lines shown at one ft. intervals, unless otherwise permitted by the subdivision official. 
11.  Drainage plan showing existing drainage conditions and proposed improvements and including engineering calculations on which the drainage design is based. 
12.  Identification of all accesses to the site, sight distance at access points, dimensions of curb cuts and distances from intersections and driveways on adjacent properties. 
13.  Proposed utility layouts. 
14.  If not to be served by municipal sewer facilities, a certificate or letter from the state and/or county health department indicating their approval 
15.  Certificate of approval from the electric, water, gas, and sanitary sewer providers, and any other interested city, county or state departments. 
16.  All existing and proposed easements, deed restrictions, and reservations on the site. 
17.  Minimum building front, rear, and side yard setbacks. 
18.  The zoning classification of the site and on abutting properties. 
19.  Location and total number of parking and loading spaces. 
20.  A landscape plan, describing the number, location, types and size of all landscape elements, buffers and screening. 
21.  The location, type and nature of all exterior lighting and signage. 
22.  Base flood elevations and flood hazard areas, based on available FEMA maps. 
For multi-phase developments, grading, drainage and similar plans for each phase may be required by the subdivision official for review and approval by the planning commission. 
ARTICLE 4. - SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS 
    All proposed subdivisions shall conform to all applicable state and local regulations, including the zoning ordinance where in effect. The design standards of this article shall be the minimum standards allowable for development. Standards above the minimum may be required by the planning commission or the subdivision official. Detailed construction specifications and engineering requirements may be obtained from the subdivision official. Prior to the planning commission's consideration of any request for a variance, modification, or waiver of the requirements of this article, the subdivision official shall provide its recommendation to the planning commission regarding such request. 

Sec. 4.1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of good subdivision and site design is to ensure functional and attractive developments, to minimize adverse impacts, and make projects assets to the community. To promote this purpose, the subdivision and/or site plan shall conform to the following standards, which are designed to result in a well-planned community without adding unnecessarily to development costs. 
Sec. 4.2. - General subdivision design standards. 
4.2.1.  Site analysis. An analysis shall be made of characteristics of the proposed site, such as site context; geology and soil; topography; existing vegetation; structures and street networks; visual features; and use of the site. Development of the site shall be based on the site analysis. To the maximum extent practicable, development shall be located so as to preserve the natural features of the site, to avoid or protect areas of environmental sensitivity, and to minimize negative impacts and alteration of natural features. 
4.2.2.  Suitability of the land. The planning commission may not approve the subdivision of land, if from adequate investigation conducted by all public agencies concerned, it has been determined that in the best interest of public health, safety and welfare, the site is not suitable for platting and development as proposed. However, an applicant may nonetheless propose a new plat with a different layout, change in use or intensity, or other change in response to the issues raised by the applicable public agencies during review of a previous plat proposal. 
4.2.3.  Stormwater drainage design. The rate of stormwater runoff from any development resulting from the 25-year rainfall occurring within the space of one hour shall not exceed the predevelopment stormwater runoff rate for a 25-year rainfall occurring within the space of one hour. 
4.2.4.  Development in flood zones. The development of land, subject to flooding, shall be done in accordance with the flood damage prevention ordinance and the applicable regulations of the national flood insurance program (NFIP). Development in a designated floodway is prohibited unless certification by the project engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
4.2.5.  Conformity with other plans and regulations. Design of the development shall take into consideration all existing local and regional plans and shall conform to the zoning ordinance where in effect. 
1.  No final plat of land within the force and effect of the zoning ordinance shall be approved unless the building restrictions to be established conform to the applicable regulations of the zoning ordinance. 
2.  Public uses. If public sites are shown in the comprehensive plan to be set aside or if such sites are recommended as essential by the planning commission or city council, such sites shall be reserved for such purpose for a period of two years from the date the subdivision is recorded. If at the end of two years the city has not taken action to acquire the property, the applicant may request a hearing before the planning commission to waive the reservation or to otherwise determine the fate of said site. 
4.2.6.  Preservation areas. The following specific areas should be preserved as undeveloped open space, to the extent consistent with the reasonable use of the land and in accordance with applicable state or local regulations: 
1.  Significant trees or stands of trees; 
2.  Lands in the flood plain, as defined and or depicted on the flood maps provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, and as outlined in the flood damage prevention ordinance. 
3.  Steep slopes in excess of 20 percent as measured over a ten-foot interval unless appropriate engineering measures concerning slope stability, erosion, and resident safety are taken. 
4.  Habitats of endangered wildlife. 
5.  Historically significant structures and sites, as listed on federal, state or local registers of historic places. 
4.2.7.  The development shall be laid out to avoid adversely affecting ground water; to reduce cutting and filling; to avoid unnecessary impervious cover; to prevent flooding; to provide adequate access to lots and sites; and mitigate adverse effects of noise, odor, traffic, drainage, and utilities on neighboring properties. 
4.2.8.  The street, parcel and block pattern of all proposed developments shall be adapted appropriately to the uses anticipated. 
4.2.9.  Where applicable, a proposed phasing plan shall provide for continuity of development through phases of reasonable proportions. 
4.2.10.  Lot and block size, shape and orientation shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision, its environmental systems and for the type of development anticipated. 
4.2.11.  When land is subdivided into parcels larger than ordinary building lots, such parcels should be arranged and designed so as to allow for future resubdivision and extension of future streets. 
4.2.12.  The proposed street layout shall be appropriate for the type of development proposed and appropriately integrated with the surrounding street system. 
4.2.13.  The proposed street layout shall conform substantially to a development pattern for the subject and surrounding area that will be in accord with the comprehensive plan, as interpreted by the planning commission. 
4.2.14.  Where community or public facilities, existing or as proposed in the comprehensive plan, are to be located in whole or in part in a proposed subdivision or development, such area(s) necessary to accommodate these facilities shall be reserved. 
Sec. 4.3. - Residential subdivision design standards. 
4.3.1.  All residential lots shall abut a public street unless otherwise permitted for planned developments in accordance with the zoning ordinance. 
4.3.2.  Every lot shall have sufficient access to it for emergency vehicles, as required by the adopted fire code. 
4.3.3.  The placement of dwelling units shall take into consideration topography, privacy, building height, orientation, drainage, and aesthetics. 
4.3.4.  Buildings shall be spaced so that adequate privacy is provided for units. 
    For the purposes of applying subdivision standards in a manner that is sensitive to the type of development proposed, residential subdivisions are hereby classified as: low density (R-1 zoning or minimum average lot size of 15,000 sf.); medium density (R-2 zoning or a minimum average lot size between 10,500 and 15,000 sf.) and high density (all other residential zoning classifications or any multifamily or townhouse development or single-family lots less than 10,500 sf.). 
Sec. 4.4. - Nonresidential subdivision design standards. 
    Except as otherwise specified, all commercial and industrial subdivisions shall be subject to all design standards in this article 4 and shall be designed according to the same principles governing the design of residential developments; namely, that buildings and streets shall be located according to topography, with environmentally sensitive areas avoided to the maximum extent practicable; factors such as drainage, noise, odor, and surrounding land uses shall be considered in citing buildings; sufficient access shall be provided; and adverse impacts buffered or otherwise mitigated. 
    Following subdivision of the land, nonresidential developments shall also be reviewed in accordance with § 3.9, site plan approval, and the site design standards in article 6 to ensure that the subdivision will accommodate the requirements of the uses contemplated and the requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
Sec. 4.5. - Circulation system design. 
    The street system shall be designed to permit the safe, efficient, and orderly movement of traffic; to meet the needs of the present and future population served; to have a simple and logical pattern; to respect natural features and topography; and to present an attractive streetscape. 
4.5.1.  Streets. 
1.  Whenever land to be subdivided embraces any part of a highway or street so designated on any county or regional plan, such part of the proposed public way shall be platted by the same width as indicated on the county or regional plan. 
2.  All streets shall be platted along contour elevations, which will result in minimum grades and greater visibility wherever practical, with consideration given to the anticipated use of the land. 
3.  The proposed street layout shall be made according to good land planning practices for the type development proposed and shall be coordinated with the street systems of the surrounding areas. 
4.  Proposed new streets shall extend existing streets or their projections at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the minimum required width. 
5.  To ensure proper circulation and emergency response, all residential subdivisions containing 50 or more lots shall have a minimum of two access points on external streets. 
6.  To ensure future street connections where a proposed development abuts unplatted land or a future development phase of the same development, street stubs shall be provided for access to abutting properties or to logically extend the street system as determined by the planning commission. 
a.  All street stubs shall be provided with temporary turnarounds except where the street stub is 200 feet or less in length. The area necessary for the temporary turnaround outside the normal right-of-way shall be contained within a temporary easement, which shall automatically dissolve when the street is extended and approved by the city. The length of the turnaround shall be in accordance with § 4.5.4.4, dead end streets. 
b.  Street improvements shall extend to within five ft. of the boundary of the property. Rights-of-way shall extend to the boundary. 
c.  Paving and utilities shall be extended far enough to serve the developing lots and, unless approved otherwise by the city engineer, shall be extended the same distance. 
d.  The restoration and extension of the street shall be the responsibility of the future developer of the abutting land. 
The planning commission may waive this provision if in their determination, there is no feasible way to continue the street in the foreseeable future. 
4.5.2.  The platting of any land, the purpose of which is to deny access to rights-of-way, is prohibited, except as otherwise provided herein. There shall be no reserve strips controlling access to streets, except where the control of such strips is specifically placed with the city and under conditions approved by the planning commission. 
4.5.3.  Private streets. There shall be no private streets platted in any subdivision. 
4.5.4.  Street design requirements. Minimum street right-of-way, pavement width, and cross section elements shall be as provided in table 4-1 and as illustrated in figure 4.1. All streets shall include curb and gutter. 
1.  Additional widths on half streets. Subdivisions that adjoin existing half streets shall dedicate additional right-of-way to meet the minimum street width requirements. The entire right-of-way shall be dedicated where any part of the subdivision is on both sides of the half street; and where the subdivision is located on only one side of a half street, the amount of right-of-way to be dedicated is as follows: 
a.  If the land across the roadway from the proposed subdivision has not been subdivided or developed, the subdivider is only required to dedicate one-half of the required right-of-way, measured from the center line of the existing roadway. 
b.  If the land across the roadway has been subdivided or developed, the subdivider is required to provide enough additional right-of-way on his side of the roadway to bring the total right-of-way to the required width. 
2.  Topographic conditions and street grades. In general, streets shall be planned to conform to existing topographic conditions. Unless a steeper grade is approved by the Fire marshal, maximum street grades shall be: six percent on arterials and ten percent on collectors, local streets and alleys, with no grades exceeding the maximum for any length of street. Grades of dead-end streets shall not exceed five percent for the cul-de-sac bulb or hammerhead. To allow for proper drainage, no tangent street grade shall be less than one percent. 
3.  Street intersections. Insofar as practical, acute angles at street intersections shall be avoided. Where an acute angle of less than 75 degrees occurs between streets at their intersections, the planning commission may require the property lines to be rounded or otherwise setback to permit curb construction of desirable radius without curtailing the sidewalk at the street corner to less than normal width. Submission of a grading plan showing existing and proposed contours at intervals of one foot and a detailed design for the intersection may be required by the subdivision official. 
4.  Dead end streets. Streets designed to have one end permanently closed (cul-de-sac) shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround with a minimum right-of-way radius of 50 feet, and a minimum driving surface radius of 40 feet. The maximum permitted length of a cul-de-sac is 600 feet. 
5.  Medians. Medians, where provided, shall have a minimum width of five ft. to allow for planting. 
6.  On-street parking. Lanes for on-street parking shall be provided on streets as required or as approved by the planning commission in accordance with the requirements in table 4-1 and the following: 
a.  Generally, on-street parking is appropriate along local streets serving nonresidential, mixed-use, and high density residential uses. 
b.  Parking lane width shall be measured from the face of curb. 
7.  Planting strips. Planting strips shall be provided between the curb and sidewalk, or in the absence of sidewalk, between the curb and right-of-way line. Along residential streets, the planting strip shall be grassed or otherwise vegetative. Along nonresidential streets, the planting strip may include regularly spaced street tree wells and an extension of the sidewalk to the curb. On nonresidential streets with minimal pedestrian traffic expected, the planning commission may approve a continuous grassed or vegetative planting strip between the curb and sidewalk. 
8.  Street elevations. The planning commission may require, where necessary, profiles and elevations of streets in areas subject to flood, as defined in these regulations and the flood damage prevention ordinance and as identified on the flood maps provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). Fill may be used, except within identified floodways, where such fill does not increase flood heights. 
4.5.5.  Street names. Proposed street names shall be subject to approval of the planning commission. Proposed streets obviously in alignment with existing and named streets shall bear the names of the existing streets. In no case shall the name for the proposed streets duplicate existing street names. 
4.5.6.  Horizontal curvature. The minimum radii of centerline curvature shall be as provided in table 4-2 and as necessary to meet the applicable minimum sight distance. See also figure 4.2. Between reverse curves there shall be a tangent having a length of not less than 100 feet. 
4.5.7.  Vertical alignment. Vertical alignment shall be such that the minimum stopping and intersection sight distances in table 4-2 are met. Stopping sight distance shall be determined using a height of eye of 3.5 feet and two feet object height. The intersection sight distance shall be determined using a height of eye of 3.5 feet and 4.25 feet object height. See also figure 4.2. 
Table 4-1. Street Design Standards Specifications are based on two-lane road sections. The planning commission, upon a recommendation by the city engineer, may require a median, turn lanes, acceleration and deceleration lanes, or additional travel lanes where trips generated by anticipated uses or where city, county, or regional plans require increased design improvements (see also figure 4.1). Street Type Residential Local Residential Collector Posted Speed 15-25 25-35 Design Speed 20-30 mph 30-40 mph Drainage Facility Width/Type 18 inches; curb/gutter 18 inches; curb/gutter Min. Planting Strip 4 ft. both sides 4 ft. both sides Parking Lane Width 1 7 ft. 7 ft. Actual Curb Radius 15-18 ft. 20-24 ft. Effective Turning Radius 2 20-24 ft. 20-24 ft. Travel way Width 3 26 ft. 26 ft. Min. ROW 4 50 ft. 60 ft. Travel Lane Width 5 10-12 ft. 11-12 ft.  
1 On-street parking, where required or approved by the planning commission, shall be parallel and may be placed on one or both sides as determined by the planning commission. 
2 Effective turning radius is determined by adding the width of an adjacent parking lane, if present, to the corner curb radius. Where a bulb-out is provided, the effective turning radius is the radius of the bulb-out. 
3 Travel way width is measured from face-of-curb to face-of-curb. Widths shown do not include on-street parking. Where on-street parking, medians or additional travel lanes (including turn, acceleration, and deceleration lanes) are approved or required by the planning commission, travel way widths shall be calculated based on the minimum requirements for each cross section element to be included. 
4 Additional ROW width may be required when parking lanes, medians, or additional travel lanes (including turn, acceleration or deceleration lanes) are included, or when other design elements require a greater width. 
5 Lane widths shall be within the range specified, except that lanes of up to 13 ft. on local streets and 14 ft. on collectors may be required in areas of steeper topography where horizontal curves are more frequent. This may require additional right-of-way width. Lane striping is not required on local residential streets but may be required by the city engineer on residential collectors and for any street segment with more than two lanes. 
Street Type Mixed-Use or Nonresidential Local Mixed-Use or Nonresidential Collector Frontage Road Industrial Access Road Posted Speed 20-25 mph 25-35 mph 20-35 mph 20-30 mph Design Speed 25-30 mph 30-40 mph 25-40 mph 25-35 mph Curb Width/Type 18 inches; curb/gutter 18 inches; curb/gutter 18 inches; curb/gutter 18 inches; curb/gutter Min. Planting Strip 4 ft.; both sides 4 ft.; both sides 4 ft.; developed side 4 ft.; developed side Parking Lane Width 1 7 ft. 7 ft. n/a n/a Actual Curb Radius 12-15 ft. 15-18 ft. 18-21 ft. 25-30 ft. Effective Turning Radius 2 19-22 ft. 22-25 ft. 25-28 ft. 25-30 ft. Min. Travel Way 3 26 ft. 26 ft. 26 ft. 30 ft. Min. ROW 4 50 ft. 60 ft. 50 ft. 60 ft. Travel Lane Width 5 10-12 ft. 11-12 ft. 11-12 ft. 11-13 ft.  
1 On-street parking, where required or approved by the planning commission, shall be parallel and may be placed on one or both sides. Angled parking may be permitted by the planning commission on mixed-use and nonresidential streets. In such cases, minimum parking lane width shall be 18 ft. and the travel way and ROW widths increased accordingly. 
2 Effective turning radius is determined by adding the width of an adjacent parking lane, if present, to the corner curb radius. Where a bulb-out is provided, the effective turning radius is the radius of the bulb-out. 
3 Travel way width is measured from face-of-curb to face-of-curb. Widths shown do not include on-street parking. Where on-street parking, medians or additional travel lanes (including turn, acceleration, and deceleration lanes) are approved or required by the planning commission, travel way widths shall be calculated based on the minimum requirements for each cross section element to be included. 
4 Additional ROW width may be required when parking lanes, medians, or additional travel lanes (including turn, acceleration or deceleration lanes) are included, or when other design elements require a greater width. 
5 Lane widths shall be within the range specified, except that lanes of up to 13 ft. on local streets and 14 ft. on collectors may be required in areas of steeper topography where horizontal curves are more frequent. This may require additional right-of-way width. 
Table 4-2. Sight Distance and Street Curvature Street Design Speed (mph) Minimum centerline radius (ft.) Stopping Sight Distance (ft.) Intersection Sight Distance (ft.) 20 125 115 225 25 150 155 280 30 275 200 335 35 300 250 390 40 500 305 445 45 650 360 500 50 820 425 555  
Distances are intended as a minimum guideline. Site conditions, such as grades, traffic volumes, additional lanes, signalization types, etc., may warrant increases in desired sight distances. 

4.5.8.  Alleys. The planning commission may, at its discretion, require that alleys be provided for any or a combination of the following: alternative access to lots, placement of and access to aboveground utilities, garbage collection, loading and unloading, and mail service. Where alleys are to be provided, they shall be designed in accordance with the requirements in table 4-3 and paved as required by the city engineer. Where an alley is designated as a fire apparatus access road by the fire marshal, the minimum pavement width shall be 20 ft. 
Table 4-3. Alley Requirements Min. ROW Width Min. Pavement Width Curb Radius at Street Local Collector Single-family 20 ft. 12 ft. 10-13 ft. 13-16 ft. Multifamily and Nonresidential 24 ft. 20 ft. 10-13 ft. 13-16 ft.  
4.5.9.  Roadside drainage facilities. Roadside drainage facilities shall be used as needed to channel stormwater runoff away from private property and away from streets. The type of drainage facility shall be as required in table 4-1. 
1.  The planning commission may approve the use of "bioswales" as an alternative to conventional drainage techniques in accordance with § 4.10, experimental subdivisions. 
2.  Owing to unique topographic and soil characteristics, roadside drainage improvements may not be required for stormwater runoff in some medium and low density residential developments. In such cases the planning commission may modify these requirements upon a recommendation by the city engineer. 
Sec. 4.6. - Access management. 
    The purposes of this section are to promote the overall safety of motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians; to reduce interference with through traffic by other vehicles entering, leaving, and crossing streets; to ensure safe access to and from streets by emergency vehicles; and to preserve the traffic capacity of streets. 
4.6.1.  General conditions and requirements. The location and design of vehicular accesses from arterial, collector, and local streets proposed with a subdivision shall be specified in an access plan submitted to the subdivision official for review and recommendation to the planning commission for action. No curbs or rights-of-way shall be cut, paved, or otherwise altered until a permit for the access has been secured from the city and/or any other governmental agency owning or controlling the street right-of-way. 

4.6.2.  Approval for specific use. Accesses existing as of the effective date of these standards are approved for the existing use only. Accesses approved under these standards shall be approved for the use specified in the access plan. Changes in use that would increase traffic or change the types of vehicles accessing the site shall require a new approval of access. When a site existing at the time of these standards is redeveloped so as to create a significant increase in trip generation, the existing driveways shall be brought into conformity with these requirements. 
4.6.3.  Expiration of approval. Access plans, including related off-site street improvements, shall be constructed within two years of approval, or the approval shall terminate. 
4.6.4.  Prohibition of unsafe access. Notwithstanding any other provisions of these standards, an access, which demonstrates a potential threat or danger to the public and/or which could affect the safe, efficient flow of traffic, may be denied, based on commonly accepted and applied traffic engineering principles. 
4.6.5.  Access plan. The access plan shall be submitted as part of the preliminary plat or site plan. 
4.6.6.  Traffic impact study. The subdivision official may require a traffic impact study by an engineer, using the standard format specified by the latest edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) publication Traffic Access and Impact Studies for Site Development to assess the traffic impacts of a proposed access to adjacent and nearby streets and intersections when the expected number of trips generated by the proposed use exceeds an estimated 1,000 vehicle trips per day or 100 peak hour vehicle trips per day. In addition, the subdivision official may require a traffic impact study for sites that generate less than 1,000 vehicle trips per day, or 100 peak hour vehicle trips per day, if the sites are located at or near high-volume intersections or other locations where the use may constitute a threat or danger to the safe and efficient flow of traffic. The subdivision official may waive this provision if a recent, valid traffic study has been completed from which needed traffic data can be extrapolated. 
    Unless otherwise specified by the subdivision official, the study shall address trip generation and directional distribution, traffic assignment to streets and access locations, 24-hour and a.m. and p.m. peak hour traffic forecasting (on-site and off-site), capacity analysis and level of service for adjacent streets and nearby intersections before and after the proposed full development, and recommendations for street improvements and traffic control installation and/or modifications to existing signals. The traffic data used in the study shall be consistent with the use and density data as referenced in the latest edition of trip generation, published by ITE; current city and state traffic counts for surrounding streets; and the marketing study for the proposed use. 
4.6.7.  Guidelines. For all developments, redevelopments, and changes in use, the city engineer shall provide a recommendation to the planning commission regarding requests for access: 
1.  Access to a corner lot should be permitted only from the street of lesser classification or lower average daily traffic, except as otherwise specified herein. Where the classification of both streets is the same, access may be provided along either or both subject to table 4-4. 
2.  Access to streets shall be provided to lots by means of shared access (alleys or shared driveways), frontage roads, or direct access (non-shared driveways). The number and location of access points shall be in accordance with table 4-4 and measured as shown in figure 4.5. 
3.  Frontage roads shall normally only be required along major arterials and only when they can be designed properly to provide safe and efficient access for properties. 
4.  Single-family and duplex lots: 
a.  Should not front on nor have direct access from a major arterial; 
b.  May have frontage along minor arterials though access should generally be from a local street, frontage road or alley; 
c.  May have frontage and access along a collector subject to table 4-4. 
5.  For local streets, minimum separation distance may be reduced, provided that, if approved by the city engineer, the following conditions exist, based on commonly accepted and applied traffic engineering principles: 
a.  Shared access is not possible; 
b.  Exceptional topographic or site conditions exist at the driveway location (such as in-place utility or drainage features) which would make strict application of the standard exceptionally and/or practically difficult or unduly harsh; 
c.  Application of these requirements would conflict with other provisions of these regulations; and 
d.  The reduction would not constitute a threat or danger to the safe and efficient flow of traffic. 

Table 4-4. Access Management Criteria Use and Street Type Number of Accesses Permitted Minimum Required Spacing From intersection Between driveways on same lot Between driveways on separate lots Major Arterials regardless of use 1 access for lots with street frontage < 600 ft. 1 250 ft. 200 ft. 200 ft. Minor Arterials regardless of use 1 access for lots with street frontage < 400 ft. 200 ft. 150 ft. 150 ft. Nonresidential and Multifamily uses on Collectors 1 access for lots with street frontage < 125 ft. 1 150 ft. 125 ft. 125 ft. Single-family and duplex dwellings on Collectors 1 access for lots with street frontage < 100 ft. 1 125 ft. 2 50 ft. 25 ft. Nonresidential and Multifamily uses on Local Streets 1 access for lots with street frontage < 75 ft. 1 100 ft. 75 ft. 75 ft. Single-family and duplex dwellings on Local Streets 1 access per lot with street frontage < 100 ft. or 2 access per lot with street frontage &gte;100 ft. 75 ft. 2 50 ft. 10 ft.  
1 Lots with greater street frontage may have a second driveway, provided that the planning commission may approve additional driveways based on trip generation or topography, and it is determined that the impact to traffic safety and movement on the street will be minimal. 
2 A corner lot abutting two local streets may have a driveway with less than the above-required distance from the intersecting street, if, in the opinion of the city engineer, the driveway will not adversely affect traffic safety and movement on the streets. 
4.6.8.  Access easements. The planning commission may require shared access easements or other conditions that require multiple lots to have shared access to arterials or collector streets such as through the use of alleys, shared driveways, or marginal access roads. Such requirements shall be considered for both residential and nonresidential subdivisions where application of the access spacing standards of this subsection would prevent direct access along arterials and collector streets. 
1.  Shared access easements should be provided wherever it is possible to construct a continuous access drive or alley connecting one street to another. In such cases, the shared access drive shall be constructed by the developer and may be considered for maintenance by the city. Where it is not feasible to create such an easement, the planning commission may require a private access easement as described below. 
2.  Where private access easements are used, the subdivision plat shall state that the transfer of lots shall be subject to the provision of such easements, which shall provide for a guaranteed, unrestricted, right of access to all other owners providing such easements and that the owners of lots subject to private access easements shall be required to execute an agreement specifying responsibility for construction and perpetual maintenance of the easements and drives in accordance with the approved access plan. The agreement shall specify that the parties thereto shall hold the city harmless from liabilities resulting from unsafe conditions on private access easements. Copies of the agreements shall be filed with the city clerk. Construction on private access easements shall not be commenced until all agreements are filed. Copies of all subsequent amendments to the agreements shall also be filed with the city clerk. 
4.6.9.  Throat length. At access points, adequate throat length shall be provided for stacking space. Driveways for nonresidential uses should extend a minimum of 60 feet into the property from the front lot line before the edge of the driveway is crossed by an aisle or another drive and 30 feet before the edge of the driveway intersects an off-street parking space. See figure 4.6 below. 

4.6.10.  Acceleration and deceleration lanes, storage and turn lanes. 
1.  Acceleration lanes for nonresidential uses. In instances of unusual topography or for traffic safety considerations, the city engineer may require the construction of an acceleration lane for nonresidential uses. The length of taper and total length shall be determined based on commonly accepted and applied traffic engineering principles. 
2.  Deceleration lanes. Deceleration lanes shall be required for each access to arterial or collector streets where the proposed use will increase traffic volumes on the existing street to a total in excess of 1,000 vehicle trips per day or 100 peak-hour vehicle trips per day. 
a.  The deceleration lane, a minimum of 11 feet wide, measured from the face of the curb (for curb sections without a monolithic gutter), the edge of the gutter (for a monolithic curb and gutter section), or the edge of the shoulder line (for a non-curbed section to the center of the lane line), shall be constructed with the length measured from the centerline of the access point according to the criteria in table 4-5. 
b.  The minimum dimensions of the deceleration lane may be reduced, provided that it is determined by the city engineer that the following conditions exist, based on commonly accepted and applied traffic engineering principles: exceptional topographic constraints or unusual site conditions at the driveway location (such as in-place utility or drainage features) which would make strict application of the standard exceptionally and/or practically difficult or unduly harsh; and the reduction would not constitute a threat or danger to the safe and efficient flow of traffic. 
Table 4-5 Minimum Deceleration Lane Speed Limit Length of Taper Total Length 35 mph or less 75 ft. 200 ft. 40 to 45 mph 110 ft. 250 ft. 50 to 55 mph 150 ft. 300 ft.  
3.  Left-turn storage lanes. Approval of access to an arterial or to a collector may be conditioned upon the provision of a left-turn storage lane. The requirement and design of each storage lane, including the paved approach, bay, and departure tapers, shall be determined from the recommendations of a traffic study and approved by the city engineer based on commonly accepted and applied traffic engineering principles. 
4.  Turn lanes on collectors and local streets. Right and left-turn lanes at intersections may be required by the city engineer based upon existing or required traffic studies. Such lanes shall be accommodated in the dedication of additional right-of-[way] widths on existing streets or in the planned right-of-way of proposed streets. Design requirements, including width and storage length, shall be determined from the recommendations of the applicable traffic study and approved by the city engineer based on commonly accepted and applied traffic engineering principles. Continuous two-way left-turn lanes shall be discouraged, and a median shall be provided to control access between intersections on collector streets. 
Sec. 4.7. - Blocks and lots. 
4.7.1.  Blocks. Blocks shall not be more than 1,200 feet in length. In blocks over 800 feet in length the planning commission may require one or more public pedestrian passages with not less than a ten-foot right-of-way. The planning commission may require a minimum block length of 400 feet. 
4.7.2.  Lot arrangement. 
1.  Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines. 
2.  Each lot shall front a public street for a consecutive distance as required by the zoning ordinance. 
3.  Lots shall not be platted such that they, by virtue of topography, flooding, or other environmental hazards, may not reasonably be built upon without variance from dimensional and other requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
4.7.3.  Double and reverse frontage lots. Double frontage lots in residential developments should be avoided, except where essential to separate residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. Reverse frontage lots shall have a depth of not less than 150 feet. A planted evergreen buffer and easement at least ten feet wide, across which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the line of lots abutting the street right-of-way or other incompatible land use. 
Sec. 4.8. - Sidewalks, pedestrian facilities. 
    Sidewalks and pedestrian facilities shall be provided as determined by the planning commission in accordance with the following. Where not required, such facilities may be provided at the option of the applicant, provided minimum design and construction requirements are satisfied: 
4.8.1.  Guidelines. 
1.  Whenever land to be subdivided embraces any part of a sidewalk or pedestrian facility so designated on a city sidewalk master plan, such facility shall be provided as part of the subdivision. 
2.  Sidewalks should be provided on at least one side of streets within 1,000 ft. of an existing or planned school, library, park, place of assembly or commercial area. 
3.  Sidewalks should be provided along streets that presently or in the future will contain uses that are specifically intended to serve children or the aged. 
4.  Pedestrian facilities should be placed along collector streets to provide a safe walking environment, adequately separated from higher speed vehicular traffic, connecting one or more subdivisions to nearby destinations. 
5.  Sidewalks shall not be required where the proposed grade of a street frontage is steeper than would be reasonable for pedestrian use. 
6.  A permanently dedicated greenway, walking trail, pedestrian passage or similar pedestrian facility may be required as an alternative to sidewalks to provide pedestrian access to nearby commercial centers, schools, parks, or places of assembly. In such cases, the pedestrian facility should be located so as to be accessible to the greatest number of users within the proposed development. 
7.  Where the planning commission determines there is a need to provide pedestrian access, pedestrian passages may be required to provide access across the depth of a block that exceeds 800 feet in length. 
8.  Cul-de-sacs within medium or high density residential subdivisions or districts may be required to provide a permanent pedestrian passage to nearby destinations. Such passage may be an alternative to or in addition to sidewalks within the subdivision. In determining whether a passage should be required, the planning commission shall consider the degree to which the passage would increase the safety and convenience of pedestrians in reaching such destinations compared to other feasible routes within the subdivision. 
4.8.2.  A planting strip shall be provided between the back of curb and sidewalk, except where the planning commission determines that topography; tree preservation or conservation; right-of-way characteristics; or other conditions dictate that this requirement be modified or waived. 
4.8.3.  Pedestrian ramps in accordance with the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) shall be provided at intersections of streets requiring sidewalks. 
4.8.4.  Pedestrian passages. Where required, pedestrian passages shall be provided as follows: 
1.  The easement or right-of-way shall not be less than ten ft. and the minimum width of the walkway shall be four ft. in residential areas and five in nonresidential areas. The design and surfacing of the passage shall be as approved by the subdivision official. 
2.  If located in a right-of-way, the passage shall be subject to acceptance by the city. 
3.  If located within an easement, maintenance shall be the responsibility of the developer or property owners' association consistent with the provisions of § 4.9.4, deed restrictions and ownership. 
Sec. 4.9. - Open space and recreation in residential developments. 
4.9.1.  Open space. Planned unit developments, conservation subdivisions and multifamily housing developments shall provide open space as required the zoning ordinance and as specified herein. Developed open space shall be designed to provide active recreational facilities to serve the residents of the development. Undeveloped open space shall be designed to preserve important site amenities and environmentally sensitive areas, usually left in its natural state. 
4.9.2.  Multifamily subdivision, size of open space. For multifamily subdivisions, unless otherwise specified in the zoning ordinance, at least five percent of the site shall be set aside for developed and undeveloped open space, adjusted, as appropriate, for conditions such as population density, existing municipal facilities, topography, socioeconomic characteristics of the prospective population, and other appropriate site- and development-specific factors. The area of each parcel of open space designed for active recreational purposes shall be no less than 40 ft. wide at any point or other such minimum dimensions as to be functionally useable for the type of recreation proposed. 
4.9.3.  Location of open space. Open spaces shall be convenient to the dwelling units they are intended to serve. However, because of the possibility for noise generation, they may be sited with consideration given to such impacts on surrounding residential development. 
4.9.4.  Deed restrictions and ownership. 
1.  Lands dedicated for open space purposes shall contain appropriate covenants and deed restrictions approved by the city attorney ensuring that: 
a.  The open space area will not be further subdivided in the future; 
b.  The use of the space will continue in perpetuity for the purpose specified; 
c.  Appropriate provisions will be made for the maintenance of the open space; and 
d.  Common undeveloped open space shall not be turned into a commercial enterprise which charges an admittance fee. 
2.  Open space ownership. The type of ownership of land dedicated for open space purposes shall be selected by the applicant, subject to the approval of the planning commission. Types of ownership may include, but not necessarily [be] limited to, the following: 
a.  Shared, undivided interest by an owners association of all property owners in the subdivision, i.e., a homeowner, condominium, group, or cooperative association of organization; 
b.  The City of Scottsboro, subject to acceptance by the city council; or 
c.  Other public or quasi-public jurisdiction, organization or agencies, subject to their acceptance. 
3.  The provisions of § 5.18, ownership and maintenance of common open spaces and facilities of the zoning ordinance are hereby made a part of these regulations and shall apply throughout their jurisdiction. 
Sec. 4.10. - Experimental subdivisions. 
    The planning commission may waive, vary or modify the standards and requirements of these regulations if, in its judgment, an unusual experimental subdivision might prove of considerable merit toward: 
4.10.1.  The use of unusual materials in constructing required improvements; or 
4.10.2.  A new or untried design concept in the Scottsboro area, which appears promising. The planning commission may require that the applicant provide a written proposal stating the nature of the project, and a cost-benefit study on the implementation of the project. 
In granting approval for experimental subdivisions, the planning commission may require such conditions as will in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied, modified, or approved. These may include, but not be limited to: personal, surety, performance, or maintenance bonds; affidavits; covenants; or other legal instrument. 
Sec. 4.11. - Name of development. 
    The name of the subdivision or development must have the approval of the planning commission. The name shall not duplicate or closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision or development in the county. 
ARTICLE 5. - IMPROVEMENTS STANDARDS 

Sec. 5.1. - Utility easements. 
    There shall be an easement a minimum of ten ft. wide along the front and rear lot line of each lot for poles, wires, conduits, storm and sanitary sewers, gas, water, and heat mains, telephone lines, television cables, and/or other utility lines and drainage ditches. The planning commission may also require easements along side lot lines. If the utilities are underground, the utility plans must include design location for all utilities, including light poles and street lights. Final plat approval signatures must include all utilities, including cable and telephone. Although not mandatory, it is recommended that all utilities be installed in the required rear utility easements. 
Sec. 5.2. - Monuments. 
    Monuments, the type of which shall be in accordance with current surveying practice, shall be placed at all points where the street ROW lines intersect the exterior boundaries of the subdivision, and at all angle points of curves in each street. All lot corners shall be marked with reinforcing bar not less than one-half inches in diameter and 18 inches long. All monuments and markers shall be set flush with the finished grade and detectable with conventional instruments for finding ferrous or magnetic objects. 
Sec. 5.3. - Streets. 
5.3.1.  A geotechnical investigation of soil conditions shall be required for all streets serving nonresidential uses and as may otherwise be required by the city engineer. Such report shall be prepared by a registered geotechnical engineer and shall ensure adequate bearing capacity and quality of subgrade materials. 
5.3.2.  Grading. All streets and alleys shall be graded to the required cross section and in accordance with city specifications. Except as specified otherwise by the city engineer, where streets are to be constructed under or adjacent to existing major electric transmission lines, the nearest edge of the roadway surface shall be set back from any transmission line structure as may be required by the electric utility provider, and all grading for the street shall be done in a manner that will not disturb the structure or result in erosion endangering the structure. The clearance from the street to the nearest conductor of electricity shall meet the requirements of the National Electric Safety Code. 
1.  Preparation. Before grading is started, the entire right-of-way area shall be first cleared of all stumps, roots, brush, and other objectionable materials and all trees not intended for preservation. 
2.  Cuts. All tree stumps, boulders and other obstructions shall be removed to a depth of two feet below the subgrade. Rock, when encountered, shall be scarified to a depth of 12 inches below the subgrade. This provision applies to the roadway and not necessarily to the entire right-of-way width. 
5.3.3.  Subgrade. 
1.  All subgrade shall be cut to the grade as shown on the plan and profile. 
2.  Soil deeper than six inches below subgrade shall be compacted to 95 percent standard proctor density. The top six inches shall be compacted to 100 percent standard proctor density. 
3.  A test shall be made on all fill sections by a testing agency satisfactory to the city engineer. Additional tests shall be performed at the rate of not less than one test per 500 linear feet of street. 
4.  Tests shall be performed on all lifts. 
5.  The top six inches shall be modified, with the work being performed under section 230, Roadbed processing, of the ALDOT standard specifications. It shall be compacted to 100 percent standard proctor density for the full width of the roadway section. 
6.  The road bed shall be proof rolled after placement of final subgrade and the final base layer. 
7.  A copy of all lab reports shall be submitted to the city engineer. 
5.3.4.  Base material, paving. 
1.  Base. Base course shall meet the requirements for crushed aggregate as set forth in section 301, Soil, soil aggregate, and aggregate, base and subbases, Type 825 A or B, plant mixed with water, of the ALDOT standard specifications. Base course shall have a minimum thickness of eight inches for local streets and ten inches for major, commercial and industrial streets compacted thickness and extend 12 inches outside of curb sections. The density requirements for compaction shall be in accordance with section 306, Density requirements for compaction, of the ALDOT standard specifications. The project engineer may submit an alternate base design method for approval by the city engineer. Design should be based on a proven and accepted engineering test or method. 
2.  Roadway pavement. All streets shall be paved and comply with the following: 
a.  Prior to the placement of pavement, a bituminous treatment A (Prime) shall be placed in accordance with section 401, Bituminous surface treatments, of the ALDOT standard specifications and be approved by the city engineer. 
b.  Bituminous pavement requirements shall be a minimum of 225 pounds per square yard (two-inch depth) of bituminous concrete binder and 100 pounds per square yard (one-inch depth) of bituminous concrete wearing surface. All design mixes shall meet the requirements of section 424, Superpave bituminous concrete base, binder, and wearing surface layers, of the ALDOT standard specifications. 
5.3.5.  Fill. All suitable material for the roadway cuts may be used in the construction of fills, approaches, or at other places as needed. Excess materials, including organic materials, soft clays, etc., shall be removed from the development site. The fill shall be spread in layers not to exceed eight inches loose depth, and compacted by a sheep's foot roller. The filling of utility trenches and other areas not accessible to a roller shall be mechanically tamped. Compaction test results must be provided to the streets superintendent before paving can begin. 
5.3.6.  Fire apparatus access roads. Any street, alley or other access designated by the fire marshal as a fire apparatus access road shall meet the load requirements of the fire code. Such shall be certified by the project engineer. 
5.3.7.  Culverts and bridges. Culverts, bridges and all materials shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the ALDOT Standard Specifications. 
5.3.8.  Sidewalks and pedestrian passages. 
1.  Where required, all sidewalks shall be four inches thick with a minimum width of four feet. Sidewalks shall generally run parallel to the street, however, the planning commission may approve an alternate location to preserve topographical or natural features or to provide visual interest, if the developer shows that an alternate arrangement provides safe and convenient circulation. 
2.  Pedestrian passages, where required, shall be designed and constructed in a manner acceptable to the city engineer. 
Sec. 5.4. - Storm drainage. 
    An adequate drainage system, including necessary curbs and gutters, pipes, culverts, drop inlets, intersectional drains, bridges, etc., shall be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water in accordance with table 5-1. See appendix for specifications. 
Table 5-1. Drainage Design Criteria Structure Type Flood Event Overtopping Analysis Bridge 100-yr. Yes Roadway Culvert 25-yr. Yes Open Channel 25-yr. 100-yr. Floodplain delineation Storm Sewer System Arterials, Collectors Local, Frontage 25-yr. 10-yr. Max. Spread -1/2 lane + gutter Max. Spread -1/2 lane + gutter Detention/Retention Primary, Secondary 25-yr. 100-yr.  
5.4.1.  Water will be taken from the street via drop inlets in accordance with city specifications. In no case will the water be allowed to drain across the sidewalk. The exposed ends of all drain tile shall be finished with concrete headwalls. 
5.4.2.  For curb and gutter systems, drop inlets shall be spaced frequently enough to adequately remove water from the street. The location and design must be approved by the planning commission. 
5.4.3.  Corrugated steel pipe shall not be used in any swale, driveway or other stormwater drainage culvert. All street cross drains shall be reinforced concrete pipe. All other pipes installed in any swale, driveway, or stormwater drainage culvert shall be reinforced concrete pipe, HDPE type "S" drainage pipe or corrugated aluminum pipe as approved by the city engineer and streets superintendent. All pipe shall meet applicable AASHTO requirements. 
Installation shall be in accordance with city specifications. Prior to installation, approval shall be obtained from the streets superintendent and city engineer. 
Sec. 5.5. - Utilities. 
5.5.1.  Water supply system. 
1.  The water supply system must be connected to the community water supply system and shall be designed and constructed in such a manner as to adequately serve required uses for all lots shown on the subdivision plat or development site plan, including reasonably anticipated future needs. The system shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the Scottsboro Waterworks, Sewer and Gas Board Standard Water Specifications and regulatory requirements, and the design and installation must be approved by the Scottsboro Waterworks, Sewer and Gas Board. 
2.  Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed along each street at intervals of 500 feet, or at the ends and center, of each block and tied to the water system. Dwellings shall not be located more than 400 ft. from the nearest fire hydrant and nonresidential buildings shall not be located more than 250 ft. from the nearest fire hydrant. The water supply and pressure shall be sufficient to adequately serve the potential needs of the intended land use and have the approval of the Scottsboro Waterworks, Sewer, and Gas Board and the Scottsboro Fire Department. 
5.5.2.  Sanitary sewer. 
1.  The sanitary sewer system must be connected to the community sanitary sewerage system and shall be designed and constructed in such a manner as to adequately serve required uses for all lots shown on the subdivision plat or development site plan, including reasonably anticipated future needs. The system shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the Scottsboro Waterworks, Sewer and Gas Board Standard Sanitary Sewer Specifications and regulatory requirements, and the design and installation must be approved by the Scottsboro Waterworks, Sewer and Gas Board. 
2.  Where lots cannot be economically connected to the Scottsboro Waterworks, Sewer and Gas Board's sanitary sewerage system, individual on-site wastewater disposal systems shall be permitted, provided the disposal plan for each lot has written approval of the Jackson County health department, as evidenced by the health department official's signature on the final plat. 
5.5.3.  Natural gas system. 
    When gas mains are connected with the community natural gas distribution system, the system shall be designed and constructed in such a manner as to adequately serve required uses for all lots shown on the subdivision plat or development site plan. The system shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the Scottsboro Waterworks, Sewer, and Gas Board Standard Natural Gas Specifications and regulatory requirements, and the design and installation must be approved by the Scottsboro Waterworks, Sewer and Gas Board. 
5.5.4.  Electricity. 
1.  The applicant is encouraged to place all electrical lines under ground and utilize pad mounted transformers. All plans for electrical utilities must be approved by the Scottsboro Electric Power Board. 
2.  Street lighting. For reasons of safety and convenience the applicant shall provide street lights at each street intersection. Where blocks exceed 800 feet in length, the planning commission may require additional lighting. All street lighting plans must be approved by the Scottsboro Electric Power Board. 
Sec. 5.6. - Signs. 
5.6.1.  Street name signs. All streets shall be designated by name on a metal street sign post, in accordance with city specifications, with name plates of metal set one above the other with a minimum clearance of seven feet from grade to the lowest edge of the sign. The post shall be so located as to be visible for both pedestrian and vehicular traffic. At four-way intersections, two street sign posts shall be located diagonally across the intersection from each other. One street sign post shall be required at "T" street intersections. 
5.6.2.  Traffic control signs. The developer shall install, at his cost, all necessary traffic control signs and devices as shown on the approved preliminary plat, which shall be in compliance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices as adopted by the State of Alabama. 
ARTICLE 6. - SITE DESIGN STANDARDS 
    For developments subject to site plan review, the following standards shall be considered by the planning commission: 

Sec. 6.1. - General site design standards. 
6.1.1.  Access management. Generally, driveways should be fewer and farther apart on major streets while a larger number of driveways spaced more closely together are more tolerable on local streets. 
1.  Site plans shall conform with the access management requirements in § 4.6, access management. 
2.  Shared driveways, alleys and cross access drives are encouraged where appropriate. 
3.  For corner lots, access should be provided along the street of lesser classification and any driveways should be located as far from the intersection as possible. 
6.1.2.  Sight lines. Structures and landscaping should be placed to ensure clear sight lines for motorists that allow safe ingress and egress to properties and safe movements within the site. 
6.1.3.  Building location. 
1.  Buildings should be located on site in keeping with adjacent buildings on the same side of the street and to create useable exterior spaces. 
2.  Buildings should be oriented such that entrances face the street. 
6.1.4.  Parking location. 
1.  Parking areas for multifamily developments should be located internally to the site rather than between buildings and the street. 
2.  Large surface parking lots should be broken up into multiple spaces through landscaping. 
3.  Some parking should be placed to the sides and rear of the building to avoid oversized parking in front of the building. This strategy can be helpful in matching shallower setbacks of adjacent buildings. 
6.1.5.  Storage, service and loading areas. 
1.  Storage, service and loading areas should be located so as to minimize their visibility to the public and/or shall be screened as required by the planning commission. 
2.  Storage, service and loading areas should be located to so as not to disrupt the efficient flow of on-site and off-site traffic. 
6.1.6.  Refuse collection areas (multifamily and nonresidential). 
1.  Refuse collection areas should be located to minimize their visibility to the public and/or screened as required by the planning commission in accordance with the zoning ordinance. 
2.  Refuse collection areas shall be designed and of a size to contain all refuse (and recycling, if applicable) generated on-site and deposited between collections. 
6.1.7.  Mechanical and electrical equipment. Mechanical and electrical equipment should be located to minimize their visibility to the public and/or screened as required by the planning commission. 
Sec. 6.2. - Landscaping standards. 
6.2.1.  Buffering. Buffers shall be provided as required in the zoning ordinance wherever a use of higher intensity is developed abutting a use of lower intensity (i.e., a commercial use is developed next to a residential use or a multifamily use is developed next to a single-family use). 
6.2.2.  Parking lot landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided within and at the perimeter of parking lots and other vehicular areas as required by § 11.2, landscaping, for vehicular areas of the zoning ordinance. 
6.2.3.  Screening. Location on-site, plant materials, fences, walls, berms or a combination thereof shall be used to visually screen certain site elements and activities, including, but not limited to outdoor storage and garbage collection areas, from public view as required in § 11.3, screening, of the zoning ordinance. 
ARTICLE 7. - VARIANCES, ENFORCEMENT, LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 7.1. - Variances. 
    Where an applicant can show that a provision of these regulations would cause an unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to and where, because of topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site, in the opinion of the planning commission a departure may be made without destroying the intent of such provision, the planning commission may authorize a variance. Any variance thus authorized is required to be entered in writing in the official minutes of the planning commission and the reason which justified the departure to be set forth. In determining whether a modification, reduction or waiver of a requirement of these regulations is warranted, the planning commission must find that all of the following criteria are met: 
7.1.1.  Owing to extraordinary circumstances, literal enforcement of the provisions of this resolution will result in undesirable characteristics, including, but not limited to, poor traffic movement, unsuitable lot design, or unnecessarily expensive utility extensions. 
7.1.2.  That the variance, if granted, will not cause any off-site problems such as traffic, utilities, drainage, water, and sanitation on other properties. 
7.1.3.  That the variance, if granted, will not substantially or permanently injure any adjacent conforming property. 
7.1.4.  That the variance, if granted, is the minimum variance and the least modification that will afford the relief sought. 
7.1.5.  That the variance, if granted, will be in harmony with the spirit of these regulations and will not adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare. 
Sec. 7.2. - Transferring lots in unapproved subdivisions, penalties. 
    Whoever, being the agent of the owner or owner of any land located within a subdivision, transfers or sells or agrees to sell any land by reference to or exhibition of or by other use of a part of a subdivision, before such plat has been approved by the planning commission and recorded in the office of the probate judge, shall forfeit and pay a penalty of $100.00 for each lot or parcel so transferred or sold or agreed or negotiated to be sold. The description of such lot or parcel by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties or from the remedies herein provided. 
    The city may enjoin such transfer or sale or agreement by action for injunction brought in any court of equity jurisdiction or may recover the same penalty by a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
Sec. 7.3. - Fees, fines. 
7.3.1.  Fees. All applicants shall pay a $150.00 fee to the City of Scottsboro at the time of submission of any request for minor plat, preliminary plat, or final approval of a proposed subdivision. 
7.3.2.  Fines. Any person violating any provisions of this regulation shall be charged a fine, upon conviction, of not more than $100.00 and court costs for each offense. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
Sec. 7.4. - Conflict with other laws. 
    Wherever the requirements of this regulation conflict with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted statutes, rules, regulations, ordinances, the most restrictive, or that imposing higher standards, shall govern. 
Sec. 7.5. - Validity. 
    Each phrase, sentence, paragraph, section or other provision of this regulation is severable from all other such phrases, sentences, paragraph, sections and provisions. Should any phrase, sentence, paragraph, section or provision of these regulations be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration shall not affect any other portion or provision of these regulations. 
Sec. 7.6. - Effective date. 
    These regulations shall take effect and be in force from and after the date of adoption. 
Sample Certificates and Acknowledgments 
    Surveyor's Certificate. 
    Sketch Plan Certificate (city engineer). 
    Site Assessment Certificate (city engineer). 
    Certificate of Approval, preliminary plat (subdivision official). 
    Certificate of Approval, preliminary plat (planning commission). 
    Certificate of Approval, preliminary plat (city engineer). 
    Certificate of Approval, preliminary plat (streets superintendent). 
    Certificate of Approval of Water Distribution System, preliminary plat (waterworks, sewer and gas board). 
    Certificate of Approval of Sewer Distribution System, preliminary plat (waterworks, sewer and gas board). 
    Certificate of Approval of Gas Distribution System, preliminary plat (waterworks, sewer and gas board). 
    Certificate of Approval of Electric Distribution System, preliminary plat (Scottsboro Electric Power Board). 
    Certificate of Approval, preliminary plat (county health department). 
    Dedication. 
    Notary's Acknowledgment. 
    Notary's Acknowledgment. 
    Mortgage Holder's Certificate. 
    Certificate of Approval, final plat (planning commission). 
    Certificate of Approval, final plat (city engineer). 
    Certificate of Approval, final plat (streets superintendent). 
    Certificate of Approval, final plat (Scottsboro Electric Power Board). 
    Certificate of Approval, final plat (waterworks, sewer and gas board). 
    Certificate of Approval, final plat (county health department). 
Subdivision Procedural Flowchart 
    PLAT CHECKLISTS 
    Minor Subdivision Plat Checklist. 
    Preliminary Plat Checklist. 
    Final Plat Checklist. 
    SPECIFICATIONS 
    Standard Street Cross Sections (local street, collector, industrial access road). 
Surveyor's Certificate 
    Surveyor's Certificate and Description of Land Platted 
    State of Alabama 
    County of Jackson 
    I, (name of surveyor), an Alabama registered Surveyor, hereby certify that I have surveyed the property of the (name of company of proprietor), a (corporation or proprietor), situated in the city of Scottsboro, Jackson County, Alabama and described as follows: 
    (Insert Legal Description) 
    And that the plat or map contained hereon is a true and correct map, meeting the current standards of practice set forth by the Alabama State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and land surveyors, showing the subdivision into which the property described is divided giving the length and bearings of the boundaries of each lot and its number and showing the streets, alleys and public grounds and giving the bearings, length, width, and name of the streets, said map further shows the relation of the land so platted to the Government Survey, and that permanent monuments have been placed at points marked thus (0) as hereon shown. 
    WITNESS my hand this ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
____________ ____________ (Name of Surveyor) Registration Number  
    Sketch Plan Certificate (city engineer). 
    The sketch plan for ____________ has been reviewed by the city engineer for the city of Scottsboro. 
____________ ____________ Date City Engineer City of Scottsboro, Alabama  
    Site Assessment Certificate. 
    I, ____________ , the project engineer, do hereby certify that the information shown hereon is complete and in compliance with all applicable regulations of the City of Scottsboro, Alabama to the best of my knowledge. 
____________ ____________ Date Project Engineer  
    Certificate of Approval, preliminary plat (subdivision official). 
    In that all the requirements of Preliminary Approval have been fulfilled, this subdivision plat was given Preliminary Approval by the Scottsboro planning commission on ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
    ____________ 
    Subdivision Official 
    City of Scottsboro, Alabama 
    Certificate of Approval, preliminary plat (planning commission) 
    In that all the requirements of Preliminary Approval have been fulfilled, this subdivision plat was given Preliminary Approval by the Scottsboro planning commission on ____________ , 20 ____________ . Preliminary Approval does not constitute approval of the final plat. 
    ____________ 
    Chairperson 
    Scottsboro Planning Commission 
    Certificate of Approval, preliminary plat (city engineer) 
    In that all the requirements of Preliminary Approval have been fulfilled, this subdivision plat was given Preliminary Approval by the Scottsboro planning commission on ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
    ____________ 
    City Engineer 
    City of Scottsboro, Alabama 
    Certificate of Approval, preliminary plat (streets superintendent) 
    In that all the requirements of Preliminary Approval have been fulfilled, this subdivision plat was given Preliminary Approval by the Scottsboro planning commission on ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
    ____________ 
    Streets Superintendent 
    City of Scottsboro, Alabama 
    Certificate of Approval of Water Distribution System, preliminary plat (waterworks, sewer and gas board) 
    The undersigned, as authorized by the Scottsboro Waterworks, Sewer and Gas Board, hereby approved the water distribution system design as shown on this preliminary plat on ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
    ____________ 
    Scottsboro Waterworks, Sewer and Gas Board 
    Certificate of Approval of Sewer Distribution System, preliminary plat (waterworks, sewer and gas board) 
    The undersigned, as authorized by the Scottsboro Waterworks, Sewer and Gas Board, hereby approved the sewer distribution system design as shown on this preliminary plat on ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
    ____________ 
    Scottsboro Waterworks, Sewer and Gas Board 
    Certificate of Approval of Gas Distribution System, preliminary plat (waterworks, sewer and gas board) 
    The undersigned, as authorized by the Scottsboro Waterworks, Sewer and Gas Board, hereby approved the gas distribution system design as shown on this preliminary plat on ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
    ____________ 
    Scottsboro Waterworks, Sewer and Gas Board 
    Certificate of Approval of Electric Distribution System, preliminary plat (Scottsboro Electric Power Board) 
    The undersigned, as authorized by the Scottsboro Electric Power Board, hereby approved the electric distribution system design as shown on this preliminary plat on ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
    ____________ 
    Scottsboro Electric Power Board 
    Certificate for Lots with On-Site Septic Systems, preliminary plat (county health department) 
    The lot(s) on this plat are subject to approval or deletion by the Jackson County health department. The approvals may contain certain conditions pertaining to the onsite wastewater treatment system(s) that could restrict the use of the lot(s) or obligate owners to special maintenance and reporting requirements. These conditions are on file with said health department and are made a part of this plat as if set out hereon. The undersigned, as authorized by the Jackson County health department, Alabama, hereby approved the onsite wastewater treatment system for this plat, on ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
    ____________ 
    Health Officer, Jackson County, Alabama 
    Dedication 
    I/We (Land Owner or developer, address), as proprietor(s), have caused the land embraced in the within plat to be surveyed, laid out and platted to be known as (Subdivision Name), a part of (Section Call Out), City of Scottsboro, Jackson County, Alabama, and that the (Streets, Drives, Alleys, etc.) as shown on said plat are hereby dedicated to the use of the public. 
    Signed and sealed in the presence of: 
____________ ____________ Witness Property Owner ____________ ____________ Witness Property Owner  
    Notary's Acknowledgment 
    Acknowlegment 
    State of Alabama 
    County of Jackson 
    I, ____________ , a Notary Public in and for said County, in said State, hereby certify that (individual's name), whose name as (title) of the (corporation name), is signed to the foregoing instrument, and who is known to me, acknowledged before me on this day that, being informed of the contents of the instrument, he as such officer and with full authority, executed the same voluntarily for and as the act of said corporation. 
    GIVEN under my hand and official seal this ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
    NOTARY PUBLIC 
    Notary's Acknowledgment 
    Acknowlegment 
    State of Alabama 
    County of Jackson 
    I, ____________ , a Notary Public in and for said County, in said State, hereby certify that (owner's name), whose name is signed to the foregoing instrument, and who is known to me, acknowledged before me on this day that, being informed of the contents of the instrument, executed the same voluntarily. 
    GIVEN under my hand and official seal this ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
    NOTARY PUBLIC 
    Mortgage Holder's Certificate 
    We, (name of institution and location), by (name and title of officer), holders of a mortgage on the above described property do hereby consent to the plat of (name of plat), in the City of Scottsboro, Jackson County, Alabama on ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
    (Name of Institution and Location) 
    ____________ 
    Name and Title, Mortgagee Representative 
    Certificate of Approval, final plat (planning commission) 
    In that all the requirements of final approval have been fulfilled, this subdivision plat was given final approval for recording of same in the Probate Office of Jackson County, Alabama by the Scottsboro planning commission on ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
    ____________ 
    Chairperson 
    Scottsboro Planning Commission 
    Certificate of Approval, final plat (city engineer) 
    In that all the requirements of final approval have been fulfilled, this subdivision plat was given final approval for recording of same in the Probate Office of Jackson County, Alabama by the Scottsboro planning commission on ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
    ____________ 
    City Engineer 
    City of Scottsboro, Alabama 
    Certificate of Approval, final plat (streets superintendent) 
    In that all the requirements of final approval have been fulfilled, this subdivision plat was given final approval for recording of same in the Probate Office of Jackson County, Alabama by the Scottsboro planning commission on ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
    ____________ 
    Streets Superintendent 
    City of Scottsboro, Alabama 
    Certificate of Approval, final plat (Scottsboro Electric Power Board) 
    The undersigned, as authorized by the Scottsboro Electric Power Board, hereby approved this plat for recording of same in the Probate Office of Jackson County, Alabama on ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
    ____________ 
    Scottsboro Electric Power Board 
    Certificate of Approval of Water System, final plat (waterworks, sewer and gas board) 
    The undersigned, as authorized by the Scottsboro Waterworks, Sewer and Gas Board, hereby approved the water distribution system for this plat for recording of same in the Probate Office of Jackson County, Alabama on ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
    ____________ 
    Scottsboro Waterworks, Sewer and Gas Board 
    Certificate of Approval of Sewer System, final plat (waterworks, sewer and gas board) 
    The undersigned, as authorized by the Scottsboro Waterworks, Sewer and Gas Board, hereby approved the sewer distribution system for this plat for recording of same in the Probate Office of Jackson County, Alabama on ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
    ____________ 
    Scottsboro Waterworks, Sewer and Gas Board 
    Certificate of Approval, final plat (waterworks, sewer and gas board) 
    The undersigned, as authorized by the Scottsboro Waterworks, Sewer and Gas Board, hereby approved the gas distribution system for this plat for recording of same in the Probate Office of Jackson County, Alabama on ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
    ____________ 
    Scottsboro Waterworks, Sewer and Gas Board 
    Certificate for Lots with On-Site Septic Systems, final plat (county health department) 
    The lot(s) on this plat are subject to approval or deletion by the Jackson County health department. The approvals may contain certain conditions pertaining to the onsite wastewater treatment system(s) that could restrict the use of the lot(s) or obligate owners to special maintenance and reporting requirements. These conditions are on file with said health department and are made a part of this plat as if set out hereon. The undersigned, as authorized by the Jackson County health department, Alabama, hereby approved the within plat for recording of same in the Probate Office of Jackson County, Alabama, on ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
    ____________ 
    Health Officer, Jackson County, Alabama 
    Subdivision and Site Plan Procedure Flowchart 

MINOR SUBDIVISION PLAT CHECKLIST 
?  Name of subdivision. 
?  Graphic scale (not less than on inch equals 100 feet). 
?  North point. 
?  Date. 
?  Total acreage. 
?  Name, address and seal/registration no. of surveyor. 
?  Location (legal description, lot, block, subdivision name, parcel numbers, deed book and page). 
?  Vicinity map. 
?  Name of adjacent subdivisions. 
?  Name, address and deed book and page of record of owners and adjoining owners. 
?  Name, address of agents, if applicable. 
?  Location of existing property lines. 
?  Location and width of existing rights-of-way and easements. 
?  Name, location and widths of existing streets, alleys and driveways. 
?  Length (1/100 ft.) and bearing (one-tenth sec. of arc) of exterior boundaries. 
?  Location of existing buildings, watercourses, railroads, sewers, bridges, culverts, drain pipes, water mains (on-site and adjoining). 
?  Dimensions and area of lot lines, reservations, open spaces and parks. 
?  Approximate radii, central angle, arc distance, chord lengths and points of tangency of all curves. 
?  Restrictions and proposed use of lots (as required). 
?  Certificate of approval (water, sewer, gas, electric, and health dept. if not on sanitary sewer). 
?  Additional certificates as required. 
?  Present and proposed zoning (as applicable). 
?  Regulatory floodplain boundaries with FIRM panel number and effective date. 
?  Flood study with floodway and base flood elevations (if in Special Flood Hazard District A). 
?  Minimum finished floor elevations for all lots in 100-year floodplain. 
?  Inscription: "NOT FOR FINAL RECORDING" (except for combined Preliminary/final approval). 
PRELIMINARY PLAT CHECKLIST 
?  Name of subdivision. 
?  Graphic scale. 
?  North point. 
?  Date. 
?  Total acreage. 
?  Name, address and seal/registration no. of surveyor. 
?  Location (legal description, lot, block, subdivision name, parcel numbers, deed book and page). 
?  Vicinity Map. 
?  Name of adjacent subdivisions. 
?  Name, address and deed book and page of record of owners and adjoining owners. 
?  Name, address of agents, if applicable. 
?  Topography (USGS, geodetic Survey Sea Level Datum, etc.). 
?  Five foot intervals (two foot may be required). 
?  Source of Topography. 
?  Location of existing property lines. 
?  Location and width of existing rights-of-way and easements. 
?  Name, location and widths of existing streets, alleys and driveways. 
?  Length (1/100 ft.) and bearing (one-tenth sec. of arc) of exterior boundaries. 
?  Location of existing buildings, watercourses, railroads, sewers, bridges, culverts, drain pipes, water mains (on-site and adjoining). 
?  Location and dimensions of proposed rights-of-way, streets, alleys, easements; lot and block numbers. 
?  Dimensions and area of lot lines, reservations, open spaces and parks. 
?  Street profiles (natural and finished grade; scale 1=100' H, 1'=10' V as required). 
?  Street cross sections. 
?  Approximate radii, central angle, arc distance, chord lengths and points of tangency of all curves. 
?  Proposed utility layout. 
?  Restrictions and proposed use of lots (as required). 
?  Certificate of approval (water, sewer, gas, electric, and health dept. if not on sanitary sewer). 
?  Additional certificates as required. 
?  Present and proposed zoning (as applicable). 
?  Minimum building front, rear and side yard setback lines. 
?  Drainage plan. 
?  Regulatory floodplain boundaries with FIRM panel number and effective date. 
?  Flood study with floodway and base flood elevations (if in Special Flood Hazard District A). 
?  Minimum finished floor elevations for all lots in 100-year floodplain. 
?  Inscription: "NOT FOR FINAL RECORDING." 
FINAL PLAT CHECKLIST 
?  Name of subdivision. 
?  Graphic scale. 
?  North point. 
?  Date. 
?  Total acreage. 
?  Name, address and seal/registration no. of surveyor. 
?  Location (legal description, lot, block, subdivision name, parcel numbers, deed book and page). 
?  Name of adjacent subdivisions. 
?  Name, address and deed book and page of record of owners. 
?  Name, address of agents, if applicable. 
?  Bearings and distances to nearest street lines, benchmarks, monuments (at least three). 
?  Boundary lines from survey (to one sec.; error closure 1:10,000). 
?  Location and dimensions of rights-of-way, streets, alleys, including on adjoining tracts. 
?  Dimensions and area of lot lines, reservations, open spaces and parks. 
?  Street centerlines with angles of deflection and intersection, radii, lengths, tangents. 
?  Dimensions of lot lines (to 1:100 ft. and bearings); lot and block numbers. 
?  Location, dimension and purpose of easements, reservations, common or public use spaces. 
?  Location, material and description of monuments. 
?  Statement of covenants (on or attached to plat). 
?  Regulatory floodplain boundaries with FIRM panel number and effective date. 
?  Flood study with floodway and base flood elevations (if in Special Flood Hazard District A). 
?  Minimum finished floor elevations for all lots in 100-year floodplain. 
?  Dedication for public lands. 
?  Notary's Acknowledgment (where developer and owner are not the same). 
?  Certificate of Approval of final plat (planning commission). 
?  Certificate of Approval of final plat (city engineer). 
?  Certificate of Approval of final plat (streets superintendent). 
?  Certificate of Approval of final plat (Scottsboro Electric Power Board). 
?  Certificates of Approval of final plat (waterworks, sewer and gas board). 
?  Certificate of Approval (county health department). 
STANDARD STREET CROSS SECTIONS 



CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
    This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of the city used in the Code. 
Legislation Date Section Section 
this Code Ord. of 11-17-1938 11-17-1938 1 22-1 2 22-1 3 22-1 4 22-1 5 22-1 6 22-1 7 22-1 8 22-1 Ord. of 1-5-1939 1-5-1939 2 22-1 Ord. No. 280 4-9-1956 I 30-21 II 30-22 III 30-23 V 30-24 VI 30-25 VII 30-26 Ord. No. 281 5-14-1956 1 22-25 2 22-26 3 22-27 4 22-28 5 22-29 6 22-30 7 22-31 8 22-32 9 22-33 10 22-34 Ord. No. 12 2-10-1958 3 34-23 4 34-24 5 34-25 Ord. No. 15 12-22-1958 1 22-25 2 22-26 Ord. No. 16 12-22-1958 1 22-25 Ord. No. 92 3-8-1971 1 34-109 2 34-110 3 34-111 4 34-112 5 34-113 6 34-114 7 34-115 Ord. No. 93 6-14-1971 1 30-22 Ord. No. 96 10-1-1971 1 22-26, 22-27 Ord. No. 103 1-1-1973 1 22-57 2 22-58 3 22-59 4 22-60 5 22-61 6 22-62 7 22-63 Ord. No. 131 11-24-1975 1 34-4 Ord. No. 152 11-22-1976 1 30-22 Ord. No. 155 12-28-1976 1 34-26 2 34-26 2 34-26 Ord. No. 159 2-14-1977 1 23-1 2 23-1 3 23-1 4 23-1 5 23-1 6 23-1 Ord. No. 166 12-12-1977 1 26-1 4 26-2 5 26-3 6(D) 26-4 12 26-7 13 26-8 Ord. No. 169 1-23-1978 1 30-22 Ord. No. 173 7-24-1978 1 34-56 2 34-57 3 34-58 4 34-59 5 34-60 Ord. No. 176 7-24-1978 1 34-61 Ord. No. 183 2-26-1979 1 30-56, 30-57 Ord. No. 184 2-26-1979 1 30-22 Ord. No. 197 9-22-1980 1 14-1 2 14-1 Ord. No. 200 2-23-1981 I 32-1 Ord. No. 205 1-25-1982 I 20-1 II 20-2 III 20-3 IV 20-4 V 20-5 VI 20-6 VII 20-7 VIII 20-8 XI 20-9 Ord. No. 207 4-20-1982 1 10-1 2 10-1 3 10-1 Ord. No. 226 6-25-1984 1 26-6 Ord. No. 233 12-10-1984 1 2-131 2 2-132 3 2-133 4 2-134 Ord. No. 240 6-24-1985 1 22-26, 22-27 Ord. No. 241 7-8-1985 1 36-19 2 36-20 3 36-21 4 36-22 5 36-23 6 36-24 Ord. No. 247 10-28-1985 2 32-3 3 32-3 Ord. No. 251 4-14-1986 1 32-2 Ord. No. 254 11-10-1986 1 30-22 Ord. No. 309 7-9-1990 1 30-22 Ord. No. 315 22-5-1990 1 30-22 Ord. No. 322 5-13-1991 1 30-88 2 30-89 3 30-90 4 30-91 Ord. No. 335 3-11-1992 1 36-20 Ord. No. 347 12-14-1992 1 30-22 Ord. No. 350 1-25-1993 1 30-22 Ord. No. 356 4-26-1993 1 30-1 Ord. No. 368 3-29-1994 1 22-85 2 22-86 3 22-87 4 22-88 5 22-89 6 22-90 7 22-91 9 22-92 Ord. No. 385 3-20-1995 2 22-113 3 22-114 4 22-115 5 22-116 6 22-117 Ord. No. 445 5-24-1995 1 24-2 3 24-2 4 24-2 Ord. No. 397 10-23-1995 1 34-60, 34-61 Ord. No. 398 10-23-1995 1 34-27 2 34-27 3 34-27 4 34-27 6 34-27 7 34-27 Ord. No. 410 7-8-1996 1 22-148 2 22-149 3 22-150 4 22-151 5 22-152 6 22-153 7 22-154 9 22-155 10 22-156 Ord. No. 412 7-12-1996 exh. A 26-9 Ord. No. 415 2-24-1997 1 28-1 2 28-1 3 28-1 4 28-1 5 28-1 6 28-1 7 28-1 8 28-1 10 28-1 Ord. No. 418 7-14-1997 1(a) 36-20 1(b) 36-20 1(c) 36-20 1(d) 36-21 1(e) 36-20 Ord. No. 435 6-22-1998 1 2-132 Ord. No. 458 5-28-2001 intro. ¶ 18-1 1 18-1 2 18-1 3 18-1 4 18-1 Ord. No. 460 10-22-2001 1 12-1 2 12-1 3 12-1 4 12-1 Ord. No. 471 10-28-2002 2 2-44 3 2-40 4 2-45 5 2-46 7 2-47 8 2-48 9 2-49 10 2-50 11 2-51 12 2-43 13 2-52 14 2-53 15 2-54 16 2-55 17 2-41 18 2-56 19 2-57 20 2-58 21 2-59 Ord. No. 477 4-7-2003 1 30-22 Ord. No. 485 12-22-2003 1 26-10 2 26-10 4 26-10 5 26-10 Ord. No. 492 10-1-2004 1 2-78 Ord. No. 494 3-21-2005 1 2-132 Ord. No. 495 4-25-2005 - 26-9 Ord. No. 504 9-12-2005 1 10-2 2 10-2 Ord. No. 505 9-26-2005 1(24) 2-42 Ord. No. 521 12-11-2006 1 2-45 Ord. No. 525 7-23-2007 1 30-88 Ord. No. 528 12-10-2007 1 22-181 2 22-182 3 22-183 4 22-184 5 22-185 6 22-186 7 22-187 8 22-188 9 22-189 10 22-190 11 22-191 12 22-192 13 22-193 14 22-194 15 22-195 16 22-196 17 22-197 18 22-198 19 22-199 20 22-200 21 22-201 24 22-203 25 22-204 Ord. No. 531 1-14-2008 art. 1, § A 16-20 art. 1, § B 16-21 art. 1, § C 16-22 art. 1, § D 16-23 art. 2, § A 16-24 art. 2, § B 16-25 art. 2, § C 16-26 art. 2, § D 16-27 art. 2, § E 16-28 art. 2, § F 16-29 art. 2, § G 16-30 art. 2, § H 16-31 art. 3, § A 16-51 art. 3, § B 16-52 art. 3, § C 16-53 art. 4, § A 16-82 art. 4, § B 16-83 art. 4, § C 16-84 art. 4, § D 16-85 art. 4, § E 16-86 art. 4, § F 16-87 art. 5, § A 16-54 art. 5, § B 16-54 art. 5, § C 16-54 art. 5, § D 16-54 art. 5, § E 16-54 art. 5, § F 16-54 art. 5, § G 16-54 art. 5, § H 16-54 art. 5, § I 16-54 art. 6 16-19 Ord. No. 532 1-14-2008 1 34-2 Ord. No. 540 7-28-2008 1 8-40 2 8-41 3 8-42 4 8-43 5 8-44 6 8-45 7 8-46 9 8-47 Ord. No. 541 8-25-2008 1 6-19 2 6-20 3 6-21 4 6-22 5 6-23 6 6-24 7 6-25 8 6-26 9 6-27 10 6-28 11 6-29 12 6-30 14 6-31 15 6-32 Ord. No. 547 4-3-2009 1 2-45 Ord. No. 548 7-28-2009 1 22-318 2 22-319 3 22-320 4 22-321 5 22-322 6 22-323 7 22-324 8 22-325 9 22-326 10 22-327 11 22-328 Ord. No. 412-2 11-22-2010 - 26-9 Ord. No. 528-2 11-22-2010 1 22-183 3 22-205 Ord. No. 563 11-22-2010 1 26-5 2 26-5 3 26-5 Ord. No. 564 1-18-2011 1 34-3 3 34-3 4 34-3 Ord. No. 567 9-12-2011 1 22-234 2 22-235 3 22-236 4 22-237 5 22-238 6 22-239 Ord. No. 568 11-14-2011 2 22-3 2 22-3 Ord. No. 577 3-25-2013 - 22-2 Ord. No. 579 11-25-2013 1 34-81 2 34-82 3 34-83 4 34-84 5 34-85 6 34-86 7 34-87 8 34-88 9 34-89 10 34-90 11 34-91 12 34-92 Ord. No. 0581 1-13-2014 1 22-57 Ord. No. 585 1-12-2015 1 22-257 2 22-258 4 22-259 5 22-260 Ord. No. 586 2-23-2015 art. 1, § 1 4-1 art. 1, § 2 4-2 art. 1, § 3 4-3 art. 1, § 4 4-4 art. II, § 1 4-27 art. II, § 10 4-35 art. II, § 11 4-36 art. II, § 12 4-37 art. II, § 13 4-38 art. II, § 2 4-28 art. II, § 3 4-29 art. II, § 4 4-30 art. II, § 5 4-31 art. II, § 7 4-32 art. II, § 8 4-33 art. II, § 9 4-34 art. III, § 1 4-65 art. III, § 10 4-74 art. III, § 2 4-66 art. III, § 3 4-67 art. III, § 4 4-68 art. III, § 5 4-69 art. III, § 6 4-70 art. III, § 7 4-71 art. III, § 8 4-72 art. III, § 9 4-73 art. IV, § 2 4-92 art. IV, § 4 4-93 art. IV, § 5 4-94 art. IV, § 6 4-95 Ord. No. 588 10-12-2015 1 2-79 Ord. No. 589 2-22-2016 1 2-77 2 2-77 Ord. No. 590 4-26-2016 1 22-284 2 22-285 3 22-286 4 22-287 5 22-288 6 22-289 7 22-290 8 22-291 11 22-292 Ord. No. 593 2-27-2017 - 24-1 Ord. No. 597 12-18-2017 21 22-201  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within the Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Code of Alabama, 1975. 
Code of Ala. 1975 
Section Section 

this Code 1-1-1 et seq. 1-2 1-1-14 1-3 1-1-15 1-3 3-1-1 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) 3-5-14 Ch. 6 (note) 3-7A-1 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. II 4-4-1 et seq. App. B, intro. ¶ 4-6-1-4-6-15 App. B, intro. ¶ 4-6-1 et seq. App. B (note) - App. B, intro. ¶ 5-19A-1 22-260 7-2-104 22-257 11-19-1 et seq. 16-20 11-40-1 et seq. Ch. 2 (note) 11-40-30 et seq. 28-2 (note) 11-43-6 et seq. 2-77 11-43-40 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II 11-43-40 2-46 11-43-49 2-47 11-43-50 2-45 11-43-52 Ch. 2, Art. II, 
Div. 2 11-43-59 Ch. 8 (note) - Ch. 14 (note) 11-45-1 et seq. 16-20 11-45-7 1-1 11-45-8 Ch. 8, Art. II - App. A, § 12.10 11-45-9 1-7 11-46-1 et seq. Ch. 10 (note) 11-46-2 10-1 11-46-24(b) 10-2 11-47-110 Ch. 6 (note) 11-47-117 et seq. Ch. 28 (note) 11-47-130 Ch. 12 (note) - Ch. 18 (note) 11-47-131 Ch. 12 (note) - Ch. 18 (note) 11-51-44 22-193 11-51-90 22-1 - 22-85 11-51-90(a)(1) Ch. 22, Art. VII 11-51-90(a)(2) 22-86 11-51-90.2 22-182 11-51-91 22-27 - 22-204 11-51-122 22-183 11-51-129 22-182 11-51-150 et seq. 22-195 11-51-180 et seq. 22-182 11-51-192 22-200 11-51-200 22-57 - 22-148 11-51-202 22-60 - 22-150 11-51-206 22-58 - 22-60 - 22-149, 22-150 11-52-1 et seq. 16-20 - App. A, § 1.3 - App. C, § 1.2 11-52-8 App. C, § 2.2 11-52-30-11-52-36 App. C, § 2.1 11-52-30-11-52-54 App. C, § 1.2 11-52-31 App. C, § 3.5 11-52-32 App. C, § 3.5 11-52-70 et seq. App. A (note) 11-67-80 et seq. 30-1 11-52-80 App. A, § 13.1 11-52-81 App. A, § 13.1 12-14-1 et seq. Ch. 26 (note) 12-14-14 26-4, 26-5 12-14-30 et seq. 26-2 12-14-33 26-3 13A-1-2 24-1 13A-7-22 1-7 13A-7-23 1-7 13A-7-29 Ch. 30 (note) 13A-8-5 1-7 13A-8-9 1-7 13A-8-10.3 1-7 13A-8-19 1-7 13A-8-23 1-7 13A-8-71 1-7 13A-8-72 1-7 13A-8-102 1-7 13A-8-140-13A-8-144 1-7 13A-9-75 1-7 13A-9-91 1-7 13A-11-230 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. II 13A-11-240 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. II 13A-11-260 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) 15-23-17 26-6 20-3A-20.1 4-37 22-1-1 et seq. Ch. 12 (note) - Ch. 18 (note) 22-15A-10 18-1 22-27-1 et seq. Ch. 30 (note) 22-27-47 Ch. 30 (note) 24-5-30 et seq. App. A, § 6.7 28-1-1 et seq. Ch. 4 (note) 28-1-5 Ch. 4 (note) 28-3-1 4-4 28-3-190 et seq. 4-72 28-3A-1 et seq. 4-67 28-3A-1 4-72 28-3A-6 4-72 28-3A-7 et seq. 4-72 28-3A-8-28-3A-11 4-72 28-3A-11 et seq. Ch. 4, Art. III 28-3A-15 4-72 28-3A-17 4-72 28-3A-20 4-72 28-3A-25(a)(3) Ch. 4 (note) 28-3A-25(a)(18) Ch. 4 (note) 28-7-1 et seq. 4-72 28-10-1 et seq. 4-74 tit. 32 Ch. 34 (note) 32-1-4 26-10 32-5A-191 1-7 32-6-19 34-2 32-13-1 et seq. 28-1 32-13-1-32-13-8 34-2 32-13-1 34-88 34-8-1 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) 34-14A-1 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) 36-19-1 et seq. Ch. 14 (note) 36-25A-1 et seq. 2-47 - 2-54 - 2-57 tit. 40 22-201 40-2A-3 22-182 40-12-224 22-203 40-21-50 et seq. 22-182 40-21-80 et seq. 22-182 40-23-1 et seq. 22-59 - 22-113, 22-114 - 22-151 - 22-284, 22-285 40-23-25 22-203 40-23-60 et seq. 22-61 40-23-82 22-203 40-26-1 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. V - Ch. 22, Art. X 41-9-160 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) 41-9-166 16-20 45-36A-100 Ch. 4 (note) 45-36A-100.01 Ch. 4 (note) 45-36A-101 10-1 45-36A-102 Ch. 20 (note) - 20-4 46-36A-102 20-2  
