Casa Grande City Code


Casa Grande, Arizona
Code of Ordinances



Contains 2018 S-22,
current through Ordinance 1397.02.15, passed February 19, 2019



 




Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com




Title 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS



Chapters:



1.01   Code Adoption



1.04   General Provisions



1.08   General Penalty



Chapter 1.01
CODE ADOPTION



Sections:



1.01.010   Authorization for adoption.



1.01.020   Title—Citation—Reference.



1.01.030   Repeal.



1.01.040   Reference applies to all amendments.



1.01.050   Title, chapter and section headings.



1.01.060   Reference to specific ordinances.



1.01.070   Effect of code on past actions and obligations.



1.01.080   Effective date.



1.01.090   Constitutionality.



1.01.100   Ordinances passed prior to adoption of code.



1.01.010  Authorization for adoption.



   The mayor and council authorize the adoption of the “Casa Grande
Municipal Code” as compiled, edited and published by Book Publishing
Company, Seattle, Washington.



(Ord. 1397 § 1, 1991)



1.01.020  Title—Citation—Reference.



   This code shall be known as the “City of Casa Grande Municipal
Code” and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the “City of
Casa Grande Municipal Code” in any prosecution for the violation of any
provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity.  It shall be
sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or
repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amend-ment
to, correction or repeal of the “City of Casa Grande Municipal Code.” 
Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and
subsections of the “City of Casa Grande Municipal Code,” and such
references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection
as it appears in the code.



(Ord. 1397 § 2, 1991)



1.01.030  Repeal.



   All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions
of this ordinance or any part of the code adopted herein by reference are
repealed.



(Ord. 1397 § 3, 1991)



1.01.040  Reference applies to all amendments.



   Whenever a reference is made to this code as the “City of Casa Grande
Municipal Code” or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city,
the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions
heretofore, now or hereafter made.



(Ord. 1397 § 4, 1991)



1.01.050  Title, chapter and section headings.



   Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be
deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or
intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof.



(Ord. 1397 § 5, 1991)



1.01.060  Reference to specific ordinances.



   The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of
record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are
therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included
within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the
corresponding provisions contained within this code.



(Ord. 1397 § 6, 1991)



1.01.070  Effect of code on past actions and obligations.



   Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendments of any
ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the city shall in any manner
affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were
committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of
any license, fee, or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such
ordinances relating to the collection of any such license fee, or penalty, or
the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, not to affect the
validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted,
filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and obligations
thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect.



(Ord. 1397 § 7, 1991)



1.01.080  Effective date.



   This code shall become effective on the date the ordinance adopting
this code as the “City of Casa Grande Municipal Code” becomes effective.



(Ord. 1397 § 8, 1991)



1.01.090  Constitutionality.



   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is
for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code.  The council
declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection,
sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or
more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared
invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should be
declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or
ordinances shall be in full force and effect.



(Ord. 1397 § 9, 1991)



1.01.100  Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code.



   The last ordinance included in this code was Ordinance 1368, passed and
adopted November 5, 1990.  The following ordinances, passed and adopted
subsequent to Ordinance 1368, but prior to the adoption of this code, are
adopted and made a part of this code:  Ordinances 936.14, 1178.35, 1178.37,
536.5, 1179.2, 1179.3, 1179.4, 1178.39, 1179.5, 583.2, 1178.40, 1086.3,
854.4, 536.6, and 936.17.



(Ord. 1397 § 10, 1991)



Chapter 1.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS



Sections:



1.04.010   Code cite.



1.04.020   City seal.



1.04.030   Construction of ordinances.



1.04.040   Rules of construction.



1.04.050   Acts by agents.



1.04.060   Definitions.



1.04.070   Authority.



1.04.080   Reasonable time for compliance.



1.04.090   Time computation.



1.04.100   Additional rules of construction.



1.04.110   References.



1.04.120   Conflicting provisions—Different chapters.



1.04.130   Conflicting provisions—Same chapter.



1.04.140   Section headings.



1.04.150   Effect of repeal.



1.04.160   Severability.



1.04.170   City Consolidated Fee Schedule.



1.04.010  Code cite.



   The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall
constitute and be designated “The Code of the City of Casa Grande,
Arizona,” and may also be cited as the “Casa Grande City Code.”



(Prior code Art. 1-1)



1.04.020  City seal.



   The city seal of Casa Grande, Arizona shall appear as follows:



 



 



(Added during 1991 codification)



1.04.030  Construction of ordinances.



   The rules and the definitions set forth in this chapter shall be
observed in the construction of this code and the ordinances of the city
unless such construction would be inconsistent with either the manifest
intent of the council or the context of this code or the ordinances of the
city.



(Prior code Art. 1-2)



1.04.040  Rules of construction.



   A.   All words and phrases shall be construed and understood
according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical
words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and
appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to
such peculiar and appropriate meaning.



   B.   Words of the masculine gender include the feminine; and words
in the singu-lar number include the plural and words in the plural number
include the singular.



   C.   The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the
future includes the present.



(Prior code §§ 1-3-1, 1-3-9, 1-3-25)



1.04.050  Acts by agents.



   When an ordinance requires an act to be done which may by law as well
be done by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed
to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.



(Prior code § 1-3-2)



1.04.060  Definitions.



   “City” means the city of Casa Grande, Arizona.



   “City Consolidated Fee Schedule” shall mean that public record
adopted by council by resolution, as amended from time to time, as codified
in Subsection 1.04.170.A. of this code.



   “Civil hearing officer” means any person qualified and appointed to
hear civil traffic violation cases and/or any civil violation cases.



   "Civil traffic laws" are those laws adopted by ordinance or regulation
relating to movement and control of traffic, including the parking, standing
or stopping of a vehicle, which provides for imposition of civil sanctions
upon violation of such ordinance or regulation.



   "Civil traffic violation" means any violation designated as such under
the provisions of Section 28-181(B), Arizona Revised Statutes, or any
violation of civil traffic laws under the city code.



   "Civil violation" means any violation designated as such under Arizona
Revised Statutes, or any violation of the city code expressly designated as
such.



   “The code” or “this code” means “The Code of the City of Casa
Grande, Arizona,” unless the context indicates otherwise.



   “Council” means the council of the city of Casa Grande, Arizona.



   “Day” means the period of time between any midnight and the
midnight following.



   “Daytime” means the period of time between sunrise and sunset.
“Nighttime” means the period of time between sunset and sunrise.



   Whenever any department, board, commission, office, officer, or
employee is referred to, it shall mean a department, board, commission,
office, officer, or employee of the city, unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise.



   "Gross vehicle weight rating" means the weight that is assigned by the
vehicle manufacturer to a vehicle and that represents the maximum recommended
total weight including the vehicle and the load for the vehicle.



   “In the city” or “within the city” means and includes all
territory over which the city now has, or hereafter acquires, jurisdiction
for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers.



   “Month” means a calendar month.



   “Oath” means and includes affirmation or declaration.



   “Or” may be read “and,” and “and” may be read “or,” if
the sense requires it.



   “Person” means and includes firms, corporations, or voluntary
associations, as well as individuals, unless plainly inapplicable.



   “Personal property” means and includes every species of property,
except real property as defined in this section.



   “Preceding” and “following” mean the next before and the next
after, respectively.



   “Property” means and includes real and personal property.



   “Real property” means and includes lands, tenements, and
hereditaments.



   “Shall” is mandatory and “may” is permissive.



   “Shall have been” includes past and future cases.



   “Signature” or “subscription” means and includes a mark when
the signer cannot write, such signer's or subscriber's name being written
near the mark by a witness who writes his own name near the signer's or
subscriber's name; but a signature or subscription by mark can be
acknowledged or can serve as a signature of subscription to a sworn statement
only when two witnesses so sign their own names thereto.



   “The state” means the state of Arizona.



   “Tenant” or “occupant,” applied to a building or land, means
and includes any person holding a written or an oral lease of or who occupies
the whole or part of such building or land, either alone or with others.



   "Vehicle" means every device in, upon or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.



   “Week” means seven consecutive days.



   “Writing” means and includes any form of recorded message capable
of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report,
statement or record is required or authorized by this code, it shall be made
in writing in the English language unless it is expressly provided otherwise.



   “Year” means a calendar year, except where otherwise provided.



(Ord. 1397.01.09 § 1, 2007; Ord. 1397.01.07 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1397.01.06 §
1, 2004; Ord. 1397.01.04 § 1, 2000; Ord. 1397.01.03 § 3, 1998: prior code
Art. 1-3, §§ 1-3-3 — 1-3-8, 1-3-10, 1-3-12 — 1-3-24, 1-3-28 — 1-3-30)



1.04.070  Authority.



   All words purporting to give joint authority to three or more city
officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such officers or other persons unless it shall be otherwise
expressly declared in the law giving the authority.



(Prior code § 1-3-11)



1.04.080  Reasonable time for compliance.



   In all cases where any section of this code shall require any act to be
done in a reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, such reasonable
time or notice shall be deemed to mean such time only as may be necessary for
the prompt performance of such duty, or compliance with such notice.



(Prior code § 1-3-26)



1.04.090  Time computation.



   The time within which an act is to be done as provided in this code or
in any order issued pursuant to any ordinance, when expressed in days, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, except that if
the last day is a Sunday or holiday, it shall be excluded, and when such time
is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday or a holiday, from midnight to
midnight, shall be excluded.



(Prior code § 1-3-27)



1.04.100  Additional rules of construction.



   In addition to the rules of construction specified in the previous
section, the rules set forth in Sections 1.08.100, 1.08.110 and 1.08.120 of
this code shall be observed in the construction of this code.



(Prior code § 1-4-1)



1.04.110  References.



   All references to chapters, articles, or sections are to the chapters,
articles, and sections of this code unless otherwise specified.



(Prior code § 1-4-2)



1.04.120  Conflicting provisions—Different chapters.



   If the provisions of different chapters of this code conflict with or
contravene each other, the provisions of each chapter shall prevail as to all
matters and questions growing out of the subject matter of such chapter.



(Prior code § 1-4-3)



1.04.130  Conflicting provisions—Same chapter.



   If conflicting provisions are found in different sections of the same
chapter, the provisions of the section which is last in numerical order shall
prevail unless such construction is inconsistent with the meaning of such
chapter.



(Prior code § 1-4-4)



1.04.140  Section headings.



   Headings of the sections of this code are intended as a convenience to
indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be
titles of such section, nor as any part of this section, nor unless expressly
so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such section, including the
headings, is amended or reenacted.



(Prior code Art. 1-5)



1.04.150  Effect of repeal.



   A.   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or
provision, shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to
revive such former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it shall be
expressly so provided.



   B.   The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or
penalty incurred before the repeal took effect nor any suit, prosecution or
proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for any offense committed under
the ordinance repealed.



(Prior code Art. 1-6)



1.04.160  Severability.



   It is declared to be the intention of the council that the sections,
paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code shall be severable,
and if any provision of this code is held unconstitutional for any reason by
a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect
any of the remaining provisions of this code.



(Prior code Art. 1-7)



1.04.170  City Consolidated Fee Schedule.



   A.   Council shall, by resolution, adopt a public record known as
the “City Consolidated Fee Schedule,” which shall set out the fees
charged to users for certain services provided by the City, the provisions of
which are hereby incorporated by reference. From time to time, council may
amend the City Consolidated Fee Schedule by resolution. At all times, there
shall be three copies of the most updated Consolidated Fee Schedule on file
with the City in locations to be determined by the city clerk.



   B.   Except as otherwise set forth in this section or expressly set
forth elsewhere in this code, City shall charge users of City services the
user fees as established in the City Consolidated Fee Schedule adopted by
reference herein.



   C.   City shall charge users of the services provided by the City
for issuance of permits for sewer construction and final acceptance of
subdivision sewer collection systems within the City of Casa Grande, pursuant
to its intergovernmental agreement with the Arizona Department of
Environmental Quality. Other user fees for sewer services shall be as
established in the City Consolidated Fee Schedule.



   D.   City shall charge users of the services provided by the City
for fees relating to the issuance of building permits in accordance with the
City's Building Code, as may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. 1397.01.09 § 2, 2007; Ord. 1397.01.08 §§ 2, 4, 2006; Ord. 1397.01.07
§ 2, 2005; Ord. 1397.01.06  2, 2004; Ord. 1397.13.15 § 1 (part), 2003;
Ord. 1397.01.05 § 1  (part), 2002; Ord. 1397.01.2, 1995; Ord. 1397.01.1 §
1, 1992)



Chapter 1.08
GENERAL PENALTY



Sections:



1.08.010   Penalty.



1.08.010  Penalty.



   A.   Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city any act
is prohibited or is made or is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a
misdemeanor or whenever in such code or ordinance the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no
specific penalty is provided therefor, any person violating any such
provisions of this code or any ordinance is guilty of a Class II misdemeanor
punishable by a fine not exceeding seven hundred fifty dollars or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding four months or both such fine and
imprisonment, in the discretion of the city judge. Each day any violation of
any provisions of this code or of any ordinance continues shall constitute a
separate offense unless otherwise designated in such code or ordinance.



   B.   In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions
of this code or any ordinance shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be,
by the city, abated as provided by law, and each day that such condition
continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense.



(Ord. 1368 §§ 1 (part), 2 (part), 1990: prior code Art. 1-8)


Casa Grande City Code


Title 2
ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL



Chapters:



2.04   City Council



2.08   City Clerk



2.12   City Attorney



2.14   Director of Finance



2.16   Police Department



2.20   Fire Department



2.24   City Court



2.28   Airport Advisory Board



2.30   Parks and Recreation Advisory Board



2.32   Civil Defense



2.36   Boards, Committees and Commissions Generally



2.40   Personnel System



2.42   Self-Funded Insurance Plan and Trust



Chapter 2.04
CITY COUNCIL



Sections:



2.04.010   Meetings.



2.04.020   Agenda.



2.04.030   Reserved.



2.04.035   Meetings—Order of business.



2.04.040   Suspension of rules when.



2.04.010  Meetings.



   The council shall hold regular meetings on the first and the third
Monday of each month at seven p.m.; provided, that when the day fixed for any
regular meeting of the council falls upon a day designated by law as a legal
holiday, such meeting shall be held at the same hour on the next succeeding
day not a holiday. All regular meetings of the council shall be held in the
city hall of Casa Grande.



(Prior code § 2-4-1)



2.04.020  Agenda.



   Prior to each council meeting, or on or before a time fixed by the
council for preparation and distribution of an agenda, whichever is earlier,
the clerk shall collect all written reports, communications, ordinances,
resolutions, contracts, and other documents to be submitted to the council,
and prepare an agenda according to the order of business and shall furnish
each councilmember, the mayor, and the attorney with a copy.



(Prior code § 2-4-5)



2.04.030  Reserved.



2.04.035  Meetings—Order of business.



   The business of the council shall be taken up for consideration and
disposition in the following order:



   A.   Call to Order.



   1.   The mayor or, in the mayor's absence, the mayor pro-tem
presides over all meetings of the city council and, after determining that a
quorum is present, calls the meeting to order. 



   2.   In the absence of the mayor and mayor pro-tem, the city clerk
shall call the council to order, whereupon a temporary mayor pro-tem shall be
elected by the members of the council present. 



   3.   Following the call to order, those in attendance may be asked
to join the council in reciting the pledge of allegiance.



   B.   Roll Call. The mayor or city clerk, or designee, takes roll and
announces the presence or absence of individual council members.



   C.   Minutes of the Preceding Council, Board, Commission and
Committee Meeting(s).



   1.   The clerk or his deputy shall read or present the minutes of
the preceding council meeting, which shall be approved if correct.  Any
errors noted shall be corrected prior to approval.



   2.   The clerk or his deputy shall read or present the minutes of
any board, commission and committee meetings.



   D.   Claims.



   1.   Upon approval from the appropriate department head, the finance
director shall pay all claims against the city that do not exceed $2,000.



   2.   All claims in excess of $2,000 shall be approved by the city
council prior to payment, with the exception of the following items, which
shall be paid when due by the finance director, upon approval of the city
manager: payroll and payroll-related checks, council-approved contracts,
utilities, and claims upon escrow accounts containing federal funds for
housing rehabilitation.



   3.   The finance director is also authorized, upon approval of the
city manager, to make such fund transfers as may be necessary from time to
time, and to invest such surplus funds as may be available from time to time.



   4.   A list of all claims that have been paid and all transfers and
investments that have been made pursuant to this chapter shall be prepared
and distributed as ordered in Section 2.04.020 of this chapter. This list
shall include the name of the claimant, the date and the amount of each
payment.



   E.   Meeting Agenda Approval.



   1.   This is the time when council members or the city manager may
withdraw or move items on the agenda. 



   2.   A simple majority of those present may vote to consider items
in a different order.



   3.   During this portion of the agenda, council members will share
current activities on regional, state and federal committees, boards or
commissions on which they serve.



   F.   Special Presentations.



   1.   Petitions, remonstrances, communications and comments or
suggestions from citizens present, shall be heard by the council. 



   (a)   All such remarks shall be addressed to the council as a whole,
and not to any member thereof. 



   (b)   Such remarks shall be limited to ten minutes, unless
additional time is granted by the council. 



   (c)   No person other than the individual speaking shall enter into
the discussion without the permission of the presiding officer. 



   (d)   No question shall be asked a councilman except through the
presiding officer.



   2.   Council may also take the opportunity to acknowledge
outstanding achievements or present awards to employees, groups or other
individuals. 



   G.   Consent Agenda.



   1.   Any agenda item which appears under Reports by Officer,
Unfinished Business, or New Business shall be marked by an asterisk when the
item appears to be routine and noncontroversial. 



   (a)   Examples of such agenda items are:  final adoptions of
ordinances and resolutions, bid calls for budgeted purchases and some bid
awards, license approvals, leases, agreements and similar items.



   (b)   Agenda items marked with an asterisk become a part of the
consent agenda and shall be acted upon by a roll call vote of the council. 



   (c)   The results of this vote shall apply to all items on the
consent agenda.



   2.   If any council member or member of the public requests that an
item be removed from the consent agenda, the request shall be granted and the
item shall be discussed and voted upon separately.



   H.   Public Comments.



   1.   During this portion of the meeting, the mayor will invite
citizens to talk with the council about topics that are not scheduled for
public testimony on the evening's agenda. 



   (a)   Speakers will limit their presentation to three to five
minutes, unless a longer period is permitted by the presiding officer and/or
council. 



   (b)   Speakers are asked to sign the speakers sign-in sheet provided.



   2.   Written comments may be submitted into the record of a council
meeting by presenting the written document to the clerk of the meeting.  A
copy of the document will be provided to each council member; the document
will not be read aloud.



   I.   Award of Contract. Before presentation to the council, all
contract documents shall have been:



   1.   Approved as to form and legality by the city attorney or the
city attorney's authorized representative; and



   2.   First referred for review to the head of the department under
whose jurisdiction the administration of the subject matter of the contract
document would devolve; and



   3.   Further, presented to the city manager or authorized
representative for review.



   J.   Boards and Commissions. During this portion of the meeting,
council may consider board and commission interviews, appointments, and/or
other advisory board-related business as necessary.



   K.   Ordinances and Resolutions.



   1.   Ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects requiring
action by the council must be introduced by a member of the council, except
that the city manager, city attorney or department directors may present
ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects to the council, and any
council member may assume sponsorship thereof by moving that such ordinances,
resolutions, matters or subjects be adopted; otherwise, they shall not be
considered. 



   2.   City officials and committees shall prepare any reports
required by the council.



   L.   Public Meetings, Public Hearings, Open Record Reviews and
Closed Record Reviews.



   1.   After giving their name and address, individuals desiring to
speak during a public hearing are to address the council from the speaker
podium. 



   (a)   Comments are limited to the specific matter for which the
public hearing is held.



   (b)   Comments are limited to three to five minutes, unless a longer
period is permitted by the presiding officer and/or council.



   (c)   Unless the presiding officer grants an extension of time,
comments are limited to five minutes.



   2.   Written comments are encouraged during the public hearings. 



   (a)   When materials are presented during public hearings, they
should be submitted to the city clerk before the public hearing is closed on
the item. 



   (b)   Written documents submitted will be entered into the record,
but will not be read aloud.



   3.   After a public hearing is closed, no member of the public shall
be permitted to address the council or the staff. 



   (a)   In fairness to members of the public, the city council shall
be considered to be in deliberations from that point forward.



   (b)   Additional public testimony either that evening or at a future
meeting would be precluded until public hearing notification procedures
required by the Casa Grande Municipal Code are concluded.



   M.   Executive Session.



   1.   At the call of the presiding officer or with a majority vote,
the city council may recess to executive session to privately discuss and
consider matters of confidential concern to the well being of the city. 



   2.   The purposes for which an executive session may be held are
identified in Article II, Section 14 of the City of Casa Grande Charter.



   3.   Before convening in executive session, the presiding officer
shall publicly announce the purpose for excluding the public from the meeting
place, and the time when the executive session will be concluded. 



   4.   An executive session may be extended to a stated later time by
announcement of the presiding officer.



   N.   Reports. Members of the council and the city manager may take
this opportunity to make comments, extend compliments, express concerns or
make announcements concerning any topic they wish to share with staff or the
public.



   O.   Addressing the Council—Generally.



   1.   Written Communications. 



   (a)   All persons may address the council by written communication,
including e-mail.
     (b)   Such written communication pertaining to items subject to
public hearing procedures will be made a part of the public record, but will
not be read aloud.



   (c)   Written comments may be submitted to the council at any time
by mailing or otherwise delivering to: the City Clerk, 510 E. Florence Blvd.,
Casa Grande, AZ 85222.
     (d)   The clerk will distribute a copy of the correspondence to
each council member.



   2.   Oral Communications.  All persons may address the council
verbally, either:



   (a)   During the visitor's portion of the agenda for items not on
the agenda;



   (b)   During public hearings, following staff and, if applicable,
applicant comments;



   (c)   During items on the agenda that are not public hearings, etc.,
following staff comments at the discretion of the council.



   3.   Addressing the Council—Manner— Limits. 



   (a)   Each person addressing the council will give his or her name
and address in an audible tone of voice for the record and, unless the
council grants further time, shall limit the address to five minutes. 



   (b)   All remarks will be addressed to the council as a body and not
to any member thereof. 



   (c)   No person other than the council and the person having the
floor will be permitted to enter into any discussion, either directly or
through a member of the council, without the permission of the mayor.



   P.   Addressing the Council—After a Motion is Made. After the
council makes a motion, no person will address the council without first
securing the permission of the mayor or presiding officer.



   Q.   Adjournment.



   1.   The council may, by a majority vote of those present, adjourn
from time to time to a specific date and hour.



   2.   A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and decided
without debate.



(Ord. 1397.02.08 § 2, 2005)



2.04.040  Suspension of rules when.



   Any of the provisions of this chapter may be temporarily suspended in
connection with any matter under consideration by a recorded vote of
three-fourths of the members present, except that this section shall not be
construed to permit any action that is contrary to state statutes.



(Prior code § 2-4-8)



Chapter 2.08
CITY CLERK



Sections:



2.08.010   Powers and duties.



2.08.020   Deputy city clerk—Appointment.



2.08.030   Deputy city clerk—Duties.



2.08.010  Powers and duties.



   A.   The city clerk shall keep a true and correct record of all
business transacted by the council and any other records that either pertain
to the business of the city or that the council directs. The clerk shall
number, plainly label, and file separately in a suitable cabinet all
resolutions, notices, deeds, surveys, leases, paid and unpaid vouchers,
inventories, letters, orders, and other documents of whatever nature.



   B.   Public Inspection of Records. The clerk shall keep convenient
for public inspection all public records and public documents under his
control, as provided by state statute.



   C.   Minutes. The clerk shall prepare or cause to be prepared all
minutes of council proceedings and ensure their correctness and accuracy.



   D.   Ordinances, Resolutions, Budgets and Notices. The clerk shall
process, record, file, publish, and if required by state statute, post all
ordinances, resolutions, budgets and notices that may be passed by the
council.



   E.   Election Official. The clerk shall be the city election
official and perform those duties required by state statute.



   1.   The city clerk shall, in the case of initiative measures,
require that petitions ordering the submission of such measures to a vote of
the people contain the signatures of fifteen percent of the qualified
electors within the city limits. The city clerk shall determine the total
number of registered voters within the city limits from the most recent
available statistics kept by the county recorder.



   F.   Licenses. The clerk shall issue or cause to be issued all
licenses that may be prescribed by state statute or this code.



(Ord. 1368 § 1 (part), 1990; prior code § 4-3-1)



2.08.020  Deputy city clerk—Appointment.



   The city clerk is authorized, with the advice and consent of the city
manager, to appoint the deputy city clerk.



(Ord. 1397.02.15 § 1(part), 2019)



2.08.030  Deputy city clerk—Duties.



   The deputy city clerk shall act as the city clerk when the city clerk
is absent, unavailable, or otherwise unable to act for any reason. In the
absence of the city clerk, the deputy city clerk shall have the duty to
execute, attest, and acknowledge all documents required by law or ordinance
to be attested to and formalized by the city clerk and to affix the seal of
the city thereto. In signing any documents, the deputy city clerk shall affix
the name of the city clerk, followed by the word “by” and the deputy city
clerk’s own signature and title. The deputy city clerk shall perform other
functions and duties under the supervision and direction of the city clerk.



(Ord. 1397.02.15 § 1(part), 2019)



Chapter 2.12
CITY ATTORNEY



Sections:



2.12.010   Powers and duties.



2.12.010  Powers and duties.



   The attorney shall act as the legal counselor and advisor of the
council and other city officials, and as such shall give his opinion in
writing when requested. He shall draft all deeds, contracts, conveyances,
ordinances, resolutions and other legal instruments when required by the
council. He shall approve as to form, in writing, all drafts of contracts and
all official or other bonds before final approval or acceptance thereof by
the council. He shall return, within ten days, all ordinances and resolutions
submitted to him for consideration by the council, with his approval or
disapproval as to form noted thereon, together with his reasons therefor. He
shall prosecute and defend all suits, actions or causes where the city is a
party, and shall report to the council, when required, the condition of any
suit or action to which the city is a party.



(Prior code § 4-3-2)



Chapter 2.14
DIRECTOR OF FINANCE



Sections:



2.14.010   Office created.



2.14.020   Appointment.



2.14.030   Qualifications required.



2.14.040   Powers and duties.



2.14.010  Office created.



   The office of director of finance is created and established. The
director of finance shall be the chief accounting officer of the city.



(Ord. 1368 § 2 (part), 1990)



2.14.020  Appointment.



   The director of finance shall be appointed by the city manager.



(Ord. 1368 § 2 (part), 1990)



2.14.030  Qualifications required.



   The director of finance shall be qualified by sufficient technical
accounting training, skill and experience to be proficient in the office. The
director of finance shall also show evidence of his executive ability.



(Ord. 1368 § 2 (part), 1990)



2.14.040  Powers and duties.



   The director of finance shall be the head of the finance department of
the city and shall have the power and is required to do the following:



   A.   Administration of Financial Affairs. He shall have charge of
the administration of the financial affairs of the city under the direction
of the city manager.



   B.   Budget. He shall compile the budget expense and income
estimates for the city manager.



   C.   Accounting System. He shall maintain a general accounting
system for the city government and of each of the offices, departments and
agencies.



   D.   Disbursements. He shall supervise and be responsible for the
disbursement of all moneys and have control of all expenditures, audit and
approve before payment all bills, invoices, payrolls, demands or other
charges against the city government and with the advice of the city attorney,
when necessary, determine the regularity, legality and correctness of such
claims, demands or charges to ensure that budget appropriations are not
exceeded.



   E.   Other Functions. He shall perform such other functions and have
such other responsibilities as the city manager may from time to time
specify, or such other functions and responsibilities as may be prescribed
from time to time, by action of the city council.



(Ord. 1368 § 2 (part), 1990)



Chapter 2.16
POLICE DEPARTMENT



Sections:



Article I. In General



2.16.010   Composition.



2.16.020   Appointment of chief of police.



2.16.030   Rules and regulations.



2.16.040   Duties.



2.16.050   Authority to answer calls outside city.



2.16.060   Unclaimed property—Procedure—Disposal.



Article II. Reserve Police



2.16.070   Established.



2.16.080   Appointment, powers and duties.



2.16.090   Oath of office.



2.16.100   Training.



2.16.110   Compliance with regulations.



Article I. In General



2.16.010  Composition.



   There is created a police department for the city which shall consist
of a chief of police, and as many policeman as may from time to time be
deemed necessary by the city manager for the safety and good order of the
city.



(Prior code § 5-1-1)



2.16.020  Appointment of chief of police.



   The chief of police shall be appointed by the city manager.



(Prior code § 5-1-2)



2.16.030  Rules and regulations.



   The police department shall be operated and managed in accordance with
such departmental rules and regulations as may from time to time be
recommended by the chief of police and approved by the city manager.



(Prior code § 5-1-3)



2.16.040  Duties.



   It is the duty of the police department, under the direction of the
chief of police, to:



   A.   Enforce this code and the statutes of the state of Arizona
within jurisdictional limits as conferred by law and to arrest and charge the
violators thereof;



   B.   Take charge of the city jail and all prisoners confined
therein, and all those who are sentenced to labor on the streets or public
works of the city and to see that orders and sentences with reference to such
are fully executed and complied with;



   C.   Deliver any persons who may be confined in the jail upon
conviction of crime committed under the jurisdiction of the magistrate's
court to any authorized officer of the city who shall at any time demand such
prisoners. Any such authorized person so demanding and receiving such
prisoners shall work such prisoners on the streets or alleys of the city or
any and all authorized work as may be determined by the council;



   D.   Render such account of the police department, its duties, and
receipts as may be required by the council and city manager, and keep records
of the office open to inspection by the council or city manager at any time.



   E.   Direct traffic and ensure the orderly flow thereof and
investigate and make reports to traffic accidents;



   F.   Inspect and ascertain the condition of traffic control devices
of every description which have been erected within the city on the authority
of the council and to notify the city manager of any defects found therein;



   G.   Perform such additional duties as may be required by the
council and city manager.



(Prior code § 5-1-4)



2.16.050  Authority to answer calls outside city.



   The members of the police department of the city are duly authorized to
answer calls for aid and assistance beyond the corporate limits of the city
whenever the chief of police in his discretion shall deem it necessary to
protect lives and property.



(Prior code § 5-1-5)



2.16.060  Unclaimed property—Procedure—Disposal.



   A.   Unclaimed property shall be interpreted to mean and include
bicycles, automobiles, vehicles of whatever nature, suitcases, trunks and
other baggage and any such property except livestock and any weapons that
come into the possession of the police department and which is held for more
than sixty days without being claimed by and returned to the owner.



   B.   Upon taking possession of any property by any officer, agent or
employee of the city, the same shall be delivered to the police department,
and it shall be the duty of the police department to ascertain, if possible,
the owner thereof and to notify the owner by mail or in person that such
property is in the possession of the police department.



   C.   In the event the owner of unclaimed property cannot be found or
does not claim such property, the police department shall sell such property
in the manner set forth in this section:



   1.   The police department shall hold all such property for a period
of sixty days before selling;



   2.   At least ten days prior to the holding of the sale the police
department shall cause to be published in the official city newspaper, notice
of such sale, in which shall be stated the time and place of holding the sale
and the general nature of the unclaimed property to be sold, and shall mail a
copy of such notice to the owner, if known;



   3.   The police department shall also post a notice of such sale on
the bulletin board at the city hall, at least ten days prior to the date of
sale;



   4.   Unclaimed property shall be sold at public auction for cash,
either singly or otherwise as the police department may see fit, to the
highest bidder;



   5.   All proceeds of such sale over and above the sale and
advertising costs shall be paid over to the treasurer and retained in a
separate fund for six months. Upon the expiration of such time, unless sooner
claimed as hereinafter provided, such moneys shall be paid into the general
fund;



   6.   Within six months following the sale any person claiming the
ownership of any property sold may receive the proceeds from the sale of such
property, less its proportionate share of the costs of sale, upon proof of
ownership to the satisfaction of the police department.



   D.   Upon delivery to any purchaser of any property sold under the
provisions of this section, the police department shall execute to the
purchaser a certificate of sale, describing the item sold and the date of
sale, and the certificate shall serve to pass title to the purchaser.



(Prior code § 5-1-6)



Article II.  Reserve Police



2.16.070  Established.



   There is created in and for the city a police reserve system for the
purpose of preserving the public peace and promoting the general welfare of
the city by giving authority to persons appointed as reserve police officers
to assist and supplement the regular police officers of the city in the
enforcement of city ordinances and state statutes.



(Prior code § 5-1-7)



2.16.080  Appointment, powers and duties.



   The chief of police with approval of the city manager, may appoint and
dismiss adult residents of the city as reserve police officers, and shall
assign them to such duties as he may deem to be in the best interests of the
city in promoting the public peace and general welfare.



(Prior code § 5-1-8)



2.16.090  Oath of office.



   Every person appointed by the chief of police as a reserve police
officer shall be sworn to faithful performance of his required duties as
prescribed by the chief of police.



(Prior code § 5-1-9)



2.16.100  Training.



   The chief of police shall conduct a period of pre-assignment training
for reserve police officers sufficient to enable the officers to perform
properly and adequately their required duties. Further, the chief of police
may require such additional continuing training as he may deem necessary or
advisable.



(Prior code § 5-1-10)



2.16.110  Compliance with regulations required.



   Reserve police officers shall adhere to and be governed by the rules
and regulations laid down for the guidance of regular police officers insofar
as such rules and regulations are applicable to and consistent with the
special class or duty prescribed for reserve police officers by the chief of
police. Reserve police officers shall also comply with all other applicable
ordinances, rules and regulations adopted by the city council.



(Prior code § 5-1-11)



Chapter 2.20
FIRE DEPARTMENT



Sections:



2.20.010   Creation and composition.



2.20.020   Compliance with regulations required.



2.20.030   Fire chief—Appointment, powers and duties.



2.20.040   Fire chief—Authority.



2.20.050   Firemen—Appointment, powers and duties.



2.20.060   Authority to enter adjacent property.



2.20.070   Equipment.



2.20.080   Fire protection outside city.



2.20.090   Right-of-way of firemen when responding to alarm.



2.20.100   Fire alarms.



2.20.110   Bureau of fire prevention established—Powers and duties.



2.20.111   Fire department fees.



2.20.010  Creation and composition.



   There is created a fire department for the city which shall consist of
a chief, and as many regular and volunteer firemen as may be deemed necessary
from time to time by the city manager upon recommendation of the fire chief.



(Prior code § 5-2-1)



2.20.020  Compliance with regulations required.



   The fire department shall be operated and managed in accordance with
such departmental rules and regulations as may from time to time be
recommended by the fire chief and approved by the city manager.



(Prior code § 5-2-2)



2.20.030  Fire chief—Appointment, powers and duties.



   The chief of the fire department shall be appointed by the city
manager. It shall be the duty of the fire chief to:



   A.   Be accountable to the council for the personnel, morale and
general efficiency of the fire department;



   B.   Direct the operations of the fire department, subject to the
rules and regulations thereof;



   C.   Be present at all fires, if possible, and plan and direct the
extinguishment thereof. During the progress of a fire the authority of the
fire chief shall be absolute in all matters directly concerning the
extinguishment of fire and the disposition of property endangered by it;



   D.   Conduct suitable drill or instruction in the operation and
handling of equipment, first aid and rescue work, salvage, a study of
buildings in the city, water supplies and all other matters generally
considered essential to good firemanship and safety of life and property from
fire;



   E.   Assist the proper authorities in suppressing the crime of arson
by investigating or causing to be investigated the cause, origin and
circumstances of all fires;



   F.   Inspect buildings and premises and serve written notice upon
the owner or occupant to abate, within a specified time, any and all fire
hazards that may be found. For the purpose of conducting such inspection, the
chief is empowered to enter any and all buildings and premises within the
city at any reasonable hour. Any person served with such written notice shall
comply and notify the chief of his compliance within a reasonable time;



   G.   Keep complete records of all fires, inspections, apparatus and
equipment personnel and other information about the work of the department
open to inspection by the city manager and furnish to the city manager such
information upon request;



   H.   Enforce or cause to be enforced all ordinances, laws and
regulations of the city and state, insofar as they pertain to fire and safety.



(Prior code § 5-2-3)



2.20.040  Fire chief—Authority.



   It is unlawful for any fireman or citizen to refuse to obey an order
issued by the fire chief pursuant to his authority.



(Prior code § 5-2-10)



2.20.050  Firemen—Appointment, powers and duties.



   Volunteer firemen shall be appointed by the city manager upon the
recommendation of the fire chief. Such appointees shall be able-bodied
citizens whose business activities are normally within the confines of the
city, and who have telephones in their homes.



(Ord. 1368 § 3 (part), 1990; prior code § 5-2-4)



2.20.060  Authority to enter adjacent property.



   It is lawful for any fireman acting under the direction of the chief or
another officer in command to enter upon the premises adjacent to or in the
vicinity of any building or other property that is on fire for the purpose of
extinguishing such fire, and no person shall hinder, resist or obstruct any
fireman in the discharge of his duty as hereinabove provided.



(Prior code § 5-2-5)



2.20.070  Equipment.



   The department shall be equipped with such apparatus and other
equipment as may be required from time to time to maintain its efficiency and
properly protect life and property from fire. Recommendations concerning
apparatus and equipment needed shall be made by the chief to the city
manager. All equipment of the department shall be safely and conveniently
housed in such place or places as may be designated by the council. No person
shall use any fire apparatus or equipment for any private purpose, nor shall
any person wilfully take away or conceal any article used in any way by the
department. No person shall enter any place where the fire apparatus is
housed or handle any apparatus or equipment belonging to the department
unless accompanied by, or having special permission of, an officer or
authorized member of the department. No fire apparatus or equipment shall be
hired out or permitted to leave the fire station except in response to a call
for aid at a fire within the corporate limits of the city, or in response to
a call for aid at a fire in an area authorized for fire protection service of
mutual aid under provisions of Section 3.20.080.



(Prior code § 5-2-6)



2.20.080  Fire protection outside city.



   The council may enter into agreements or contracts to furnish fire
protection outside the city or enter into mutual aid agreements, and the fire
department is authorized to render fire fighting service pursuant to the
terms of such agreements or contracts.



(Prior code § 5-2-7)



2.20.090  Right-of-way of firemen when responding to alarm.



   Each volunteer member of the department who drives a private motor
vehicle shall be issued suitable insignia which may be attached to such motor
vehicle. All motor equipment of the department and all motor vehicles of
department members shall have right-of-way over all other traffic when
responding to an alarm. No unauthorized vehicle shall follow within six
hundred feet of any apparatus belonging to the department nor park any
vehicle or otherwise cause any obstructions to be placed within ten feet of
the entrance to any fire station or other place where fire apparatus is
stored or within fifteen feet of any fire hydrant. No person shall drive any
vehicle over fire hose except on specific orders from the chief or other
officer in charge where the hose is used.



(Prior code § 5-2-8)



2.20.100  Fire alarms.



   Suitable arrangements or equipment shall be provided for citizens to
use in an alarm and for notifying all members of the department so that they
may properly respond. It is unlawful for any person knowingly to turn in or
cause to be turned in a false alarm.



(Prior code § 5-2-9)



2.20.110  Bureau of fire prevention established—Powers and duties.



   A.   The Uniform Fire Code shall be enforced by the bureau of fire
prevention in the fire department of the city which is established and which
shall be operated under the supervision of the chief of the fire department.



   B.   The chief (or fire marshal) in charge of the bureau of fire
prevention shall be appointed by the city on the basis of examination to
determine his qualifications.



   C.   The chief of the fire department may detail such members of the
fire department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. The
chief of the fire department shall recommend to the city manager the
employment of technical inspectors, who, when such authorization is made,
shall be selected through an examination to determine their fitness for the
position. The examination shall be open to members and nonmembers of the fire
department, and appointments made after examination shall be for an
indefinite term with removal only for cause.



(Prior code § 5-3-2)



2.20.111  Fire department fees.



   All fees associated with the Casa Grande Fire Department and its
services are hereby established in the City Consolidated Fee Schedule
pursuant to Section 1.04.170.



(Ord. 1397.02.10 § 1, 2008; Ord. 1397.02.05 § 1, 1998; Ord. 1397.02.01,
1995)



Chapter 2.24
CITY COURT



Sections:



2.24.010   Established.



2.24.020   Authority.



2.24.030   Business hours.



2.24.040   City judge—Appointment.



2.24.050   City judge—Powers and duties.



2.24.060   Judicial selection committee
established—Composition—Purpose.



2.24.070   Deputy city judge—Office created—Appointment—Duties.



2.24.080   Criminal proceedings—Statutory authority—Performed under
oath.



2.24.081   Proceedings for civil traffic violation offenses.



2.24.082   Proceedings for civil violation offenses.



2.24.083   Commencement of an action alleging a civil violation: citation
and complaint.



2.24.084   Method of service of citation or complaint for a civil
violation.



2.24.085   Civil violation cases to be heard by judge or hearing officer.



2.24.090   Bail.



2.24.100   Jail cost recovery fee.



2.24.110   City court enhancement fee­Establishment of fund.



2.24.120   Court default cost recovery fee.



2.24.130   Court warrant administrative fee.



2.24.140   Court deferred prosecution fee.



2.24.150   Court monitoring and probation fee.



2.24.160   Court compliance recovery fee.



2.24.170   Court security fee.



2.24.200   Home detention and electronic monitoring program.



2.24.010  Established.



   There shall be and is established in the city a municipal court, to be
known and designated “The City Court of the City of Casa Grande, Pinal
County, State of Arizona.”



(Prior code § 6-1-1)



2.24.020  Authority.



   The city court shall, within the territorial limits of the city, have
and exercise the following jurisdiction:



   A.   It shall have and exercise exclusive original jurisdiction of
all proceedings of a criminal nature for the violation of any ordinance of
the city, and of every action of a civil nature for the enforcement of a
penalty, or the recovery of a penalty or forfeiture imposed by any ordinance
of the city for violation thereof, or for neglect to perform any duty by any
ordinance imposed, and of every action for the collection of any license,
fine or penalty due from any person to the city, and required to be paid, or
which is due and collectible under the ordinance of the city.



   B.   The city court shall have concurrent jurisdiction with the
justices of the peace, in the precincts where the city is established, over
all violations of the laws of the state committed within the limits of the
city; the concurrent jurisdiction shall be subject to the rules of civil
procedure applicable to trials before justices of the peace.



(Prior code § 6-1-2)



2.24.030  Business hours.



   The city court shall always be open, except on nonjudicial days, and on
such nonjudicial days, it may transact such business within its jurisdiction
as is authorized by law to be transacted by courts of justice of the peace,
relative to businesses within their jurisdiction.



(Prior code Art. 6-2)



2.24.040  City judge—Appointment.



   The presiding officer of the city court shall be a city judge who shall
be appointed by the council for a term coterminous with that of the mayor,
unless sooner removed for misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance of office.



(Prior code § 6-3-1)



2.24.050  City judge—Powers and duties.



   The powers and duties of the city judge shall include:



   A.   The powers and duties set forth in and conferred upon him under
the provisions of the State Constitution and statutes, the charter, this
code, and the ordinances and the resolutions of the city;



   B.   The authorization to issue and cause to be served, any and all
writs and processes, and he shall have full authority to hear and to
determine all matters properly coming before him and coming within his
jurisdiction herein specified. The writs and processes to be used shall be
similar to those used by justices of the peace in cases of similar nature,
and proper record shall be kept of the issuances of writs and processes and
returns, and of any kind and all other actions taken relative thereto, and
the actions of the court thereof;



   C.   The keeping of a docket in which shall be entered such action
on the proceedings of the court therein;



   D.   The responsibility for fixing and receiving all bonds and bails
and receiving all fines, penalties, fees and other moneys as provided by law;



   E.   The payment of all fees, fines, penalties and moneys collected
by the court to the treasurer;



   F.   The submitting of a monthly report to the council summarizing
court activities for that month;



   G.   The preparation of a schedule of traffic violations not
involving the death of a person, listing specific bail for each violation;



   H.   The designation of a deputy other than a law enforcement
officer and a specific location at which the deputy shall, during hours when
the court is not open, set the amount of bail in accordance with the
foregoing schedule and collect such bail, or accept proper bail bonds in lieu
thereof, for and on behalf of the court.



(Prior code Art. 6-4)



2.24.060  Judicial selection committee established—Composition—Purpose.



   A.   The council shall, by ordinance, establish a judicial selection
committee. The committee shall be composed of five persons who are residents
of the city. Within fifteen days following the expiration of each two year
term of the city judge or following the time that a vacancy exists in the
office, the judicial selection committee shall recommend to the council at
least two persons to fill the vacancy.



   B.   The presiding officer of the city court shall be appointed by
the council from the list of those persons recommended by the judicial
selection committee.



   C.   Each judicial selection committee, established under the terms
of this section, shall exist for the sole purpose of recommending to the city
council persons to fill vacancies in the office of city judge and immediately
upon the filling of the vacancy by the city council, each judicial selection
committee shall forthwith cease to exist.



   D.   At the expiration of the city judge's term of office, the
council may appoint the judge to fill the office until such time as the
judicial selection committee has made its recommendations and the council has
appointed his successor.



(Prior code § 6-3-2)



2.24.070  Deputy city judge—Office created—Appointment—Duties.



   The office of deputy city judge is created. A deputy city judge shall
be appointed by and shall serve at the pleasure of the council for such term
and for such salary as the council may determine. The council may appoint
more than one deputy judge to assure the continued operation of the city
court in the absence of the city judge, designating a first and second deputy
for the purposes of court administration. The deputy city judge shall perform
the duties of the city judge in the absence of the city judge in such manner
as the council may direct.



(Prior code § 6-3-3)



2.24.080  Criminal proceedings—Statutory authority—Performed under oath.



   A.   All proceedings on criminal violations shall be conducted in
accordance with the state constitution, the applicable state statutes and
rules of the state supreme court pertaining to police courts. The proceedings
shall also be conducted in accordance with the rules of criminal procedure
for the superior court, unless otherwise prescribed, and providing the
charter, this code, ordinances and resolutions of the city are not in
conflict therewith.



   B.   The city court criminal proceedings shall be commenced by
complaint under oath, or as prescribed by applicable state statutes and rules
of the State Supreme Court, and in the name of the state setting forth the
offense charged with and such particulars of time, place, person, and
property as to enable the defendant to understand distinctly the character of
the offense complained of and to answer the complaint.



   C.   If the judge is satisfied that the criminal offense complained
of has been committed by the person charged, the judge shall issue a summons
or a warrant of arrest. Before issuing a summons or warrant of arrest on a
complaint, the judge may subpoena and examine witnesses as to the truth of
the complaint.



(Ord. 1397.01.03 § 4 (part), 1998; prior code § 6-5-1)



2.24.081  Proceedings for civil traffic violation offenses.



   The Arizona Rules of Court for civil traffic violation cases, as
established by the Arizona Supreme Court and amended from time to time, shall
apply in the adjudication of civil traffic violations brought before the city
court of the city of Casa Grande.



(Ord. 1397.01.03 § 4 (part), 1998)



2.24.082  Proceedings for civil violation offenses.



   In all cases brought before the City Court of Casa Grande involving
adjudication of offenses classified as civil violations by the municipal
code, the Arizona Rules of Court for civil traffic violation cases, as
established by the Arizona Supreme Court and amended from time to time by
that court, shall apply except as supplemented or modified herein, Arizona
Supreme Court-approved local rules of procedure for the Casa Grande City
Court.



(Ord. 1397.01.03 § 4 (part), 1998)



2.24.083  Commencement of an action alleging a civil violation: Citation and
complaint.



   A.   A civil violation may be commenced by issuance of a citation or
by civil complaint. Any city employee responsible for the enforcement of any
provision of the city code may issue a citation. Alternatively, an attorney
for the city may file a complaint. Upon receipt of the complaint, the court
shall issue a summons.



   B.   Form of the citation. The citation will be substantially in the
same form as the Arizona traffic ticket and complaint, as approved by the
Arizona Supreme Court, and shall direct the defendant to appear in City Court
of the city of Casa Grande within ten (10) days after issuance of the
citation.



(Ord. 1397.01.03 § 4 (part), 1998)



2.24.084  Method of service of citation or complaint for a civil violation.



   A.   An employee of the city, authorized to issue a citation under
the city code, may serve a citation by hand delivering it to the defendant.



   B.   A civil citation or civil complaint and summons may also be
served by any means allowed by the Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure for the
Superior Court, as approved by the Arizona Supreme Court and as amended from
time to time.



   C.   In addition, a civil citation or summons may be served by
certified or registered mail, return receipt requested. Return of the receipt
shall be prima facie evidence of service.



(Ord. 1397.01.03 § 4 (part), 1998)



2.24.085  Civil violation cases to be heard by judge or hearing officer.



   A municipal court judge or a civil hearing officer shall hear and
dispose of civil violations, and make such orders as may be necessary and
proper to dispose of such cases. Cases shall be heard without a jury.



(Ord. 1397.01.03 § 4 (part), 1998)



2.24.090  Bail.



   The defendant, at any time after arrest, and before conviction, shall
be admitted to bail, if bailable.



(Prior code § 6-5-2)



2.24.100  Jail Cost Recovery Fee.



   A.   Any person who is convicted of a misdemeanor criminal offense
in the city court and who, as a consequence, is sentenced to a term of
incarceration in the county jail, or any other detention facility authorized
by law, shall pay a Jail Cost Recovery Fee to reimburse the city for its
actual expenses incurred by reason of such confinement.



   B.   A city judge may waive all or a portion of the Jail Cost
Recovery Fee set forth in subsection (A) after finding the convicted person
has a substantial financial hardship or is indigent based on sworn affidavits.



   C.   If the prisoner pays some or all of his or her fine,
surcharges, restitution, or other fees over time, the Jail Cost Recovery Fee
shall be collected prior to the payment of any fine, surcharges or other
fees, except restitution, and the Court Enhancement Fee as established in
Casa Grande Municipal Code § 2.24.110.



(Ord. 1397.02.02 § 1, 1997)



2.24.110  City Court Enhancement Fee­Establishment of Fund.



   A.   A person convicted of a criminal offense, petty offense, found
responsible of a civil offense, or placed in a court-authorized diversion
program in the city court shall pay a City Court Enhancement Fee in the
amount of $20 for each offense for which they were convicted, found
responsible, or the prosecution was suspended.



   B.   There is hereby created a Court Enhancement Fund, which shall
be used exclusively to enhance the technological, operational and security
capabilities of the city court.



   C.   The City Court Enhancement Fund shall be established as a
designated fund account with the city treasurer. The city court shall collect
City Court Enhancement Fees and deposit them in the Court Enhancement Fund
account. The city treasurer shall invest the monies in the fund in the same
manner as city funds. Interest earned on fund monies shall be deposited in
the fund.



   D.   The city court shall administer the fund and may make
expenditures from the fund for the purposes provided in this section. Monies
from the fund shall supplement monies already provided to the city court for
the general purposes stated in this section.



   E.   If the defendant pays some or all of his or her fine,
surcharges, restitution, or other fees over time, the Court Enhancement Fee
shall be collected prior to the payment of any fine, surcharges or other fees
except restitution.



   F.   "Court-authorized diversion program," as used in this section,
means a program in which an individual charged with any civil, criminal or
petty offense is not prosecuted for the offense on successful completion of
an authorized diversion program and it includes authorized defensive driving
courses. 



(Ord. 1397.02.09 § 1, 2006; Ord. 1397.02.02 § 2, 1997)



2.24.120  Court Default Cost Recovery Fee.



   A Default Cost Recovery Fee in the amount of $52 shall be imposed on
each default judgment entered for failure to appear in a civil traffic
violation case, or for failure to satisfy in full a civil sanction imposed in
a civil traffic violation case. 



(Ord. 1397.02.09 § 2, 2006; Ord. 1397.02.02 § 3, 1997)



2.24.130  Court Warrant Administrative Fee.



   A.   When a judge of the city court issues a warrant for
non-compliance with court orders, failure to pay a fine, failure to pay
restitution, or failure to pay any other fees, the judge shall impose an
administrative fee in the amount of $100 upon the person for whom the arrest
warrant is issued; and this fee shall be added to the amount set forth in the
arrest warrant.



   B.   A city judge may waive all or a portion of the administrative
fee set forth in subsection A when, in the judge's opinion, such waiver would
be in the interest of justice, or after finding the person has a substantial
financial hardship or is indigent based on sworn affidavits of the person.



   C.   If the person pays some or all of his or her fine, surcharges,
restitution, or other fees over time, the Warrant Administrative Fee shall be
collected prior to the payment of any fine, surcharges or other fees, except
restitution, the Court Enhancement Fee as established in Casa Grande
Municipal Code § 2.24.110, or the Jail Cost Recovery Fee as established in
Casa Grande Municipal Code § 2.24.100. 



(Ord. 1397.02.09 § 3, 2006; Ord. 1397.02.02 § 4, 1997)



2.24.140  Court Deferred Prosecution Fee.



   A.   A Deferred Prosecution Fee shall be imposed on each criminal
charge for which the court defers prosecution pursuant to Rule 38 of the
Arizona Rules of Criminal Procedure (or its substitute). The amount of the
Deferred Prosecution Fee shall be set by the judge in the best interest of
justice and shall be a minimum of $25 and shall not exceed $500.



   B.   A city judge may waive all or a portion of the fee set forth in
subsection A when, in the judge's opinion, such waiver would be in the
interest of justice, or after finding the person has a substantial financial
hardship or is indigent based on sworn affidavits of the person.



(Ord. 1397.02.09 § 4, 2006; Ord. 1397.02.02 § 5, 1997)



2.24.150  Court Monitoring and Probation Fee.



   A.   The city court shall assess each defendant placed on probation
or a period of deferred prosecution a fee of $40 per month or part of a month
which the defendant remains on probation or deferred prosecution.



   B.   The city court shall assess each defendant, not on probation or
deferred prosecution but ordered to complete education, treatment, counseling
and/or screening, a one-time fee of $30.



   C.   The city judge may waive all or a portion of the Court
Monitoring and Probation Fee established in subsections (A) and (B), after
finding the defendant has a substantial financial hardship or is indigent
based on sworn affidavits.



   D.   There is hereby created a Probation/Deferred Prosecution
Administration Fund account.



   E.   The Probation/Deferred Prosecution Administration Fund shall be
established as a designated fund account with the city treasurer. The city
court shall collect said fees and deposit them in the Probation/Deferred
Prosecution Administration Fund account. The city treasurer shall invest the
monies in the Fund in the same manner as city funds. Interest earned on Fund
monies shall be deposited in the Fund.



   F.   The city court shall administer the Fund and may make
expenditures from the Fund for the purposes provided in this section. Monies
from the Fund shall supplement monies already provided to the city court for
the administration of court monitoring duties as stated in this section.



   G.   If the defendant pays some or all of his or her fine,
surcharges, restitution, or other fees over time, the fee created herein
shall be collected prior to the payment of any fine, surcharges or other
fees, except restitution, the Court Enhancement Fee as established in Casa
Grande Municipal Code § 2.24.110, or the Jail Cost Recovery Fee as
established in Casa Grande Municipal Code § 2.24.100.



(Ord. 1397.02.09 § 5, 2006; Ord. 1397.02.06 § 1, 1999; Ord. 1397.02.04 §
1, 1998)



2.24.160  Court compliance recovery fee.



   A.   In order to help recover the costs of conducting hearings
related to apparent failures to follow the orders of the city court, a Court
Compliance Recovery Fee in the amount of $50 shall be assessed against
persons who have been determined by the court, after notice and opportunity
to be heard, to have failed to comply with the orders of the court without
good cause.



   B.   There is hereby created a Court Compliance Recovery Fund which
will provide a funding source to help recover the costs of the city court’s
enforcement efforts and will also help ensure that the court possesses the
resources to devote adequate attention to fulfilling its responsibility to
ensure compliance with its orders, and the Court Compliance Recovery Fee will
be deposited into this Fund.



   C.   The Court Compliance Recovery Fund shall be established as a
designated fund account with the city finance department. The city court
shall collect Court Compliance Recovery Fees and deposit them in the Court
Compliance Recovery Fund account. The city finance department shall invest
the monies in the fund in the same manner as city funds. Interest earned on
fund monies shall be deposited in the Fund.



   D.   The city court shall administer the Fund and shall make
expenditures from the fund for the purposes provided in this section. Monies
from the Fund shall supplant monies already provided to the city court for
the general purposes stated in this section.



   E.   A city judge may waive all or a portion of the Court Compliance
Recovery Fee when the judge determines that such waiver would be in the
interest of justice, or after finding that the person has a substantial
financial hardship or is indigent based on sworn testimony or affidavits of
the person.



(Ord. 1397.02.13 § 1, 2014)



2.24.170  Court security fee.



   A.   A person who has been convicted of a criminal offense, petty
offense, found responsible of a civil offense, or placed in a
court-authorized diversion program in the city court shall pay a Court
Security Fee in the amount of $20 for each case in which they were convicted,
found responsible, or the prosecution was suspended.  The Court Security Fee
shall be assessed and become due only upon such person entering into a time
payment agreement with or being assessed a time payment assessment by the
court.



   B.   There is hereby created a Court Security Fund, which shall be
for the purpose of funding the court’s security measures and the Court
Security Fee will be deposited into this Fund.



   C.   The Court Security Fund shall be established as a designated
fund account with the city finance department. The city court shall collect
Court Security Fees and deposit them in the Court Security Fund account. The
city finance department shall invest the monies in the Fund in the same
manner as city funds. Interest earned on fund monies shall be deposited in
the Fund.



   D.   The city court shall administer the fund and shall make
expenditures from the Fund solely for the purposes provided in this section.
Monies from the Fund shall supplant monies already provided to the city court
for the general purposes stated in this section.



   E.   “Court-authorized diversion program,” as used in this
section, means a program in which an individual charged with any civil,
criminal or petty offense is not prosecuted for the offense on successful
completion of an authorized diversion program and it includes authorized
defensive driving courses.



(Ord. 1397.02.12 § 1, 2014)



2.24.200   Home detention and electronic monitoring program.



   A.   Authorization to Use Alternative Sentencing Options. If a
person is sentenced to jail confinement by the city court, the judge may
substitute home detention and monitoring for a portion or all of the jail
term, as provided in this Section 2.24.200. The city court may also sentence
a person to provide community restitution work, either as a condition of
entering the home detention and monitoring program, or as a separate term of
any sentence by the city court.



   B.   Definitions. For purposes of this Section 2.24.200, the
following terms are hereby defined:



   “Community restitution work” means work, traditionally referred to
as community service, and performed by a person without compensation for the
city or a community-oriented organization designated by the city, in order to
provide partial restitution to the community for the commission of an offense.



   “Electronic monitoring device” means equipment that is able to
continuously confirm the location of the person to whom it is issued.



   “Home detention and electronic monitoring program” means a sentence
that allows a person to be released from or not serve time in jail, but
requires that the person  be affixed with an electronic monitoring device
and comply with all other court orders and requirements.



   “Provider” means a person or entity that has entered into an
agreement with the city of Casa Grande to provide for the issuance of
electronic monitoring devices, the continual monitoring of electronic
monitoring devices, and the furnishing of alcohol and/or drug testing as
requested by the city of Casa Grande.



   C.   Persons Not Eligible for Participation in Program. A person is
not eligible for the home detention and electronic monitoring program if any
of the following apply:



   1.   The person is found by the city to constitute a risk to
himself/herself or other members of the community.



   2.   The person has a past history of violent behavior.



   3.   The sentencing judge states at the time of the sentence that
the person may not be eligible for the home detention and electronic
monitoring program.



   4.   The person has, within the previous thirty-six (36) calendar
months, previously been a participant in the home detention and electronic
monitoring program, and such participation was terminated as a result of the
violation by such person of any condition set by the court, including but not
limited to: failure to complete a court-ordered treatment program, use of
alcohol or drugs, or failure to remain within the designated premises during
home detention.



   D.   Provider Required. Before any person may participate in the
home detention and electronic monitoring program, the city shall have entered
into an agreement with one or more providers to implement the home detention
and electronic monitoring program, requiring the provider to provide for the
issuance of electronic monitoring devices, continually monitoring those
devices, and providing such other services as the city may require.



   E.   Requirements for Persons Selected for Home Detention and
Electronic Monitoring Program. If a person is sentenced to a term of
confinement by the court for an offense other than driving under the
influence:



   1.   Except as permitted by the court pursuant to Paragraph G. of
this Section 2.24.200, the person shall remain at the premises designated by
the court.



   2.   The court may order that the person be affixed with an
electronic monitoring device and be required, except as permitted by the
court pursuant to Paragraph G. of this Section 2.24.200, to remain at the
premises designated by the court.



   3.   The person shall be employed within Pinal County and in a job
that the court determines is suitable in both type and location of work for
the home detention program.  The court may, alternatively or in addition
thereto, assign the person to a community restitution work assignment.  The
court may waive the requirement of employment or community restitution in
cases where the court finds the person is incapable of employment or
performing community restitution work.



   4.   The Court may place other restrictions on persons in the
program, including but not limited to:  prohibiting the use of and testing
the person for consumption of alcoholic beverages or drugs; requiring that
the person participate in a screening, education or treatment program for
alcohol, substance abuse, or anger management purposes; requiring that the
person maintain employment without absence therefrom during the term of home
detention; participation in a community restitution work program, including
participation on weekends even if the person is also employed during the
week; and prohibiting the association of the person with individuals who are
determined to be detrimental to the person's successful participation in the
program.



   5.   The person shall bear the expense and be responsible for the
full payment of all costs of home detention, testing, electronic monitoring,
counseling, treatment, or other costs related to the person's participation
in the home detention and electronic monitoring program unless, after
determining the inability of the person to pay the cost, the court assesses a
lesser amount.



   F.   Requirements for Persons Sentenced for DUI Offenses. In
addition to any requirements set forth in Paragraph E. of this Section
2.24.200, if a person is sentenced to a term of confinement by the court as a
result of any driving under the influence charge:



   1.   If the person is sentenced pursuant to ARS 28-1381(I), as from
time to time amended, the person must first serve a minimum of twenty-four
(24) consecutive hours in jail.



   2.   If the person is sentenced pursuant to ARS 28-1381(K), as from
time to time amended, or ARS 28-1382(D) or (E), as from time to time amended,
the person must first serve a minimum of fifteen (15) consecutive days in
jail before being eligible to be placed in home detention. 



   3.   The person shall have an electronic monitoring device affixed
to them throughout the term of jail confinement ordered by the court.



   4.   The person shall bear the full cost of all testing, monitoring,
and enrollment in the home detention and electronic monitoring program, as
well as all alcohol or substance abuse programs unless, after determining the
inability of the person to pay the cost, the court assesses a lesser amount.



   5.   The person shall be employed within Pinal County and in a job
that the court determines is suitable in both type and location of work for
the home detention program.  The court may, alternatively or in addition
thereto, assign the person to a community restitution work assignment.  The
court may waive the requirement of employment or community restitution in
cases where the court finds the person is incapable of employment or
performing community restitution work.



   6.   The person shall be subject to testing at least once a day for
the use of alcoholic beverages or drugs, by a scientific method that is not
limited to urinalysis or a breath or intoxication test, in the person's home
or at the office of a person designated by the court to conduct these tests.



   7.   The person shall participate in an alcohol or drug program, or
both as determined by the court.  These programs must be accredited by the
department of health services or a county probation department.



   8.   The person shall be prohibited from associating with any
individual determined to be detrimental to the person's successful
participation in the program.



   9.   The person shall, if consecutive hours of jail time are
ordered, remain at home during the consecutive hours ordered.



   10.   The person shall fully comply with any additional conditions
or terms set forth by the court in any order establishing the person's
sentence or eligibility for the home detention and electronic monitoring
program.



   11.   The person shall, except as set forth in Paragraph G. of this
Section 2.24.200, remain at the premises designated by the court.



   G.   Permission by Court to Leave Premises. The court may permit a
person in the home detention and electronic monitoring program, who has first
secured the written permission of the court, to leave the designated premises
to:



   1.   Be employed outside the home;



   2.   Conduct community restitution work;



   3.   Attend classes at accredited education institutions;



   4.   Attend funerals and religious services;



   5.   Attend medical appointments; and



   6.   Travel to a provider's location as required by the provider to
ensure payment of fees or proper operation of the electronic monitoring
device.



   H.   Community Restitution Work Committee.



   1.   There is hereby created a community restitution work committee
for the city of Casa Grande. The committee shall consist of no fewer than
seven (7) members and no more than eleven (11) members, and shall be
appointed by the city manager or his/her designee.



   2.   The committee shall, unless impracticable, include
representatives of the city court, police department, city attorney's office,
parks and recreation department, public works department, a member of the
defense bar, and a member representing a community organization. The
appointment of additional members representing community organizations, other
city departments, or other community members may also be made.



   3.   All members shall serve without compensation.



   4.   The committee shall recommend to the city court appropriate
community restitution work projects for persons in home detention. All such
projects shall be either public works projects operated and supervised by the
city or other public agencies of the state, or be projects sponsored and
supervised by public or private community-oriented organizations and agencies.



   I.   Termination of Participation in the Home Detention and
Electronic Monitoring Program.



   1.   The city court shall terminate a person's participation in the
home detention and electronic monitoring program, and require the person to
complete the remaining term of any jail sentence by jail confinement, if the
person fails to successfully complete a court-ordered alcohol or drug
screening, counseling, education and treatment program, or the court finds
that the person left the premises without permission of the court or
supervising authority during a time that the person was ordered to be on the
premises.



   2.   The city court may terminate a person's participation in the
home detention and electronic monitoring program at any other time for any
reason and, if terminated, may require the person to complete the remaining
term of any jail sentence.



   3.   If the city council, by a majority vote of its full membership,
terminates the home detention and electronic monitoring program, then a
person's participation in the home detention and electronic monitoring
program shall terminate on the effective date of the home detention and
electronic monitoring program's termination.



   J.   Administrative Fee for Participation in the Home Detention and
Electronic Monitoring Program.  In addition to paying for the full cost of
participation in the home detention and electronic monitoring program as set
forth elsewhere in this Section 2.24.200, a person subject to electronic
monitoring shall pay an administrative fee of thirty dollars ($30) per month
to the city while on electronic monitoring, unless, after determining the
inability of the person to pay these fees, the court assesses a lesser fee.



(Ord. 1397.02.11 § 1, 2010)



Chapter 2.28
AIRPORT ADVISORY BOARD



Sections:



2.28.010   Creation.



2.28.020   Definitions.



2.28.030   Membership.



2.28.040   Administrative structure - Quorum.



2.28.050   Duties.



2.28.060   Additional duties.



2.28.010  Creation.



   There is created, constituted and established an airport advisory board
of the city.



(Ord. 1397.02.07 § 2 (part), 2001)



2.28.020  Definitions.



   The term “aeronautical activity” as used in this chapter means any
activity which involves, makes possible, is required for, or is incidental to
the operation of aircraft at the municipal airport, or which contributes to
or is required for the safety of such operations, including, but not limited
to, the following: air taxi and charter operations; scheduled or nonscheduled
air carrier services; pilot training; aircraft rental and sightseeing; aerial
photography; crop dusting; aerial advertising and surveying; aircraft sales
and service; aircraft storage; sale of aviation petroleum products; repair
and maintenance of aircraft; sale of aircraft parts; parachute activities;
and ultralight activities.



(Ord. 1397.02.07 § 2 (part), 2001)



2.28.030  Membership.



   The airport advisory board shall consist of five members, appointed by
the city council to serve for a period of three years.  The airport advisory
board members may be reappointed by the city council for a second three-year
term.  In the event of death, resignation, removal or disqualification of
any member of the airport advisory board, the city council shall appoint a
member who shall serve for the unexpired term thus vacated.



(Ord. 1397.02.07 § 2 (part), 2001)



2.28.040  Administrative structure—Quorum.



   The members of the airport advisory board shall elect a chairman and a
vice chairman and shall make the rules for the administration and proper
functioning of the airport advisory board as they may deem expedient which
shall not be inconsistent with the laws of the state or the ordinances of the
city.  Three members of the airport advisory board shall constitute a quorum
for the exercise of the powers and authority conferred upon it.  The
concurrence of the majority of the airport advisory board shall be necessary
to render a decision of the board or enact any rule.



(Ord. 1397.02.07 § 2 (part), 2001)



2.28.050  Duties.



   It shall be the duty of the airport advisory board to make
recommendations to the City Council regarding the following matters:



   A.   The improvement, equipping, maintenance and operation of the
municipal airports;



   B.   The establishment, operation and conduct of aeronautical
activities and airport support services carried on by the city or in
connection with the municipal airports; and



   C.   Regulations, fees and charges for the operation of the
municipal airports.



(Ord. 1397.02.07 § 2 (part), 2001)



2.28.060  Additional duties.



   The airport advisory board shall review and make recommendations to the
City Council regarding proposed sales of city owned land at the Donovan M.
Kramer Senior Industrial Park, if the prospective buyer intends to engage in
aeronautical activities on the purchased property.



(Ord. 1397.02.07 § 2 (part), 2001)



Chapter 2.30
PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD



Sections:



2.30.010   Establishment.



2.30.020   Terms of office.



2.30.030   Officers.



2.30.040   Powers and duties generally.



2.30.010  Establishment.



   There is hereby established a parks and recreation advisory board. 
The board shall be composed of five regular members, each of whom shall
reside within the corporate limits of the city.  The five regular members
shall be appointed by the City Council. 



(Ord. 637 § 1, 1978)



2.30.020  Terms of office.



   The terms of office for the regular members of the board shall be for
three years, except that the first members of the board shall be appointed
for the following terms: two members shall serve for one year; two members
shall serve for two years; and one member shall serve for three years.
Thereafter, their successors shall serve a full term. 



(Ord. 637 § 2, 1978)



2.30.030  Officers.



   The board shall elect its own officers at the first meeting following
May 1 of each year.  The parks and recreation director, or his or her duly
authorized representative, shall act as secretary of the board, but shall not
be allowed to vote.  No officer elected by the board shall serve in the same
capacity for more than two consecutive one-year terms. 



(Ord. 637 § 3, 1978)



2.30.040  Powers and duties generally.



   The powers and duties of the parks and recreation advisory board shall
be:



   A.   To adopt such rules of procedure as are required for the
faithful performance of its duties.



   B.   To provide that three members shall constitute a quorum, and
that the affirmative vote of the majority of members present shall be
required for passage of any matter before the board.



   C.   To advise the City Council and parks and recreation director on
the policies, rules and regulations relating to the operation, use, care and
maintenance of areas and structures owned, leased or otherwise acquired by
the city of Casa Grande for use as parks and recreational centers.



   D.   To advise the City Council and assist the parks and recreation
director in the development of a continuing plan for the city's park system
and its recreation program.  The city manager, through the parks and
recreation director, shall,  from time to time, send such plans and programs
to the board for its review. The results of such reviews shall be forwarded
to the City Council.



   E.   To advise the City Council and the parks and recreation
director in establishing general priorities at budget time for those items,
other than administrative functions,  relating to park development and
recreation programs.



   F.   To receive, accept and acquire,  subject to the final action
by the City Council, by gift, bequest or devise, real and personal property
of every kind, nature and description in the name of the city of Casa Grande
for park and recreational purposes subject to the terms of the gift. 



(Ord. 637.1 § 1, 2018; Ord. 637 § 4, 1978)



Chapter 2.32
CIVIL DEFENSE



Sections:



2.32.010   Purpose of provisions.



2.32.020   Definitions.



2.32.030   Council created.



2.32.040   Powers and duties.



2.32.050   Office of director created.



2.32.060   Director—Duties and authority.



2.32.070   Membership.



2.32.080   Membership—Oath required.



2.32.090   Unauthorized activities prohibited.



2.32.100   Lights public nuisance when.



2.32.110   Conflicting regulations suspended.



2.32.120   State and federal authority.



2.32.130   Hold harmless agreement.



2.32.140   Expenditures.



2.32.010  Purpose of provisions.



   The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the
preparation and carrying out of plans for the civil defense of persons and
property within the city in the event of a disaster and to provide for the
coordination of the civil defense and disaster functions of the city with all
other public agencies and affected private persons, corporations and
organizations.



(Prior code § 7-1-2)



2.32.020  Definitions.



   “Civil defense” means preparation for and carrying out of emergency
functions, other than functions for which military forces or other federal
agencies are primarily responsible, and to prevent, minimize and repair
injury and damage resulting from disasters.



   “Disaster” means actual or threatened enemy attack, sabotage,
extraordinary fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, earthquake or other similar
public calamity or disaster.



(Prior code § 7-1-1)



2.32.030  Council created.



   There is created the Casa Grande municipal civil defense council, which
shall consist of all members of the council. The mayor shall serve as the
chairman.



(Prior code § 7-2-1)



2.32.040  Powers and duties.



   The powers and duties of the Casa Grande municipal civil defense
council shall include the adoption of a civil defense plan for the city, the
drafting and recommendation of any and all mutual aid plans and agreements
which are deemed essential for the implementation of the civil defense plan
and the continued promotion of an orderly and effective program of civil
defense. The civil defense council shall meet upon the call of the chairman
and shall have the authority to appoint and remove a director of civil
defense with the duties and authority as hereinabove set forth.



(Prior code § 7-2-2)



2.32.050  Office of director created.



   The office of director of civil defense is created with the director
having the authority to request that the council declare the existence of an
emergency. The city manager shall serve as the director of civil defense. In
any event, if the Governor of the state declares an emergency in accordance
with Section 26- 342, Arizona Revised Statutes, then any emergency plans of
the city shall immediately become effective and the Casa Grande civil defense
organization shall take immediate action.



(Prior code § 7-3-1)



2.32.060  Director—Duties and authority.



   The duties and responsibility of the director of civil defense shall
include the following:



   A.   The promotion, control and direction of the training of civil
defense personnel and the public;



   B.   The organization, administration and the execution of all civil
defense plans adopted by the city and the appointment and training of section
leaders or aids;



   C.   The maintenance of necessary liaison with other civil defense
organizations;



   D.   The marshaling, in the event of an emergency or disaster, of
all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies available in the city;



   E.   The issuing of all necessary proclamations as to the existence
of an emergency and the immediate operational effectiveness of the civil
defense plan;



   F.   The issuance of reasonable rules and regulations which are
necessary for the protection of life and property in the city;



   G.   The negotiation and drafting of mutual aid agreements and the
execution of all those entered into by the city;



   H.   The procurement and supervision of all necessary supplies and
equipment, including an acceptance of private contributions;



   I.   The recommendation of agreements for the use of private
property for air raid shelters and other civil defense purposes;



   J.   The civil defense director shall work under the direction of
and the pleasure of the council.



(Prior code § 7-3-2)



2.32.070  Membership.



   The civil defense organization of the city shall be known as the
“Casa Grande Civil Defense Organization” and shall consist of the
officers and employees of the city and all volunteers. The functions and
duties shall be designated by resolution and shall provide for the divisions
and categories necessary for the operation of any and all disaster work.
Insofar as possible, such an organization shall conform to the regulations
and recommendations of the federal government and the state of Arizona.



(Prior code Art. 7-4)



2.32.080  Membership—Oath required.



   Each person serving as a member of the Casa Grande civil defense
organization in any capacity, prior to assuming his duty or duties, shall
take an oath which shall be substantially as follows:




STATE OF ARIZONA
JOINT COUNCIL OF CIVILIAN
DEFENSE LOYALTY OATH




I,                 , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will
support and defend the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution
of the State of Arizona against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I
will bear true faith and allegiance to the same; that I take this obligation
freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; that I will
well and safely discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter.



I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I a member of
any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the
Government of the United States or of this State by force or violence; and
that during such time as I am a member of the National Civilian Defense of
the United States I will not advocate or become a member of any political
party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the Government of the
United States by force or violence.



                                                   



WITNESS:



                                                   



Subscribed and sworn to before me this                         
            day of                          , 19  , by



                                                   
                                   



Notary Public



My commission expires:



                                                 



(Prior code Art. 7-5)



2.32.090  Unauthorized activities prohibited.



   It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to operate a siren or other
device so as to simulate a blackout signal or air raid or the termination of
a blackout or air raid.



(Prior code § 7-6-1)



2.32.100  Lights public nuisance when.



   Any light displayed contrary to any rule, order or regulation
promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter constitutes a public
nuisance and when deemed necessary in order to protect life or property
during blackout or raids, the police are authorized and directed to enter
upon any premises with the city using reasonable force and extinguish lights
or take other necessary action to make effective any order, rule or
regulation promulgated under the authority conferred by this chapter.



(Prior code § 7-6- 2)



2.32.110  Conflicting regulations suspended.



   At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and
promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede
all existing orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may be
inconsistent therewith.



(Prior code Art. 7-7)



2.32.120  State and federal authority.



   This chapter shall not be construed as to conflict with any state or
federal statute or with any military or naval order, rule or regulation.



(Prior code Art. 7-8)



2.32.130  Hold harmless agreement.



   The enactment of this chapter constitutes an exercise by the city of
its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health and
safety, and neither the city, the agents and representatives of the city nor
any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or
trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying
with or attempting to comply with, any order, rule or regulation promulgated
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for any damage
sustained to person or property as the result of the activity. Any person
owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and
without compensation grants to the city a license or privilege, or otherwise
permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part of or
parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons
during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack shall, together with his
successors in interest, if any, be not civilly liable for the death of, or
injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such
license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to the
property of such person.



(Prior code Art. 7-9)



2.32.140  Expenditures.



   No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city
in carrying out any civil defense activity authorized by this chapter without
prior and specific approval of the council; except that the council may
budget money for civil defense activities and such funds shall be spent at
the direction of the director and with the approval of the council.



(Prior code Art. 7-10)



Chapter 2.36
BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND
COMMISSIONS GENERALLY



Sections:



2.36.010   Council authority.



2.36.020   Committee membership determined by council.



2.36.030   Removal of members.



2.36.040   Committees—Powers and duties designated by council.



2.36.050   Officer selection.



2.36.060   Compensation.



2.36.070   Meetings—Quorum—Records.



2.36.080   Rules and regulations to govern proceedings.



2.36.090   Financial matters—Council authority.



2.36.010  Council authority.



   A.   The council may create such boards, committees and commissions,
standing, or special, as it deems necessary. In addition, the council may
provide such aid and assistance from the administrative staff of the city to
any such board, committee or commission as may be necessary.



   B.   Any such boards, committees and commissions created by the
council shall be responsible to the council and shall function in an advisory
capacity to the council.



   C.   Whenever the word “committee” is used in this chapter, it
may also be construed to mean the words “board” or “commission.”
(Prior code § 3-1-1)



2.36.020  Committee membership determined by council.



   A.   Each committee shall consist of as many members as may be
provided by the council; provided, that each member shall be an elector of
the city and appointed by the mayor and approved by the council.



   B.   The terms of office for members of each committee shall be as
provided by the council.



   C.   All members shall serve until their successors are duly
appointed and qualified. A vacancy in office during a term shall be filled by
the mayor, with council approval, for the unexpired term.



(Prior code § 3-1-2)



2.36.030  Removal of members.



   The mayor shall have the right and power to remove any committee
member, with or without cause, upon approval by the council. It shall be a
cause for removal if any committee member shall have two or more consecutive
unexcused absences from regular meetings. Such absences shall be reported to
the council by the chairman of the committee. The committee, with the
approval of the council, may establish additional causes for the removal of
members in its rules of procedure, and the same shall be valid causes for
removal of a member by the council when so reported to the council by the
chairman of the committee.



(Prior code § 3-1-3)



2.36.040  Committees—Powers and duties designated by council.



   The function of each committee shall be determined by the council, or
when appropriate, by state law. Each committee shall be responsible for such
matters as may be referred to it by the council, and shall meet at such times
as may be necessary to perform its duties as required by state law or such
duties as the council may refer to such committee.



(Prior code § 3-1-4)



2.36.050  Officer selection.



   The officers of any committee created under the authority provided by
this chapter shall be selected by the mayor with the approval of the council.



(Prior code § 3-2-1)



2.36.060  Compensation.



   Committee members shall serve without compensation; provided, that the
committee members may be reimbursed for actual and necessary expense for
committee duties, as provided by the council.



(Prior code § 3-2-2)



2.36.070  Meetings—Quorum—Records.



   A majority of the members of the committee shall constitute a quorum at
any meeting. Each committee shall cause minutes to be kept of the
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every question, or if
absent and failing to vote, indicating that fact, and shall keep records of
the committee's examinations or other official actions. The minutes of the
committee and all other records of actions taken shall be filed forthwith,
upon approval by the committee, in the office of the clerk and the same shall
be public record.



(Prior code § 3-2-3)



2.36.080  Rules and regulations to govern proceedings.



   The committee shall have the authority by and with written approval of
the council to make all necessary rules and regulations governing its
proceedings.



(Prior code § 3-2-4)



2.36.090  Financial matters—Council authority.



   A.   No committee shall incur debts, make any purchases or enter
into any contracts binding the city. All matters coming before any such
committee involving the expenditure of money or the making of agreements or
contracts shall be referred to the council with the recommendation of the
committee.



   B.   All money received by any committee shall be deposited with the
treasurer of the city.



(Prior code § 3-2-5)



Chapter 2.40
PERSONNEL SYSTEM



Sections:



2.40.010   Creation and scope of merit system.



2.40.020   Conditions of employment.



2.40.030   Rules and regulations.



2.40.040   Use of influence to solicit political contribution prohibited.



2.40.010  Creation and scope of merit system.



   There is adopted a merit system for the employees of the city, the
provisions of which shall apply to all employees of the city except elected
officials; officers of the city appointed by the council; attorneys within
the office of the city attorney; persons engaged under contract to supply
expert, professional or technical services; temporary employees; volunteer
firemen; and volunteer personnel who receive no regular compensation from the
city.



(Ord. 1397.02.03 § 1, 1997; prior code § 4-4-1)



2.40.020  Conditions of employment.



   The appointment, promotion and tenure of every employee shall be
conditioned solely on the merit and fitness and the satisfactory performance
of the duties and responsibilities assigned. No employee or applicant for
employment shall be discriminated against on the basis of race, color,
religion, sex, or political affiliation.



(Prior code § 4-4-2)



2.40.030  Rules and regulations.



   The council may adopt by resolution rules and regulations to give
effect to this section, which may be modified or changed from time to time,
but such rules and regulations shall follow the generally accepted principles
of good personnel administration.



(Prior code § 4-4-3)



2.40.040  Use of influence to solicit political contribution prohibited.



   No officer, official or employee of the city shall use any influence or
pressure upon any employee to obtain any assessment or contribution of money
or time, either direct or indirect, for any political campaign or personal
gain.



(Prior code § 4-4-4)



Chapter 2.42
SELF-FUNDED INSURANCE PLAN AND TRUST



Sections:



2.42.010   Establishment of self-funded insurance program.



2.42.020   Authorization to enter into agreements to provide
self-insurance.



2.42.030   City of Casa Grande Health Care Benefits Trust and Trust Fund
established.



2.42.040   Purposes of the health care benefits trust.



2.42.050   Health care benefits board of trustees.



2.42.060   Powers and duties of the board of trustees.



2.42.070   Termination and amendment.



2.42.010  Establishment of self-funded insurance program.



   The city manager is authorized to determine the class of
benefit-eligible city employees and dependents, and to provide health
insurance benefits as determined by the city manager for such individuals,
and for other employees or former employees and dependents as required by law
(the “health benefits plan”) through a self-insured or partially
self-insured insurance program that provides for the direct payment of health
care benefits, losses or claims or any combination of insurance and direct
payment, and including risk management consultation for the benefits of
participants, subject to the provisions of this chapter and all relevant
provisions of state or federal law. Any health benefits plan or program of
self-insurance shall include a stop-loss provision and related stop-loss
insurance for the benefit of the city.



(Ord. 1397.02.14 § 1 (part), 2017)



2.42.020  Authorization to enter into agreements to provide self-insurance.



   Subject to annual appropriation by the council and as part of the
budget process, the city manager, or designee, is authorized to negotiate and
enter into agreements as the city manager deems practical and necessary for
the management of the self-insurance program. These agreements specifically
include, but are not limited to:



   A.   An insurance administrator or risk consultant licensed pursuant
to Title 20, Chapter 2 of the Arizona Revised Statutes;



   B.   A third party administrator for claims administration for the
program;



   C.   Agreements with an insurer to provide individual and aggregate
stop-loss coverage to limit the city’s exposure to claims to a certain sum
each fiscal year;



   D.   Agreements with medical providers, health insurers, or similar
entities to provide medical benefits, medical network leases, pharmaceutical
benefits, or other benefits that would be provided to the employees under a
fully-insured program;



   E.   An investment manager to manage funds for the trust established
pursuant to this chapter;



   F.   Such other agreements necessary for the administration of the
trust created by this chapter; and



   G.   Such other agreements deemed necessary for the efficient
administration of the program and this chapter made a part of the budget of
the city.



(Ord. 1397.02.14 § 1 (part), 2017)



2.42.030  City of Casa Grande Health Care Benefits Trust and Trust Fund
established.



   The City of Casa Grande Health Care Benefits Trust and Trust Fund is
hereby established for the purpose of providing for direct payment of the
health benefits established within the health benefits plan for the benefit
of its participants. All monies received by the city for the purpose of
funding the health benefits plan shall be deposited into the trust fund,
including all health care premiums, contributions, credits, rebates, refunds
and such monies as the city  may deposit at the inception of the trust
through the budget process, plus all the earnings, income, gains,
appreciation and all other increments of any nature from the foregoing. The
fund shall continue from year to year without lapse until and unless the city
terminates the self-funded insurance plan as set forth in Section 2.42.070.
Pursuant to state law, the trust fund, itself, shall not be subject to the
budgeting requirements of Title 42, Chapter 17, Article 3 of the Arizona
Revised Statutes.



(Ord. 1397.02.14 § 1 (part), 2017)



2.42.040  Purposes of the health care benefits trust.



   The purpose of the health care benefits trust shall be to hold the
trust funds for the benefit of the participants in and beneficiaries of the
health benefits plan, and to fund and administer the trust fund to provide
health, welfare, and related benefits consistent with the Section 115 of the
Internal Revenue Code and other applicable law, all pursuant to a trust
agreement that shall be adopted by the council and may be amended by the
council from time to time.



(Ord. 1397.02.14 § 1 (part), 2017)



2.42.050  Health care benefits board of trustees.



   The City of Casa Grande Health Care Benefits Trust shall be managed by
a board of trustees (sometimes referred to herein as “the board”), which
is hereby established. The board shall be subject to the following
requirements:



   A.   The board shall consist of five  trustees, with no more than
one member that may be employee of the city, and with no more than one member
that may be a  councilmember of the city.



   B.   One trustee shall be the city’s finance director, in an ex
officio status with full trustee privileges. In the event the position of
finance director is vacant, the city manager shall appoint another employee
to serve as the ex officio trustee until such time as the position of finance
director is filled. One trustee shall be a member of the city council, with
such member being appointed by a majority vote of the city council. If no
member of the city council is willing or able to serve as a trustee, the
council may appoint a member of the public to serve as trustee in place of
the councilmember position. The remaining three trustees shall be members of
the public, and shall be appointed by the city manager. In selecting the
public trustees, the city manager shall give preference in appointment to
individuals with experience and expertise in the fields of finance, employee
benefits, or health care, and may not appoint a former employee or a former
councilmember with the city, unless such employee’s or councilmember’s
service terminated at least three years prior to the effective date of the
appointment.



   C.   The human resources director shall be a non-voting ex officio
member of the board. The human resources director, or designee, shall attend
meetings of the board in order to provide information required by the
trustees in furtherance of their duties and the purposes of the trust.



   D.   Each trustee shall accept the appointment in writing and shall
confirm in writing that the trustee has read the trust and agrees to hold and
administer the trust funds in a fiduciary capacity pursuant to the terms of
the trust document.



   E.   All trustees shall be bonded in an amount to be approved by the
city manager. This requirement may be satisfied by a blanket performance bond
or other coverage provided by the city.



   F.   Upon the establishment of the trust, the initial councilmember
(or public member if no member of city council is willing to serve as
trustee) shall be appointed to a three-year term, and the initial public
members shall be appointed such that one trustee serves an initial term of
one year, one trustee serves an initial term of two years, and one trustee
serves an initial term of three years. Thereafter, each trustee, with the
exception of the finance director whose term shall continue throughout the
course of their employment, shall serve a three-year term, subject to
termination as set forth in this chapter. A trustee may be reappointed to
multiple terms as trustee.



   G.   At their first meeting after the establishment of the trust,
and at least thirty days prior to the commencement of each plan year
thereafter, the trustees shall elect a chairperson, a vice-chair, and a
secretary from amongst themselves. The chairperson shall preside over the
work of the trustees pursuant to this chapter and the trust document. The
vice-chair shall preside in the chairperson’s absence. The secretary shall
cause to be maintained accurate records of all actions of the trustees,
including minutes from all trustee meetings. The city manager may assign a
city employee to act as secretary and keep minutes on behalf of the trust, in
which case the employee may attend any meetings of the trustees, but shall
have no voting authority.



   H.   The trustees shall meet as required to provide for the orderly
and timely administration of the business of the trust and the health
benefits plan at such location as may be acceptable to the trustees, but no
less than four times per plan year. All meetings shall be called and
conducted in accordance with applicable law.



   I.   A quorum shall consist of three trustees.



   J.    Each trustee, other than the human resources director, shall
have the ability to make and second motions, and have one vote on all matters
coming before the board. All actions by, and decisions of, the trustees shall
be by the affirmative vote of a majority of the number of trustees attending
a duly called and noticed meeting at which a quorum of trustees is present.



   K.   The term of any trustee shall automatically terminate upon the
earliest of the following: death, resignation, removal, failure to attend
three consecutive meetings without a motion to excuse the absence of the
trustee or expiration of the term of the trustee. In addition to the
foregoing, for the finance director position, the termination of employment
shall terminate their term as trustee, and for a position filled by a
councilmember, the termination of their position as a councilmember shall
terminate their term as trustee.



   L.   Upon the recommendation of a majority of the board of trustees,
a trustee may be removed upon a showing of good cause during their term. The
determination of whether such cause exists shall be made by the city manager
for the public members, and by the city council for the city councilmember or
public member appointed by the council, after notice to and opportunity to be
heard by the affected trustee.



(Ord. 1397.02.14 § 1 (part), 2017)



2.42.060  Powers and duties of the board of trustees.



   A.   In addition to the powers set forth in the trust document and
as limited thereby, the board shall have the following powers and duties:



   1.   Administer the trust fund pursuant to this chapter and the
trust document.



   2.   Provide financial oversight of the trust fund by evaluating
claim expenses and reserve amounts.



   3.   Review the trust fund at least quarterly to ensure sufficient
funds exist to pay outstanding and future benefits, to pay losses or claims
or any combination of insurance and direct payment, and to pay expenses
related to risk management consultation, third party administration, or other
expenses of the health benefits plan.



   4.   Make recommendations to the city manager on financial issues
relating to the health benefits plan, including appropriate premiums required
to fund the expenses of the health benefits plan claims.



   5.   Comply with all requirements of state and federal laws relating
to self-insurance programs for the management and administration of the
health benefits plan or other self-insured system.



   6.   At least annually ensure that an external audit of the trust
fund is conducted and retain the audit report for a period of at least five
years.



   B.   The board may:



   1.   Adopt rules and policies for the operation of the board that
are not inconsistent with the city charter, the city code, any city ordinance
or resolution or state laws.



   2.   Appoint such advisory or work committees necessary or
appropriate to assist in performing its duties.



   3.   Request the city manager to designate city staff to perform
assignments necessary or appropriate to the administration of the trust fund.



   4.   Delegate its duties and responsibilities solely in a manner
consistent with its fiduciary responsibilities.



(Ord. 1397.02.14 § 1 (part), 2017)



2.42.070  Termination and amendment.



   As part of the annual budget process or otherwise, the city may
determine that it will no longer provide the health benefits plan or any
other self-insured program for the management and administration of a system
for direct payment of benefits, losses or claims, or any combination of
insurance and direct payments, at which time the trust fund will be
dissolved, after winding up and paying its outstanding liabilities. Any funds
remaining will revert to the city's general fund.



(Ord. 1397.02.14 § 1 (part), 2017)



Title 3
REVENUE AND FINANCE



Chapters:



3.04   Procurement Code



3.08   Privilege License Tax



3.12   Collection Charges and Penalties



Chapter 3.04
PROCUREMENT CODE



Sections:



  3.04.010   Purpose and scope.



  3.04.020   Purchasing officer; duties.



  3.04.030   Council approval; when required.



  3.04.040   Purchases in general; bids.



  3.04.050   Promotion of maximum practicable competition.



  3.04.060   Exemptions from bidding requirements.



  3.04.070   Procedure for emergency purchases.



  3.04.080   State bid requirements.



  3.04.090   Construction projects.



  3.04.100   Bidding notice.



  3.04.110   Pre-bid conferences and site inspection.



  3.04.120   Correction or withdrawal of bids.



  3.04.130   Receipt of bids or proposals.



  3.04.140   Acceptance and evaluation of bids or proposals.



  3.04.150   Preparation of bid or proposal documents.



  3.04.160   Cancellation of solicitations; rejection of bids.



  3.04.170   Bid protest.



  3.04.180   Disqualification of bidders and suppliers.



  3.04.190   Procurement contracts.



  3.04.200   Procurement records; public inspection.



  3.04.210   Bonds and other security and insurance requirements.



  3.04.220   Right to inspect plant and audit records.



  3.04.230   Intergovernmental relations.



  3.04.240   Failure to perform.



  3.04.250   Disposition of personal property of the city.



  3.04.260   Ethics.



3.04.010  Purpose and scope.



   The purpose of this article is to provide oversight and accountability
in the use of city resources. This article shall govern the purchase of any
goods or services for or on behalf of the city, including but not limited to,
the purchase of equipment, material, supplies, services and public
improvements.  This code should also provide for the fair and equitable
treatment of all persons involved in the purchasing process, in order to
obtain the highest possible value in exchange for public funds, and to
safeguard the quality and integrity of the purchasing system.



(Ord. 1397.03.08 § 2 (part), 2007)



3.04.020  Purchasing officer; duties.



   A.   The city manager is appointed as the purchasing officer for the
city.



   B.   The purchasing officer may delegate duties and responsibilities
under this chapter to one or more of the directors of various departments as
necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter when necessary. 



   C.   The purchasing officer shall have general supervision,
responsibility and authority to:



   1.   Procure, contract for and execute agreements in any amount less
than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) without prior council approval,
for supplies and services, including rentals, service agreements, and leases
of personal property needed by any city governmental unit, in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter and any additional purchasing policies that
may be established by council;



   2.   Promulgate regulations and procedures for the implementation of
the provisions of this chapter;



   3.   Prepare and submit to council any proposed amendments to this
chapter;



   4.   Have the authority to suspend or debar vendors;



   5.   Execute contracts for the purchase of supplies, materials,
services and improvements; and



   6.   Centralize procurement, consistent with this code, by which
materials, supplies, equipment and contractual services for all city
governmental units are purchased.



(Ord. 1397.03.08 § 2 (part), 2007)



3.04.030  Council approval; when required.



   Council approval for purchases shall be required in the following
circumstances:



   A.   When prior approval is required by this code;



   B.   When the purchase of an item costing greater than two thousand
five hundred dollars ($2,500) but less than twenty-five thousand dollars
($25,000) is not provided in the budget as adopted; and



   C.   For the expenditure of funds in an amount in excess of
twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000).



(Ord. 1397.03.08 § 2 (part), 2007)



3.04.040  Purchases in general; bids.



   All purchases made must be consistent with this article, and with any
applicable procedures and policies issued by the city manager.



   A.   Purchases up to $1,500.  Whenever the contemplated purchase is
one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500) or less, no written or verbal
quote is required.



   B.   Purchases from $1,500 to $5,000.  Whenever the contemplated
purchase or contract for services is for a sum of more than one thousand five
hundred dollars ($1,500) but less than five thousand dollars ($5,000), it may
be made upon the receipt of three verbal quotes and, except compliance with
any adopted regulations, without further formality.



   C.   Purchases from $5,000 to $25,000 Inclusive.  Whenever any
contemplated purchase is for the sum of at least five thousand dollars
($5,000) but not more than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), the
purchasing officer shall obtain at least three written quotes on vendor's
letterhead. The purchase or contract shall be awarded to the lowest most
responsive vendor who submits a quote. 



   D.   Purchases in Excess of $25,000. Whenever the contemplated
purchase is for a sum in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) in
one transaction, the purchasing officer shall, without necessity of council
approval, advertise for bids, according to the procedures provided in this
article and any applicable policy or procedure issued by the purchasing
officer. Prior to award, the mayor and city council must approve any bid or
proposal in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000).



   E.   Purchases in Excess of $50,000.  Whenever the contemplated
purchase is for a sum in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) in one
transaction or in aggregate, the purchasing officer shall, without the
necessity of council approval, advertise for bids, according to the
procedures provided in this article and any applicable policy or procedure
issued by the purchasing officer. The mayor and city council must approve the
award of any bid or proposal in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000)
through the passage of an ordinance.



   F.   Alternative Procedures Allowed.  Alternative delivery methods,
such as design bid build, construction manager at risk, design build, and job
order contracting, may be utilized for applicable purchases. These purchases
must be in compliance with Arizona Revised Statutes. 



(Ord. 1397.03.08 § 2 (part), 2007)



3.04.050  Promotion of maximum practicable competition.



   A.   Maximum Competition Encouraged.  All specifications for bids
or proposals shall seek to promote overall economy for the purposes intended
and encourage competition in satisfying the city's needs. Specifications
shall not be unduly restrictive.



   1.   To the extent practicable and unless otherwise permitted by
this section, all specifications shall describe the city's requirements in a
manner that does not unnecessarily exclude a specific material, service or
construction item.



   2.   To the extent practicable, the city shall use accepted
commercial specifications and shall procure standard commercial materials
and, absent significant justification, avoid proprietary specifications.



   B.   Brand Name or Approved Alternate.  Proprietary or brand name
specifications shall not be used unless the purchasing officer determines, in
writing, that such specifications are required by demonstrable technological
justification, that it is not practicable or advantageous to use a less
restrictive specification, that the use of such a specification is in the
best interests of the city, and if the solicitation provides for the
submission of equivalent products. 



   1.   A brand name or approved alternate specification shall
designate as many different brands as are practicable as “approved
alternate” references.



   2.   A brand name or approved alternate specification shall include
a description of the particular design, functional or performance
characteristics that are required, unless the purchasing officer determines,
in writing, that the essential characteristics of the brand names designated
in the specifications are commonly known.



   3.   A solicitation that uses a brand name or approved alternate
specification shall explain that the use of a brand name is for the purpose
of describing the standard of quality, performance, and characteristics
desired and is not intended to limit or restrict competition. The
solicitation shall state that products substantially equivalent to those
brands designated shall qualify for consideration. 



   C.   Qualified Products List. 



   1.   A qualified products list may be prepared and utilized, if the
purchasing officer determines, in writing, that testing or examinations of
the material or construction items prior to the issuance of the solicitation
is desirable or necessary in order to best satisfy the city's requirements.



   2.   As many potential suppliers as practicable shall be solicited
to submit products for testing and examination, to determine acceptability
for inclusion on a qualified products list.



   3.   Any potential supplier, even though not solicited, may offer
its products for consideration in accordance with the schedule or procedure
established for this purpose.



   4.   The qualified products list shall not be modified after the
solicitation is issued.



(Ord. 1397.03.08 § 2 (part), 2007)



3.04.060  Exemptions from bidding requirements.



   The bidding requirements in this chapter shall not apply in the
following instances:



   A.   An emergency purchase permitted pursuant to Section 3.04.070;



   B.   A purchase where the state, another city or town, a school
district or another governmental agency has procured a contract through
properly conducted public bidding, and permits the city to participate in
such contract; provided such bidding meets the requirements of Subsection
3.04.230.B.;



   C.   A purchase from the United States or an agency thereof, the
state or an agency thereof, or any county or local government in this state;



   D.   An agreement for professional or technical services, although
the purchasing officer may require the submission of proposals prior to
engaging such services;



   E.   This chapter shall not be construed to prohibit the purchase of
supplies, materials, equipment, services and improvements when circumstances
render the bidding procedures impractical.



   1.   Examples of these situations are equipment repairs in which
substantial work must be performed before a precise cost estimate can be
made, purchase of equipment at public auction and public bids, and the
purchase of used equipment. 



   2.   The purchasing officer shall establish regulations limiting and
defining the conditions under which the exemptions provided herein shall
apply.



(Ord. 1397.03.08 § 2 (part), 2007)



3.04.070  Procedure for emergency purchases.



   A.   In case of any emergency requiring immediate purchases of
supplies or services, when there is an urgent necessity to do so for the
preservation of life, health or property, the rules and regulations set forth
in this chapter shall not apply.



   B.   Such emergency procurements shall be made with such competition
as is practical under the circumstances, and shall be limited to those goods
and services necessary to satisfy the emergency need.



   C.   In such circumstances, the department head shall provide a
written report of the procurement to the city manager, or his or her
designee, including a description of the emergency and the basis for
selection of the particular contractor. 



   D.   In any event that such emergency action is necessary and the
procurement cost is greater than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) in
any one transaction, the city manager shall make a full and complete report
to the city council at the next regularly scheduled meeting. 



(Ord. 1397.03.08 § 2 (part), 2007)



3.04.080  State bid requirements.



   In addition to the public bidding requirements set forth herein,
purchases by or on behalf of the city shall conform to applicable state law.



(Ord. 1397.03.08 § 2 (part), 2007)



3.04.090  Construction projects.



   A.   Provided the cost of the project exceeds the statutorily
established amount, the procurement of both horizontal and vertical
construction projects shall be governed by state law. The purchasing officer
shall consult the Arizona Revised Statutes when procuring goods and services
related to construction.



   B.   When the cost of a construction project falls below the
statutorily established amount, the project shall be procured pursuant to the
provisions of this code.



(Ord. 1397.03.08 § 2 (part), 2007)



3.04.100  Bidding notice.



   The purchasing officer shall follow the procedures set forth in this
section for all purchases and contracts subject to the bidding process.



   A.   A notice of solicitation for sealed bids or proposals shall
state the date, time and place of opening, and the place and time period
within which bids shall be submitted.



   1.   Adequate public notice shall be given at least fifteen calendar
days prior to the date set forth for opening of bids or proposals, unless
otherwise approved by the purchasing officer and specified in bid documents.



   2.   The city clerk's office will be responsible for the
advertisement of all formal competitive bids or proposals.



   B.   The notice shall state with particularity the goods or services
required, and shall state the place where specifications may be examined.



   C.   The notice shall require that bids be submitted in a sealed
envelope, clearly identified on its front as a bid.  Any bid not received
within the time period allowed shall be rejected.



   D.   All bids shall be opened in the public at the time and place
specified, and a tabulation of all bids received shall be posted in city hall
for public inspection.



   E.   The purchasing officer shall have the right to reject any and
all bids and parts of bids, and/or to re-advertise or re-solicit bids.  A
bidder may appeal the decision to reject a bid to the city council.



   F.   The purchasing officer shall report the bid results to the
council, and shall advise the council on the need for the goods or services
and the advantages or disadvantages of the proposed contracts and bid
proposals.



(Ord. 1397.03.08 § 2 (part), 2007)



3.04.110  Pre-bid conferences and site inspection.



   When deemed necessary for an adequate understanding of applicable
requirements, the purchasing officer is authorized to require bidders or
proposers to attend pre-bid conferences or site inspections prior to the time
and date set for receipt of bids or proposals, and to consider bidders or
proposers not in attendance to be nonresponsive.



(Ord. 1397.03.08 § 2 (part), 2007)



3.04.120  Correction or withdrawal of bids.



   A.   Correction or Withdrawal Before Opening.  Bids or proposals
that contain errors or mistakes discovered by the bidder may be modified or
withdrawn prior to the date and time set for opening of bids, provided the
bidder establishes all of the following to the reasonable satisfaction of the
purchasing officer:



   1.   A mistake was made in the preparation of the bid;



   2.   The bidder gave written notice of the mistake, and the manner
in which it occurred, to the purchasing officer prior to bid opening;



   3.   The mistake caused the price to be materially different than
the bidder intended it to be;



   4.   The mistake was made in filling out the bid, and not due to
error in judgment or to carelessness in inspecting the site of the work, or
in reading the bid documents.



   B.   Correction After Opening.  A bidder may not change its bid or
proposal after the date and time set for receipt of bids.



   C.   Withdrawal After Opening.



   1.   If deemed to be in the best interest of the city, the
purchasing officer may allow the apparent prevailing bidder to withdraw its
bid and award a contract to the next lowest, most responsive, bidder.



   2.   In the event that bid security was required and provided by the
apparent prevailing bidder, the amount of the that bidder's bid security
shall be applied to the difference between that bid and the next lowest bid,
and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the apparent prevailing bidder
or that bidder's surety, as applicable.



(Ord. 1397.03.08 § 2 (part), 2007)



3.04.130  Receipt of bids or proposals.



   A.   Bids and proposals submitted in response to informal
competitive bids and proposal solicitations shall be in writing, unless
otherwise specified in bid documents or approved by the purchasing officer or
designee. Bids or proposals received prior to the date and time designated in
the solicitation documents shall be retained in confidence by the purchasing
officer until the date and time set for the receipt of bids or proposals.



   B.   Sealed bids and proposals submitted in response to formal
competitive bid or proposal solicitations must be delivered to the city
clerk's office prior to the time and date designated in the bid or proposal
documents.



   C.   Formal competitive bids or proposals, timely received, will be
publicly opened by the city clerk in the presence of one or more witnesses at
the location designated in the notice. If members of the public are present,
the names of those submitting bids and the aggregate bid pricing shall be
read aloud during the bid opening process, or the name of the proposer shall
be read aloud during the proposal opening process.



   D.   Formal competitive bids or proposals received after the
deadline for receipt shall not be accepted and shall be returned to the
bidder unopened.



   1.   The city clerk's office shall submit written notification to
the bidder, stating what the deadline was, when the bid or proposal was
actually received, and that it is being returned because it was received too
late.



   2.   If necessary, the bid or proposal may be opened for
identification purposes.



(Ord. 1397.03.08 § 2 (part), 2007)



3.04.140  Acceptance and evaluation of bids or proposals.



   A.   Bids or proposals shall be unconditionally accepted without
alteration or correction, except as authorized in this chapter.



   1.   For all purposes of this chapter, bids and proposals shall be
evaluated based on the criteria set forth in the invitation, which may
include inspection, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery, local taxes paid
by vendors, and suitability for a particular purpose.



   2.   Requests for proposals shall state the relative importance of
price and other evaluation factors.



   3.   In considering bids or proposals, the city may waive, if it
wishes to do so, minor defects or irregularities in the bids or proposals,
provided that the discrepancy does not affect the bid or proposal amount, or
give the bidder or proposer a material advantage over others.



   B.   If no bids or proposals are received in response to a
competitive solicitation, or if none of the bids or proposals meet the
requirements as specified in the solicitation document, the purchasing
officer may reissue the solicitation, may cease the procurement or, if deemed
in the best interest of the city, may authorize the procurement without
further compliance with competitive bidding requirements (subject to council
approval, if otherwise required pursuant to Section 3.04.040). An
authorization to procure without bidding shall be documented and become part
of the procurement records available for public inspection.



   C.   In the event that a single bid or proposal is received, the
purchasing officer shall have the authority to require the bidder or proposer
to submit cost or pricing data to assist in determining if the price is
reasonable. 



   1.   If it is determined that the bid price is not reasonable, the
purchasing officer may either reject the bid or attempt to negotiate a
reasonable price with the bidder or proposer, subject to the city's
acceptance.



   2.   Negotiation shall be completed within a reasonable time, as
determined or specified by the city.



   3.   Should such negotiation fail, the bid may be rejected.



   D.   In the event that an identical price is received from two or
more responsive and responsible bidders, and, in the judgment of the
purchasing officer, the public interest will not be served by re-advertising
for bids, the purchasing officer may determine the successful bidder by a
coin flip between the tie bidders in public at a date and time set by the
purchasing officer, with the purchasing officer determining the assignment of
heads or tails for the purpose of the flip.



(Ord. 1397.03.08 § 2 (part), 2007)



3.04.150  Preparation of bid or proposal documents.



   Any individual, firm, or vendor who has been compensated for the
preparation or assistance in the preparation of bid or proposal documents is
ineligible to submit a bid or proposal for the provision of the goods or the
performance of the services so specified.



(Ord. 1397.03.08 § 2 (part), 2007)



3.04.160  Cancellation of solicitations; rejection of bids.



   A.   Cancellation of Solicitations.  The purchasing officer may
cancel competitive bid or proposal solicitations before the date and time set
for receipt of bids or proposals, upon a written determination that such
action is in the city's best interest for, including but not limited to, any
of the following reasons:



   1.   The city no longer requires the procurement;



   2.   The city no longer can reasonably expect to fund the
procurement, as determined by the city manager or city council;



   3.   Proposed amendments to the solicitation would be of such
magnitude that a new solicitation is desirable.



   B.    Records.  The fact that a solicitation was cancelled or bid
or proposal rejected shall be made part of the procurement records.



(Ord. 1397.03.08 § 2 (part), 2007)



3.04.170  Bid protest.



   A.   Not more than three business days following the date on which
the act or error complained of occurred, a bidder may protest the handling of
a bid or awarding of a contract by filing written notice with the purchasing
officer stating the grounds for the protest.



   B.   The city manager shall hold a hearing at which the protesting
bidder may appear and present evidence. Hearings shall be as informal as may
be reasonable and appropriate under the circumstances.



   C.   If the protesting bidder establishes by clear and convincing
evidence that the city's handling of a bid or award of contract violated this
code, the city manager shall grant the protest.



   1.   If the protest is granted, the damages recoverable by the
protesting bidder shall not exceed the reasonable cost of preparing the bid. 



   2.   In no event will the award of bid be changed to the protesting
bidder.



(Ord. 1397.03.08 § 2 (part), 2007)



3.04.180  Disqualification of bidders and suppliers.



   A.   Grounds.  The purchasing officer may disqualify a person or
entity from selling or renting supplies, goods or services to the city, if it
is determined that any of the following circumstances apply:



   1.   The person has committed fraud or intentional misrepresentation
in procuring or performing a contract with the city, or in application for
payment from the city, within the last ten years;



   2.   The person has materially breached or failed to perform a
contract with the city (whether or not the contract was terminated) within
the last three years;



   3.      The person was convicted of, or pled guilty to, a
criminal offense committed in the course of obtaining or performing a public
contract within the last ten years.



   B.   Notice. 



   1.   The purchasing officer shall send written notice of any
proposed disqualification, including the grounds and the proposed period of
disqualification, to the person, by certified mail at the address contained
in the bid or proposal.



   2.   The notice shall advise the person of their right to request a
hearing on the matter before the purchasing officer. 



   3.   If the person serves a written request to the purchasing
officer not more than the lesser of (a) ten days after the date on which the
individual received notice, or (b) thirty days after the notice was sent by
certified mail, the purchasing officer shall conduct a hearing.



   4.   Hearings shall be as informal as may be reasonable and
appropriate under the circumstances.



   5.   At the hearing, the person or entity shall have the opportunity
to present evidence concerning the reasons for disqualification.



   6.   If the purchasing officer determines after hearing that
disqualification is justified under this section, the purchasing officer
shall disqualify the person or entity.



   C.   Application. A disqualification pursuant to this section shall
apply to any disqualified person, and to all businesses or other entities in
which the disqualified person holds a substantial interest or serves in a
management or sales position.



(Ord. 1397.03.08 § 2 (part), 2007)



3.04.190  Procurement contracts.



   A.   Term. 



   1.   The term of the contract and options for renewal shall be
clearly defined in the bid or proposal documents, and funds must be available
for the first fiscal period at the time of contracting.



   2.   Payment and performance obligations for succeeding fiscal
periods shall be subject to the availability and appropriation of funds by
the city council.



   B.   Modification of Contracts.



   1.   Modifications of contracts shall be in writing, and shall be
issued in accordance with the terms of the original contract.



   2.   No verbal contract modifications shall be binding on the city. 



   3.   Except as set forth in Subsection C. of this section, or unless
expressly permitted pursuant to the terms of the contract, any contract
modification which will result in an increase in the original contract amount
must be authorized in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



   C.   Change Orders. 



   1.   The city manager may authorize change orders to any contract if
the amount of the change order does not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000)
cumulative. 



   2.   The city council may authorize change order to any contract if
an amount of the change order exceeds ten thousand dollars ($10,000)
cumulative.



(Ord. 1397.03.08 § 2 (part), 2007)



3.04.200  Procurement records;  public inspection.



   A.   Records Maintenance.



   1.   The purchasing officer or city clerk's office shall maintain
records for each procurement, which shall include, at a minimum: the
procurement request; the bid or proposal documents for the procurement, if
any; any and all bids or proposals received; the basis on which contract
award is made; and a copy of any and all contracts awarded.



   2.   Such records shall be maintained for a period of time in
compliance with state law and the city's records retention schedule, and
shall be available for public inspection during normal city business hours.



   B.   Public Inspection.



   1.   Informal and formal competitive bids not involving competitive
negotiation shall be available for public inspection following the date and
time set for receipt of bids.



   2.   Informal and formal competitive proposals and formal
competitive bids involving competitive negotiation shall be available for
public inspection following contract award or rejection.



(Ord. 1397.03.08 § 2 (part), 2007)



3.04.210  Bonds and other security and insurance requirements.



   A.   When Required.  The purchasing officer shall have the
authority to require bid, performance and payment security, or specific types
and amounts of insurance coverage for specific procurements, to the extent
required by state law or upon a determination that it is in the best interest
of the city to do so.



   B.   Bid Security.



   1.   Bid security, if required, shall be submitted with the bid and
shall be a certified check, cashier's check, or surety bond from a company
authorized to conduct business in the state and acceptable to the city. 



   2.   If a bidder fails to submit the required bid security with the
bid, the bid shall be deemed nonresponsive. 



   3.   After bids are opened, bid security is irrevocable for the
period specified in the invitation for bids.



   4.   If the successful bidder fails to execute the contract within
the time specified, the total amount of the bid security shall be forfeited
to the city.



   5.   The security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned to the
bidder no later than sixty calendar days from the date of contract award.



   C.   Performance Security.  Performance security, if required,
shall be in the form of a bond acceptable to the city, on a form approved by
the city attorney.



   D.   Insurance.



   1.   The successful bidder shall submit certificates of insurance
and endorsement forms, as applicable, as evidence that it has the type and
amount of insurance coverage required by the bid or proposal documents.



   2.   Such evidence shall be submitted to the city clerk's office
promptly upon request, and shall be issued by an insurer authorized to
conduct business in the state and acceptable to the city.



   E.   Indemnity for Infringement of Patents, Copyrights or
Trademarks.  Each contractor must defend, hold harmless and fully indemnify
the city and its managers, employees and agents from all damages or claims
for damages, costs or expenses in law or equity that may arise for any
infringement of the patent right, copyright or trademark of any person, as a
consequence of the use by the city, or any of its officers, employees or
agents, of goods supplied under a contract.



(Ord. 1397.03.08 § 2 (part), 2007)



3.04.220  Right to inspect plant and audit records.



   A.   Right to Inspect Plant.  The city may, at reasonable times and
upon reasonable notice, inspect any part of the plant, place of business, or
work site of a contractor or subcontractor, at any level of the organization
pertinent to the performance of any contract awarded or that may be awarded
by the city.



   B.   Right to Audit Records.



   1.   The city shall be entitled to audit the books and records of a
contractor or subcontractor, at any level of organization, to the extent that
such books, documents, papers and records are pertinent to the performance of
such contract or subcontract.



   2.   Any contractor or subcontractor shall make such records
available for audit by the city at reasonable times upon reasonable notice. 



   3.   Any vendor who receives a contract, change order to a contract,
or modification to a contract, for which cost or pricing data is required,
shall maintain the financial data and accounting records that relate to the
cost or pricing data, for a three-year period from the date of the final
payment under contract, unless a shorter period is otherwise authorized in
writing by the finance director.



(Ord. 1397.03.08 § 2 (part), 2007)



3.04.230  Intergovernmental relations.



   A.   Cooperative Procurement.  Notwithstanding any other provision
of this chapter, the purchasing officer may authorize the city's
participation with one or more other government agencies in a cooperative
agreement for any procurement; provided that at least one of the agencies has
solicited bids using methods similar to those set forth is this chapter, and
which are not in any violation of any state statutes.



   B.   Use of Another Entity's Contract.  The purchasing officer may
authorize a procurement through the use of a contract initiated by another
governmental entity, provided all of the following conditions were met:



   1.   The original parties to the contract agree;



   2.   The contract was awarded or extended within twelve months of
the date of purchase;



   3.   The contract is for identical or nearly identical supplies,
goods or services; and



   4.   The contract resulted from a competitive bid using methods
similar to those set forth is this chapter, and not in any violation of any
state statutes.



   C.   Supply of Personnel.  The requirements of this chapter shall
not apply to any agreement or arrangement when an end user provides personnel
to, or obtains personnel from, another government agency.



(Ord. 1397.03.08 § 2 (part), 2007)



3.04.240  Failure to perform.



   A.   Supplies, Goods or Services. 



   1.   When a vendor fails to deliver supplies, goods or services in
the quality, quantity, manner or time specified in the contract, such
supplies, goods or services may be obtained from any source. 



   2.   If a greater price than that named in the contract or
procurement is paid for such supplies, goods or services, the excess price
shall be charged to and collected from the contractor or vendor, or the
surety on the contractor's/vendor's bond, if any.



   B.   Irresponsible Contractor.



   1.   Any vendor that fails to comply with the terms of its agreement
with the city may be declared an irresponsible contractor, after a due
process hearing by a hearing officer appointed by the city manager. 



   2.   Hearings shall be as informal as may be reasonable and
appropriate under the circumstances.



   3.   Upon such determination the vendor shall not be permitted to
act as a contractor or vendor on any city contract for a period of up to five
years, as determined by the hearing officer.



   4.   Appeal of a determination that a vendor is irresponsible may be
made to the city council.



   5.   The contract may be cancelled at the discretion of the city and
not in lieu of other remedies provided by law, and in the event of
cancellation, no recovery by the vendor/contractor shall be had thereon.



(Ord. 1397.03.08 § 2 (part), 2007)



3.04.250  Disposition of personal property of the city.



   A.   Authority.  The purchasing officer may sell or dispose of
personal property in any manner permitted or consistent with state law and
the city charter, including but not limited to, private sales, donations to
other entities providing a public benefit, or sale by public auction.



   B.   Property with No Salvage Value.  Personal property with no
salvage value, as determined by the purchasing officer, shall be disposed of
in a manner that salvages recyclable components, if practical.



   C.   Records.  The purchasing officer shall provide regular reports
to the city manager, which indicate the personal property disposed of, the
method of disposal, and the amounts recovered from its disposal; and shall
maintain records for public inspection relative to the disposal of personal
property for a period of time, in compliance with state law and the city's
records retention schedule.



   D.   Proceeds of Sale.  Proceeds from the sale of personal property
shall be deposited into the appropriate city fund, as designated by the
finance director.



(Ord. 1397.03.08 § 2 (part), 2007)



3.04.260  Ethics.



   A.   Statement of Policy.



   1.   City employees shall discharge their duties impartially so as
to reasonably assure fair competitive access to procurement opportunities by
responsible contractors.



   2.   Moreover, city employees shall conduct themselves in such a
manner as to foster public confidence in the integrity of procurement
activities.



   B.   Conflict of Interest. 



   1.   No city employee shall participate directly or indirectly in
any procurement if the employee has a conflict of interest as defined by ARS
§ 38-503, as may be amended from time to time.



   2.   Purchases consistent with Arizona Revised Statutes may be made
from businesses owned by Mayor and/or council members.



   C.   Withdrawal from Participation.  Upon discovery of an actual or
potential conflict of interest, an employee shall promptly withdraw from
further participation in the procurement, and notify the purchasing officer
of the withdrawal and the reasons therefor.



   D.   Gratuities. 



   1.   No person shall offer, give or agree to give any city employee
any gratuity or offer of employment in connection with any procurement.



   2.   No city employee shall solicit, demand, accept or agree to
accept from any other person a gratuity or an offer of employment in
connection with any procurement.



(Ord. 1397.03.08 § 2 (part), 2007)



Chapter 3.08
PRIVILEGE LICENSE TAX



Sections:



3.08.010   Adopted.



3.08.020   Violation—Penalty.



3.08.010  Adopted.



   That certain document known as “The City Tax Code of the City of Casa
Grande, Arizona,” three copies of which are on file in the office of the
city clerk which document was made a public record by Resolution No. 2044 of
the city of Casa Grande, Arizona, is hereby referred to, adopted and made a
part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter.



(Ord. 1474 § 1, 1993)



3.08.020  Violation—Penalty.



   Any person found guilty of violating any provision of these amendments
to the tax code shall be guilty of a class one misdemeanor. Each day that a
violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as herein
above-described.



(Ord. 1474 § 3, 1993)



Chapter 3.12
COLLECTION CHARGES AND PENALTIES



Sections:



3.12.010   Construction and exemptions.



3.12.020   Due and delinquency dates.



3.12.030   Penalties for delinquency.



3.12.040   Collection charges.



3.12.050   Charges for nonsufficient funds.



3.12.010  Construction and exemptions.



   A.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to alter or limit
the procedures for collection of fees, charges, fines or penalties which are
assessed and collected pursuant to state law, judicial decree or written
contract between the city and the party who owes money.



   B.   This chapter shall apply only to situations in which the city
bills a party and shall not be construed to limit the city's right to demand
payment in full prior to issuing building permits, releasing items sold at
auction, withholding participation in recreation programs, etc. until the
full amount has been paid.



(Ord. 1086.2 § 2 (part), 1988: prior code § 1-12-4)



3.12.020  Due and delinquency dates.



   Fees and charges payable to the city shall be due and payable when the
statement is rendered and shall be delinquent twenty calendar days thereafter.



(Ord. 1086.2 § 2 (part), 1988: prior code § 1-12-1)



3.12.030  Penalties for delinquency.



   If the total bill for any such charges is not paid the day after the
date of delinquency, a penalty of one and one-half percent of the unpaid
balance, but in no event less than fifty cents, shall be charged each month
of delinquency to be collected in addition to the amount then due.



(Ord. 1397.03.4 § 2, 1994)



3.12.040  Collection charges.



   The finance director shall have the authority to collect any and all
collection charges, court costs, and attorney's fees paid by the city in
connection with the collection of any fees arrears.



(Ord. 1086.2 § 2 (part), 1988: prior code § 1-12-3)



3.12.050  Charges for nonsufficient funds.



   The finance director may charge an individual or business an amount
equal to the bank charge plus a handling fee of $15.00, for any check
returned to the city because of nonsufficient funds or any other reason.



(Ord. 1397.03.06 § 1, 2002: Ord. 1086.3 § 2, 1991: Ord. 1086.1 § 1, 1987:
prior code § 1-11)



Title 4
FEES



Chapters:



4.01   Development Impact Fees



4.02   Reserved



4.05   Payback Fees



Chapter 4.01
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES



Sections:



  4.01.010   Title.



  4.01.020   Legislative intent and purpose.



  4.01.030   Definitions.



  4.01.040    Applicability.



  4.01.050   Authority for development impact fees.



  4.01.060    Administration of development impact fees.



  4.01.070   Land use assumptions.



  4.01.080    Infrastructure improvements plan.



  4.01.090   Adoption and modification procedures



  4.01.100   Timing for the renewal and updating of the infrastructure
improvements plan and the land use assumptions.



  4.01.110   Collection of development impact fees.



  4.01.120   Development impact fee credits and credit agreements.



  4.01.130   Development agreements.



  4.01.140   Appeals.



  4.01.150   Refunds of development impact fees.



  4.01.160   Oversight of development impact fee program.



  4.01.010   Title.



   This chapter shall be known as the “Development Impact Fee Ordinance
of the City of Casa Grande,” and may be cited as such. (Ord. 1397.04.34 §
3 (part), 2013)



4.01.020   Legislative intent and purpose.



   This chapter is adopted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety
and general welfare of the residents of the city by:



   A.   Requiring new development to pay its proportionate share of the
costs incurred by the city that are associated with providing necessary
public services to new development.



   B.   Setting forth standards and procedures for creating and
assessing development impact fees consistent with the requirements of A.R.S.
§ 9-463.05, including requirements pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05,
Subsection K, that, on or before August 1, 2014, the city replace its
development impact fees that were adopted prior to January 1, 2012, with
development impact fees adopted pursuant to the requirements of A.R.S. §
9-463.05, as amended by the state legislature in SB 1525, Fiftieth
Legislature, First Regular Session.



   C.   Providing for the temporary continuation of certain development
impact fees adopted prior to January 1, 2012, where such development impact
fees were pledged to support financing or debt for a grandfathered facility
as permitted by A.R.S. § 9-463.05, Subsections K, R, and S, or as required
to meet the provisions of A.R.S. § 9-463.05, Subsection F, relating to
developments obtaining a final development plan prior to the implementation
of a new fee schedule.



   D.   Setting forth procedures for administering the development
impact fee program, including offsets, credits, and refunds of development
impact fees.  All development impact fee assessments, offsets, credits, or
refunds must be administered in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.



   E.   Nothing in this chapter shall affect the city's zoning
authority or its authority to adopt or amend its General Plan, provided that
planning and zoning activities by the city may require amendments to
development impact fees as provided in Section 4.01.070 of this chapter. 



   F.   The payment of development impact fees shall not entitle the
applicant to a building permit unless all other applicable land use, zoning,
planning, platting, subdivision or other related requirements, standards and
conditions have been met.  Such other requirements, standards and conditions
are independent of the requirement for payment of a development impact fee.



   G.   Neither this ordinance nor the specific development fee
schedules for particular capital facilities shall affect, in any manner, the
permissible use of property, density/intensity of development, design and
improvement standards or other applicable standards or requirements of the
city land development regulations, which shall be operative and remain in
full force and effect without limitation. (Ord. 1397.04.34 § 3 (part), 2013)



4.01.030   Definitions.



   When used in this chapter, the terms listed below shall have the
following meanings unless the context requires otherwise.  Singular terms
shall include their plural.



   “Applicant” means a person who applies to the city for a building
permit.



   “Appurtenance” means any fixed machinery or equipment, structure or
other fixture, including integrated hardware, software or other components,
associated with a capital facility that are necessary or convenient to the
operation, use, or maintenance of a capital facility, but excluding
replacement of the same after initial installation.



   “Aquatic center” means a facility primarily designed to host
non-recreational competitive functions generally occurring within water,
including but not limited to, water polo games, swimming meets, and diving
events.  Such facility may be indoors, outdoors, or any combination thereof,
and includes all necessary supporting amenities, including but not limited
to, locker rooms, offices, snack bars, bleacher seating, and shade structures.



   “Building permit” means any permit issued by the city that
authorizes vertical construction, increases square footage, authorizes
changes to land use, or provides for the addition of a residential or
non-residential point of demand to the wastewater system.



   “Capital facility” means an asset having a useful life of three or
more years that is a component of one or more categories of necessary public
service provided by the city.  A “capital facility” may include any
associated purchase of real property, architectural and engineering services
leading to the design and construction of buildings and facilities,
improvements to existing facilities, improvements to or expansions of
existing facilities, and associated financing and professional services. 
Wherever used herein, “infrastructure” shall have the same meaning as
“capital facilities.”



   “Category of necessary public service” means “a category of
necessary public services” for which the city is authorized to assess
development impact fees, as further defined in Subsection 4.01.080.A.1 of
this chapter.



   “Category of development” means a specific category of residential,
commercial, or industrial development against which a development impact fee
is calculated and assessed. The city assesses development impact fees against
all development utilizing the following categories of development:



   A.   Residential development on a per-dwelling-unit basis (which
includes, but is not limited to, single-family, multi-family, mobile
home/park model, and all other types of residential dwelling units); and



   B.   Non-residential development on a per-room or per-square-foot
basis (which includes, but is not limited to, commercial/retail development,
office/institutional, business park, light industrial, warehousing,
manufacturing and hotel).



   “City” means the City of Casa Grande, Arizona.



   “Credit” means a reduction in an assessed development impact fee
resulting from developer contributions to, payments for, construction of, or
dedications for capital facilities included in an infrastructure improvements
plan pursuant to Section 4.01.120 of this chapter (or as otherwise permitted
by this chapter).



   “Credit agreement” means a written agreement between the city and
the developer(s) of  subject development that allocates credits to the
subject development pursuant to Section 4.01.120 of this chapter.  A
“credit agreement” may be included as part of a development agreement
pursuant to Section 4.01.130 of this chapter.



   “Credit allocation” means a term used to describe when credits are
distributed to a particular development or parcel of land after execution of
a credit agreement, but are not yet issued.



   “Credit issuance” means a term used to describe when the amount of
an assessed development impact fee attributable to a particular development
or parcel of land is reduced by applying a credit allocation.



   “Developer” means an individual, group of individuals, partnership,
corporation, limited liability company, association, municipal corporation,
state agency, or other person or entity undertaking land development
activity, and their respective successors and assigns.



   “Development agreement” means an agreement prepared in accordance
with the requirements of Section 4.01.130 of this chapter, A.R.S. §
9-500.05, and any applicable requirements of the City Code.



   “Direct benefit” means a benefit to a SMU resulting from a capital
facility that:



   A.   Addresses the need for a necessary public service created, in
whole or in part, by the SMU; and that



   B.   Meets either of the following criteria:



   1.    The capital facility is located in the immediate area of the
SMU and is needed in the immediate area of the SMU to maintain the level of
service; or



   2.   The capital facility substitutes for, or eliminates the need
for a capital facility that would have otherwise have been needed in the
immediate area of the SMU to maintain the city's level of service.



   “Dwelling unit” means a house, apartment, townhome, condominium
unit, mobile home or trailer, park home, group of rooms, or single room
occupied as separate living quarters or, if vacant, intended for occupancy as
separate living quarters.  “Dwelling unit” also includes spaces for
recreational vehicles or travel trailers, but does not include hotels
designed primarily for transient occupant purposes, nor shall it include
rooms in hospitals or nursing homes.



   “Equipment” means machinery, tools, materials, and other supplies,
not including vehicles, which are needed by a capital facility to provide the
level of service specified by the infrastructure improvements plan, but
excluding replacement of the same after initial development of the capital
facility.



   “Excluded library facility” means library facilities for which
development impact fees may not be charged pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05,
including that portion of any library facility that exceeds ten thousand
square feet, and equipment, vehicles or appurtenances associated with library
operations.



   “Excluded park facility” means park and recreational facilities for
which development impact fees may not be charged pursuant to A.R.S. §
9-463.05, including amusement parks, aquariums, aquatic centers, auditoriums,
arenas, arts and cultural facilities, bandstand and orchestra facilities,
bathhouses, boathouses, clubhouses, community centers greater than three
thousand square feet in floor area, environmental education centers,
equestrian facilities, golf course facilities, greenhouses, lakes, museums,
theme parks, water reclamation or riparian areas, wetlands, or zoo facilities.



   “Fee report” means a written report developed pursuant to Section
4.01.090 of this chapter that identifies the methodology for calculating the
amount of each development impact fee, identifies the service area to which
each impact fee applies, explains or demonstrates the relationship between
the development impact fee to be assessed and assumptions and calculations
set forth in the infrastructure improvements plan, and which meets other
requirements set forth in A.R.S. § Section 9-463.05.



   “Financing or debt” means any debt, bond, note, loan, inter-fund
loan, fund transfer, or other debt service obligation used to finance the
development or expansion of a capital facility.



   “Fire protection” means a category of necessary public services
that may include fire stations, fire equipment, fire vehicles and all
appurtenances for fire stations.  “Fire protection” does not include
vehicles or equipment used to provide administrative services, or helicopters
or airplanes.  “Fire protection” does not include any facility that is
used for training firefighters from more than one station or substation.



   “General Plan” refers to the overall land-use plan for the city
establishing areas of the city for different purposes, zones and activities
adopted by the city pursuant to the provisions of A.R.S. Title 9, Chapter 4,
Article 6, as amended, and including any specific area plans adopted pursuant
thereto.



   “Grandfathered facilities” means capital facilities provided
through financing or debt incurred before June 1, 2011, for which a
development impact fee has been pledged towards repayment as described in
Subsection 4.01.050.C of this chapter.



   “Gross Impact Fee” means The total development impact fee to be
assessed against a subject development on a per-unit basis, prior to
subtraction of any credits. 



   “Infrastructure improvements plan” means a document or series of
documents that meet the requirements set forth in A.R.S. § 9-463.05,
including those adopted  pursuant to Section 4.01.090 of this chapter to
cover any category or combination of categories of necessary public services.



   “Land use assumptions” means projections of changes in land uses,
densities, intensities and population for a service area over a period of at
least ten years as specified in Section 4.01.070 of this chapter.



   “Level of service” means a quantitative and/or qualitative measure
of a necessary public service that is to be provided by the city to
development in a particular service area, defined in terms of the
relationship between service capacity and service demand, accessibility,
response times, comfort or convenience of use, or other similar measures or
combinations of measures.  “Level of service” may be measured
differently for different categories of necessary public services, as
identified in the applicable infrastructure improvements plan.



   “Library facilities” means a category of necessary public services
in which literary, musical, artistic, or reference materials are kept
(materials may be kept in any form of media such as electronic, magnetic, or
paper) for non-commercial use by the public in a facility providing a direct
benefit to development.  Libraries do not include excluded library
facilities, although a library may contain, provide access to, or otherwise
support an excluded library facility.



   “Necessary public services”  shall have the meaning prescribed in
A.R.S. § 9-463.05, Subsection T, paragraph 7.



   “Offset” means an amount subtracted from the overall costs of
providing necessary public services to account for those capital components
of infrastructure or associated debt that have been or will be paid for by a
development through taxes, fees (except for development impact fees), and
other revenue sources, as determined by the city pursuant to Section 4.01.080
of this chapter.



   “Parks and recreational facilities” means a category of necessary
public services that may include, but is not limited to, parks, swimming
pools and related facilities and equipment located on real property not
larger than thirty acres in area, as well as park facilities larger than
thirty acres where such facilities provide a direct benefit.  “Parks and
recreational facilities” do not include excluded park facilities, although
parks and recreational facilities may contain, provide access to, or
otherwise support an excluded park facility.



   “Plan-based cost per SMU” means the total future capital costs
listed in the infrastructure improvements plan for a category of necessary
public services, divided by the total new service units projected in a
particular service area for that category of necessary public services over
the same time period.



   “Pledged” is defined as follows.  Where used with reference to a
development impact fee, a development impact fee shall be considered
“pledged” where it was identified by the city as a source of payment or
repayment for financing or debt that was identified as the source of
financing for a necessary public service for which a development impact fee
was assessed pursuant to the then-applicable provisions of A.R.S. § 9-463.05.



   “Police facilities” means a category of necessary public services
that may include vehicles and equipment used by law enforcement agencies to
preserve the public peace, prevent crime, detect and arrest criminal
offenders, protect the rights of persons and property, regulate and control
motorized and pedestrian traffic, train sworn personnel, and/or provide and
maintain police records, vehicles, equipment, and communications systems. 
“Police facilities” do not include vehicles and equipment used to provide
administrative services, or helicopters or airplanes.  “Police
facilities” do not include any facility used for training officers from
more than one station or substation.



   “Qualified professional” means any one of the following:



   A.   Professional engineer, surveyor, financial analyst or planner,
or other licensed professional providing services within the scope of that
person's education or experience related to city planning, zoning, or impact
development fees, and holding a license issued by an agency or political
subdivision of the State of Arizona;



   B.   A financial analyst, planner, or other non-licensed
professional providing services within the scope of the person's education or
experience related to city planning, zoning, or impact development fees; or



   C.   Any other person operating under the supervision of one or more
of the above.



   “Service area” means any specified area within the boundaries of
the city within which:



   A.   The city will provide a category of necessary public services
to development at a planned level of service; and



   B.   Within which:



   1.   A substantial nexus exists between the capital facilities to be
provided and the development to be served; or



   2.   In the case of library facilities or a park facility larger
than thirty acres, a direct benefit exists between the library facilities or
park facilities and the development to be served, each as prescribed in the
infrastructure improvements plan. 



Some or all of the capital facilities providing service to a service area may
be physically located outside of that service area, provided that the
required substantial nexus or direct benefit is demonstrated to exist.



   “Service measurement unit (SMU)” means a unit of development within
a particular category of development, defined in terms of a standardized
measure of the demand that a unit of development in that category of
development generates for necessary public services.  A “SMU” is a
“service unit” for purposes of paragraph (T), subparagraph (10) of A.R.S.
§ 9-463.05.



   “Street facilities” means  a category of necessary public services
that may include arterial or collector streets or roads, traffic signals,
rights-of-way, and improvements thereon, bridges, culverts, irrigation
tiling, storm drains, and regional transportation facilities.



   “Subject development” means a land area linked by a unified plan of
development, which must be contiguous unless the land area is part of a
development agreement executed in accordance with Section 4.01.130 of this
chapter.



   “Substantial nexus” is defined as follows. A “substantial
nexus” exists where the demand for necessary public services that will be
generated by a SMU can be reasonably quantified in terms of the burden it
will impose on the available capacity of existing capital facilities, the
need it will create for new or expanded capital facilities, and/or the
benefit to the development from those capital facilities.



   “Swimming pool” means a public facility primarily designed and/or
utilized for recreational, non-competitive functions generally occurring
within water, including but not limited to, swimming classes, open public
swimming sessions, and recreational league swimming/diving events.  The
facility may be indoors, outdoors, or any combination thereof, and includes
all necessary supporting amenities.



   “Useful life” means the period of time in which an asset can
reasonably be expected to be used under normal conditions, whether or not the
asset will continue to be owned and operated by the city over the entirety of
such period.



   “Vehicle” means any device, structure, or means of conveyance
utilized for transportation in the course of providing a particular category
of necessary public services at a specified level of service, excluding
helicopters and other aircraft.



   “Wastewater” means a category of necessary public services that may
include, but is not limited to, sewers, lift stations, reclamation plants,
wastewater treatment plants, and all other facilities for the collection,
interception, transportation, treatment and disposal of wastewater, and any
appurtenances for those facilities. (Ord. 1397.04.34 § 3 (part), 2013)



4.01.040   Applicability.



   A.   Except as otherwise provided herein, from and after July 1,
2013, this chapter shall apply to all new development within any service
area, except for the development of any city facility.



   B.   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all of the
territory within the corporate limits of the city and/or within the city's
wastewater service area.



   C.   The city manager, or his or her designee, is authorized to make
determinations regarding the application, administration and enforcement of
the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1397.04.34 § 3 (part), 2013)



4.01.050   Authority for development impact fees.



   A.   Fee Report and Implementation.  The city may assess and
collect a development impact fee for costs of necessary public services,
including all professional services required for the preparation or revision
of an infrastructure improvements plan, fee report, development impact fee,
and required reports or audits conducted pursuant to this chapter. 
Development impact fees shall be subject to the following requirements:



   1.   The city shall develop and adopt a fee report that analyzes and
defines the development impact fees to be charged in each service area for
each capital facility category, based on the infrastructure improvements plan
and the cost per SMU calculated pursuant to Subsection 4.01.080.A.12 of this
chapter.



   2.   Development impact fees shall be assessed against all new
commercial, residential, industrial and other developments, provided that the
city may assess different amounts of development impact fees against specific
categories of development, based on the actual burdens and costs that are
associated with providing necessary public services to that category of
development.  The amount of a development impact fee shall be as set forth
in the fee schedules adopted by council, which shall not exceed the maximum
supportable fee set forth in a fee report.



   3.   Except as set forth in Subsection C of this section or
otherwise set forth in this chapter, no development impact fees shall be
charged, or credits issued, for any capital facility that does not fall
within one of the categories of necessary public services for which
development impact fees may be assessed as identified in Subsection
4.01.080.A.1 of this chapter.



   4.   Costs for necessary public services made necessary by new
development shall be based on the same level of service provided to existing
development in the same service area.  Development impact fees may not be
used to provide a higher level of service to existing development or to meet
stricter safety, efficiency, environmental, or other regulatory standards to
the extent that these are applied to existing capital facilities that are
serving existing development.



   5.   Development impact fees may not be used to pay the city's
administrative, maintenance, or other operating costs for providing the level
of service.



   6.   Projected interest charges and financing costs can only be
included in development impact fees to the extent they represent principal
and/or interest on the portion of any financing or debt used to finance the
construction or expansion of a capital facility identified in the
infrastructure improvements plan.



   7.   Development impact fees charged by the city must be included in
a fee schedule prepared pursuant to this chapter, and must be based on
information and calculation of supportable fees included in the fee report;



   8.   All development impact fees shall meet the requirements of
A.R.S. § 9-463.05.



   B.   Costs per SMU.  The fee report shall summarize the costs of
capital facilities necessary to serve new development, on a per-SMU basis as
calculated in the infrastructure improvements plan, including all required
offsets, and shall recommend a development impact fee structure for adoption
by the city.  The actual impact fees to be assessed shall be disclosed and
adopted by council resolution in the form of impact fee schedules, noting the
date the fee will become effective.



   C.   Carry-over of Previously-Established Development Impact Fees
and Grandfathered Facilities.  Notwithstanding the requirements of this
chapter, certain development impact fees adopted by the city prior to the
effective date of this chapter shall continue in effect as follows:



   1.   Unless decreased by a fee schedule adopted pursuant to this
chapter, development impact fees assessed pursuant to the city's adopted fee
schedule prior to the effective date of this chapter shall continue in full
force and effect, to the extent required to meet the provisions of A.R.S. §
9-463.05, paragraph F, for developments for which a final site plan or
subdivision approval was given prior to the effective date of this chapter,
and only to the extent that the development impact fee is used to provide a
category of necessary public services that is authorized by Section 4.01.080
of this chapter.



   2.   The city may continue to assess, collect, and use any
development impact fee initially established before January 1, 2012, even if
the development impact fee would not otherwise be permitted to be collected
and spent pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05, as amended by the state legislature
in SB 1525, Fiftieth Legislature, First Regular Session, if either of the
following apply:



   a.   Both of the following conditions are met:



   i.   Prior to June 1, 2011, the development impact fee was pledged
towards the repayment of financing or debt incurred by the city to provide a
capital facility; 



   ii.   The applicable capital facility was included in the city's
infrastructure improvements plan, or other city planning document prepared
pursuant to applicable law, prior to June 1, 2011.



   b.   Before August 1, 2014, the city uses the development impact fee
to finance a capital facility in accordance with A.R.S. § 9-463.05,
Subsection (S).



   3.   Defined terms in any previously established fee schedule shall
be interpreted according to the ordinance in effect at the time of their
adoption. (Ord. 1397.04.34 § 3 (part), 2013)



4.01.060   Administration of development impact fees.



   A.   Separate Funds.  Development impact fees collected pursuant to
this chapter shall be placed in separate funds for each capital facility
category within each service area.  Impact fee funds must be held by the
city in an interest-bearing account or accounts.



   B.   Limitations on Use of Fees.  Development impact fees and any
interest thereon collected pursuant to this chapter shall be spent to provide
capital facilities associated with the same category of necessary public
services in the same service area for which they were collected, including
costs of financing or debt used by the city to finance such capital
facilities and other costs authorized by this chapter that are included in
the infrastructure improvements plan.



   C.   Time Limit.  Development impact fees collected after July 1,
2014, shall be used within ten years of the date upon which they were
collected for all categories of necessary public services, except for
wastewater facilities. For wastewater facilities fees collected after July
31, 2014, development impact fees must be used within fifteen years of the
date upon which they were collected. (Ord. 1397.04.34 § 3 (part), 2013)



4.01.070   Land use assumptions.



   The infrastructure improvements plan shall be consistent with the
city's current land use assumptions for each service area and each category
of necessary public services as adopted by the city pursuant to A.R.S. §
9-463.05.



   A.   Reviewing the Land Use Assumptions.  Prior to the adoption or
amendment of an infrastructure improvements plan, the city shall review and
evaluate the land use assumptions on which the infrastructure improvements
plan is to be based, to ensure that the land use assumptions within each
service area conform to the city's General Plan.



   B.   Evaluating Necessary Changes.  If the land use assumptions
upon which an infrastructure improvements plan is based have not been updated
within the last five years, the city shall evaluate the land use assumptions
to determine whether changes are necessary.  If, after general evaluation,
the city determines that the land use assumptions are still valid, the city
shall issue the report required in Section 4.01.100 of this chapter.



   C.   Required Modifications to Land Use Assumptions.  If the city
determines that changes to the land use assumptions are necessary in order to
adopt or amend an infrastructure improvements plan, it shall make such
changes as necessary to the land use assumptions, prior to or in conjunction
with the review and approval of the infrastructure improvements plan pursuant
to Section 4.01.100 of this chapter. (Ord. 1397.04.34 § 3 (part), 2013)



4.01.080   Infrastructure improvements plan.



   A.   Infrastructure Improvements Plan Contents.  The infrastructure
improvements plan shall be developed by qualified professionals and may be
based upon or incorporated within the city's Capital Improvements Plan.  The
infrastructure improvements plan shall:



   1.   Specify the categories of necessary public services for which
the city will impose a development impact fee, which may include any or all
of the following if appropriate:



   a.   Water;



   b.   Wastewater;



   c.   Stormwater, drainage, and flood control;



   d.   Libraries;



   e.   Street facilities;



   f.   Fire protection;



   g.   Police;



   h.   Parks.



   2.   Define and provide a map or description of one or more service
areas within which the city will provide each category of necessary public
services for which development impact fees will be charged.  Each service
area must be defined in a manner that demonstrates a substantial nexus
between the capital facilities to be provided in the service area and the
SMUs to be served by those capital facilities.  For libraries and for parks
larger than thirty acres, each service area must be defined in a manner that
demonstrates a direct benefit between the capital facilities and the SMUs to
be served by those capital facilities.  The city may cover more than one
category of capital facilities in the same service area, provided that there
is an independent substantial nexus or direct benefit, as applicable, between
each category of necessary public services and the SMUs to be served.



   3.   Identify and describe the land use assumptions upon which the
infrastructure improvements plan is based in each service area.



   4.   Analyze and identify the existing level of service provided by
the city for each category of necessary public services in each service area.



   5.   Identify the level of service to be provided by the city for
each category of necessary public services in each service area, based on the
relevant land use assumptions and any established city standards or policies
related to required levels of service.  If the city provides the same
category of necessary public services in more than one service area, the
infrastructure improvements plan shall include a comparison of the levels of
service to be provided in each service area.



   6.   For each category of necessary public services, analyze and
identify the existing capacity of the capital facilities in each service
area, the utilization of those capital facilities by existing SMUs, and the
available excess capacity of those capital facilities to serve new SMUs,
including any existing or planned commitments or agreements for the usage of
such capacity.  The infrastructure improvements plan shall additionally
identify:



   a.   Any changes or upgrades to existing capital facilities that
will be needed to achieve or maintain the planned level of service to
existing SMUs, or to meet new safety, efficiency, environmental, or other
regulatory requirements for services provided to existing SMUs; and



   b.   Those portions of capital facilities that will be necessary to
serve any new city facility for which development impact fees will not be
assessed.



   7.   Identify any grandfathered facilities and the impact thereof on
the need for necessary public services in each affected service area.



   8.   Estimate the total number of existing and future SMUs within
each service area, based on the city's land use assumptions and projected new
SMUs in each service area.



   9.   Based on the above analysis, provide a summary table or tables
describing the level of service for each category of necessary public
services, by relating the required capital facilities to SMUs in each service
area, and identifying the applicable SMU factor associated with each category
of development.



   10.   For each category of necessary public services, analyze and
identify the projected utilization of any available excess capacity in
existing capital facilities, and all new or expanded capital facilities that
will be required to provide and maintain the planned level of service in each
service area as a result of the new projected SMUs in that service area, for
a period not to exceed ten years. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit
the city from additionally including in its infrastructure improvements plan
projected utilization of, or needs for, capital facilities for a period
longer than ten years, provided that the costs of such capital facilities are
excluded from the calculation of the plan-based cost per SMU.



   11.   For each category of necessary public services, estimate the
total cost of any available excess capacity and/or new or expanded capital
facilities that will be required to serve new SMUs, including costs of land
acquisition, improvements, engineering and architectural services, studies
leading to design, construction, financing, and administrative costs, as well
as projected costs of inflation.  Such total costs shall not include costs
for ongoing operation and maintenance of capital facilities, nor for
replacement of capital facilities to the extent that such replacement is
necessary to serve existing SMUs.  If the infrastructure improvements plan
includes changes or upgrades to existing capital facilities that will be
needed to achieve or maintain the planned level of service to existing SMUs,
or to meet new regulatory requirements for services provided to existing
SMUs, such costs shall be identified and distinguished in the infrastructure
improvements plan.



   12.   Forecast the revenues from taxes, fees, assessments or other
sources that will be available to fund the new or expanded capital facilities
identified in the infrastructure improvements plan, which shall include
estimated state-shared revenue, highway users revenue, federal revenue, ad
valorem property taxes, construction contracting or similar excise taxes and
the capital recovery portion of utility fees attributable to development,
based on the approved land use assumptions.  The infrastructure improvements
plan shall additionally estimate the time required to finance, construct and
implement the new or expanded capital facilities.



   13.   Calculate required offsets as follows:



   a.   From the forecasted revenues in Subsection A.12 of this
section, identify those sources of revenue that:



   i.   Are attributable to new development; and



   ii.   Will contribute to paying for the capital costs of necessary
public services.



   b.   For each source and amount of revenue identified pursuant to
Subsection A.13.a of this section, calculate the relative contribution of
each category of development to paying for the capital costs of necessary
public services in each service area.



   c.   Based on the relative contributions identified pursuant to
Subsection A.13.b of this section, for each category of necessary public
services, calculate the total offset to be provided to each category of
development in each service area.



   d.   For each category of necessary public services, convert the
total offset to be provided to each category of development in each service
area into an offset amount per SMU, by dividing the total offset for each
category of development by the number of SMUs associated with that category
of development.



   e.   Beginning August 1, 2014, for purposes of calculating the
required offset, if the city imposes a construction, contracting, or similar
excise tax rate in excess of the percentage amount of the transaction
privilege tax rate imposed on the majority of other transaction privilege tax
classifications in the city, the entire excess portion of the construction,
contracting, or similar excise tax shall be treated as a contribution to the
capital costs of necessary public services provided to new development,
unless the excess portion is already utilized for such purpose pursuant to
this section.



   f.   In determining the amount of required offset for land included
in a community facilities district established under A.R.S. Title 48, Chapter
4, Article 6, the city shall take into account any capital facilities
provided by the district that are included in the infrastructure improvements
plan and the capital costs paid by the district for such capital facilities,
and shall offset impact fees assessed within the community facilities
district proportionally.



   14.   Calculate the plan-based cost per SMU by:



   a.   Dividing the total projected costs to provide capital
facilities to new SMUs for each category of necessary public services in each
service area, as determined pursuant to Subsection A.9 of this section, into
the number of new SMUs projected for that service area over a period not to
exceed ten years, considering the specific SMU factor(s) associated with such
SMUs for each category of necessary public services.



   b.   Subtracting the required offset per SMU calculated pursuant to
Subsection A.11 of this section.



   B.   Multiple Plans.  An infrastructure improvements plan adopted
pursuant to this subsection may address one or more of the city's categories
of necessary public services in any or all of the city's service areas. 
Each capital facility shall be subject to no more than one infrastructure
improvements plan at any given time.



   C.   Reserved Capacity.  The city may reserve capacity in an
infrastructure improvements plan to serve one or more planned future
developments, including capacity reserved through a development agreement
pursuant to Section 4.01.130 of this chapter.  All reservations of existing
capacity must be disclosed in the infrastructure improvements plan at the
time it is adopted. (Ord. 1397.04.34 § 3 (part), 2013)



4.01.090   Adoption and modification procedures.



   A.   Adopting or Amending the Infrastructure Improvements Plan. 
The infrastructure improvements plan shall be adopted or amended subject to
the following procedures:



   1.   Major Amendments to the Infrastructure Improvements Plan. 
Except as provided in Subsection A.2 of this section, the adoption or
amendment of an infrastructure improvements plan shall occur at one or more
public hearings according to the following schedule, and may occur
concurrently with the adoption of an update of the city's land use
assumptions as provided in Section 4.01.070 of this chapter:



   a.   Sixty days before the first public hearing regarding a new or
updated infrastructure improvements plan, the city shall provide public
notice of the hearing and post the infrastructure improvements plan and the
underlying land use assumptions on its website; the city shall additionally
make available to the public the documents used to prepare the infrastructure
improvements plan and underlying land use assumptions, and the amount of any
proposed changes to the plan-based cost per SMU.



   b.   The city shall conduct a public hearing on the infrastructure
improvements plan and underlying land use assumptions at least thirty days,
but no more than sixty days, before approving or disapproving the
infrastructure improvements plan.



   2.   Minor Amendments to the Infrastructure Improvements Plan. 
Notwithstanding the other requirements of this section, the city may update
the infrastructure improvements plan and/or its underlying land use
assumptions without a public hearing if all of the following apply:



   a.   The changes in the infrastructure improvements plan and/or the
underlying land use assumptions will not add any new category of necessary
public services to any service area.



   b.   The changes in the infrastructure improvements plan and/or the
underlying land use assumptions will not increase the level of service to be
provided in any service area.



   c.   Based on an analysis of the fee report and the city's adopted
development impact fee schedules, the changes in the infrastructure
improvements plan and/or the underlying land use assumptions would not,
individually or cumulatively with other amendments undertaken pursuant to
this subsection, have caused a development impact fee in any service area to
have been increased by more than five per cent above the development impact
fee provided in the current development impact fee schedule.



   d.   At least thirty days prior to the date that the any amendment
pursuant to this section is adopted, the city shall post the proposed
amendments on the city website.



   B.   Amendments to the Fee Report.  Any adoption or amendment of a
fee report and fee schedule shall occur at one or more public hearings
according to the following schedule:



   1.   The first public hearing on the fee report must be held at
least thirty days after the adoption or approval of an infrastructure
improvements plan as provided in Subsection A of this section.  The city
must give at least thirty days notice prior to the hearing, provided that
this notice may be given on the same day as the approval or disapproval of
the infrastructure improvements plan.



   2.   The city shall make the infrastructure improvements plan and
underlying land use assumptions available to the public on the city's website
thirty days prior to the public hearing described in Subsection B.1 of this
section.



   3.   The fee report may be adopted by the city no sooner than thirty
days, and no later than sixty days, after the hearing described in Subsection
B.1 of this section.



   4.   The development fee schedules in the fee report adopted
pursuant to this subsection shall become effective no earlier than
seventy-five days after adoption of the fee report by the city. (Ord.
1397.04.34 § 3 (part), 2013)



4.01.100   Timing for the renewal and updating of the infrastructure
improvements plan and the land use assumptions.



   A.   Renewing the Infrastructure Improvements Plan. Except as
provided in Subsection B of this section, not later than every five years the
city shall update the applicable infrastructure improvements plan and fee
report related to each category of necessary public services pursuant to
Section 4.01.090 of this chapter.  The five-year period shall be calculated
from the date of the adoption of the infrastructure improvements plan or the
date of the adoption of the fee report, whichever occurs later.



   B.   Determination of No Changes.  Notwithstanding Subsection A of
this section, if the city determines that no changes to an infrastructure
improvements plan, underlying land use assumptions, or fee report are needed,
the city may elect to continue the existing land use assumptions,
infrastructure improvements plan, and fee report without amendment by
providing notice as follows:



   1.   Notice of the determination shall be published at least one
hundred eighty days prior to the end of the five-year period described in
Subsection A of this section.



   2.   The notice shall identify the land use assumptions,
infrastructure improvements plan, and fee report that shall continue in force
without amendment.



   3.    The notice shall provide a map and description of the service
area(s) covered by such land use assumptions, infrastructure improvements
plan and fee report.



   4.   The notice shall identify an address to which any resident of
the city may submit, within sixty days, a written request that the city
update the infrastructure improvements plan, underlying land use assumptions,
and/or fee report, and the reasons and basis for the request.



   C.   Response to Comments.  The city council shall consider and
respond, within sixty days after close of the comment period, to any timely
requests submitted pursuant to Subsection B.4 of this section, by accepting
or rejecting the request to update the underlying land use assumptions,
infrastructure improvements plan and/or fee report. (Ord. 1397.04.34 § 3
(part), 2013)



4.01.110   Collection of development impact fees.



   A.   Collection.  Development impact fees, together with any
administrative charges assessed pursuant to Subsection A.7 of this section,
shall be calculated and collected as follows: 



   1.   Residential Development.  Development impact fees shall be
paid prior to issuance of a building permit.  Alternatively, impact fees may
be paid prior to the issuance of the earlier of a temporary or final
certificate of occupancy, in accordance with the terms of a development
agreement adopted pursuant to Section 4.01.130.  The development agreement
shall require that an appropriate financial security be posted for the value
of any deferred fees, to guarantee future payment on or before issuance of
any temporary or final certificate of occupancy.



   2.   Non-residential Development.  Development impact fees shall be
paid prior to the issuance of a building permit, or alternatively, may be
paid prior to the issuance of the earlier of a temporary or final certificate
of occupancy, if an appropriate financial security, acceptable to the city,
is posted for the value of any deferred fees, to guarantee future payment on
or before the issuance of a temporary or final certificate of occupancy.



   3.   Development Not Requiring a Building Permit.  If a building
permit is not required for development, any and all development impact fees
due shall be paid prior to approval of a site plan authorizing said
development.  If a building permit is not required for the development, but
wastewater connections are required, any and all development impact fees due
shall be paid prior to approval of a connection to the sewer system.



   4.   Wastewater development impact fees shall be assessed if a
development connects to the public sewer, or, as determined by the city
public works director, or his or her designee, is capable of discharging
sewage to a city public sewer.



   5.   No building permit, water or sewer connection, or certificate
of occupancy shall be issued if a development impact fee is not paid as
directed in the previous subsections.  If a permit is issued by the city in
violation of this section, the permit is voidable at the option of the city,
unless the development impact fee has been paid in full prior to the city
exercising its option to void the permit.



   6.   If the building permit is for a change in the type of building
use or occupancy, an increase in square footage, a change to land use, or an
addition to a residential or non-residential point of demand to the
wastewater system, the development impact fee shall be assessed on the
additional service units resulting from the expansion or change, and
following the development impact fee schedule applicable to any new use type.



   7.   For issued permits that expire or are voided, development
impact fees and administrative charges shall be as follows:



   a.   If the original permittee is seeking to renew an expired or
voided permit, and the development impact fees paid for such development have
not been refunded, then the permittee shall pay the difference between any
development impact fees paid at the time the permit was issued and those in
the fee schedule at the time the permit is reissued or renewed, along with an
administrative fee for processing the renewal as set forth in the City
Consolidated Fee Schedule.



   b.   If a new or renewed permit for the same development is being
sought by someone other than the original permittee, the new permit applicant
shall pay the full development impact fees specified in the fee schedule in
effect at the time that the permits are reissued or renewed.  If the
original permittee has assigned its rights under the permits, in writing, to
the new permit applicant, the new permit applicant shall pay development
impact fees as if it were the original permittee, along with an
administrative fee for processing the renewal as set forth in the City
Consolidated Fee Schedule.



   B.   Exceptions.  Development impact fees shall not be owed under
either of the following conditions:



   1.   Development impact fees have been previously paid for the
development and the permit(s) that triggered the collection of the
development impact fees have not expired or been voided.



   2.   The approval(s) that trigger the collection of development
impact fees involve modifications to existing residential or non-residential
development that do not:



   a.   Add new SMUs;



   b.   Increase the impact of existing SMUs on existing or future
capital facilities; or



   c.   Change the land-use type of the existing development to a
different category of development for which a higher development impact fee
would have been due. To the extent that any modification does not meet the
requirements of this subsection, the development impact fee due shall be the
difference between the development impact fee that was or would have been due
on the existing development, and the development impact fee that is due on
the development as modified.



   C.   Temporary Exemptions from Development Impact Fee Schedules. 
New developments in the city shall be temporarily exempt from subsequent
increases in development impact fees that result from the adoption of new or
modified development impact fee schedules as follows:



   1.   Residential Uses.  On or after the day that the first building
permit is issued for a platted single-family residential development, the
city shall, at the permittee's request, provide the permittee with an
applicable development impact fee schedule that shall be in force for a
period of twenty-four months, beginning on the day that the first building
permit is issued, and expiring at the end of the first business day of the
twenty-fifth month thereafter.  During the effective period of the
applicable development impact fee schedule, any building permit issued for
the samesingle-family residential development shall not be subject to any new
or modified development impact fee schedule that increases the total fee due
for that building permit.



   2.   Commercial, Industrial and Multi-family Uses.  On or after the
day that the final approval, as defined in A.R.S. § 9-463.05(T)(4), is
issued for a commercial, industrial or multifamily development, the city
shall provide an applicable development impact fee schedule that shall be in
force for a period of twenty-four months, beginning on the day that final
development approval of a site plan or final subdivision plat is given, and
expiring at the end of the first business day of the twenty-fifth month
thereafter.  During the effective period of the applicable development
impact fee schedule, any building permit issued for the same development
shall not be subject to any new or modified development impact fee schedule
that increases the total fee due for that building permit.



   3.   Other Development.  Any category of development not covered
under Subsections C.1 and C.2 of this section shall pay development impact
fees according to the fee schedule that is current at the time of collection,
as specified in subsection A of this section.



   4.   Changes to Site Plans and Subdivision Plats.  Notwithstanding
the other requirements of Subsection C, if changes are made to a
development's final site plan or subdivision plat that will increase the
number of service units after the issuance of a grandfathered development
impact fee schedule, the city may assess any new or modified development
impact fees against the additional service units.  If the city reduces the
amount of an applicable development impact fee during the period that a
grandfathered development impact fee schedule is in force, the city shall
assess the lower development impact fee.



   D.    Option to Pursue Special Fee Determination.  Where a
development is of a type that does not closely fit within a particular
category of development appearing on an adopted development impact fee
schedule, or where a development has unique characteristics such that the
actual burdens and costs associated with providing necessary public services
to that development will differ substantially from those associated with
other developments in a specified category of development, the city may
require the applicant to provide the city planning and development director,
or authorized designee, with an alternative development impact fee
analysis.  Based on a projection of the actual burdens and costs that will
be associated with the development, the alternative development impact fee
analysis may propose a unique fee for the development, based on the
application of an appropriate service unit factor to be applied to applicable
schedule, or may propose that the development be covered under the
development impact fee schedule governing a different and more analogous
category of development.  The city planning and development director, or
authorized designee, shall review the alternative impact fee analysis and
shall make a determination as to the development impact fee to be charged. 
Such decision shall be appealable pursuant to Section 4.01.140 of this
chapter.  The  city planning and development director, or authorized
designee, may require the applicant to pay an administrative fee, as set
forth in the City Consolidated Fee Schedule, to cover the actual costs of
reviewing the special fee determination application. (Ord. 1397.04.35 § 1,
2015; Ord. 1397.04.34 § 3 (part), 2013)



4.01.120   Development impact fee credits and credit agreements.



   A.   Eligibility of Capital Facility.  All development impact fee
credits must meet the following requirements:



   1.   One of the following is true:



   a.   The capital facility, or the financial contribution toward a
capital facility that will be provided by the developer and for which a
credit will be issued, must be identified in an adopted infrastructure
improvements plan and fee report as a capital facility for which a
development impact fee was assessed; or



   b.   The applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city
that, given the class and type of improvement, the subject capital facility
should have been included in the infrastructure improvements plan in lieu of
a different capital facility that was included in the infrastructure
improvements plan, and for which a development impact fee was assessed.  If
the subject capital facility is determined to be eligible for a credit in
this manner, the city shall amend the infrastructure improvements plan to:



   i.   Include the subject replacement facility; and



   ii.   Delete the capital facility that will be replaced.



   2.   Credits shall not be available for any infrastructure provided
by a developer if the cost of such infrastructure will be repaid to the
developer by the city through another agreement or mechanism.  To the extent
that the developer will be paid or reimbursed by the city for any
contribution, payment, construction, or dedication from any city funding
source, including an agreement to reimburse the developer with future
collected development impact fees pursuant to Section 4.01.130 of this
chapter, any credits claimed by the developer shall be:



   a.   Deducted from any amounts to be paid or reimbursed by the city;
or



   b.   Reduced by the amount of such payment or reimbursement.



   B.   Eligibility of Subject Development.  To be eligible for a
credit, the subject development must be located within the service area of
the eligible capital facility.



   C.   Calculation of Credits.  Credits will be based on that portion
of the costs for an eligible capital facility identified in the adopted
infrastructure improvements plan for which a development fee was assessed
pursuant to the fee report.  If the gross impact fee for a particular
category of necessary public service is adopted at an amount lower than the
full supportable fee identified in the fee report, the amount of any credit
shall be reduced in proportion to the difference between the amount
identified in the fee report and the gross impact fee adopted.  A credit
shall not exceed the actual costs the applicant incurred in providing the
eligible capital facility, nor shall it exceed the gross impact fees payable
for the subject development for that particular category of necessary public
service.



   D.   Allocation of Credits.  Before any credit can be issued to a
subject development (or portion thereof), the credit must be allocated to
that development as follows: 



   1.   The developer and the city must execute a credit agreement
including all of the following:



   a.   The total amount of the credits resulting from provision of an
eligible capital facility.



   b.   The estimated number of SMUs to be served within the subject
development.



   c.   The method by which the credit values will be distributed
within the subject development.



   2.   It is the responsibility of the developer to request allocation
of development impact fee credits through an application for a credit
agreement (which may be part of a development agreement entered into pursuant
to Section 4.01.130 of this chapter).



   3.   If a building permit is issued or a sewer connection is
purchased, and a development impact fee is paid prior to execution of a
credit agreement for the subject development, no credits may be allocated
retroactively to that permit or connection.  Credits may be allocated to any
remaining permits for the subject development in accordance with this chapter.



   4.   If the entity that provides an eligible capital facility sells
or relinquishes a development (or portion thereof) that it owns or controls
prior to execution of a credit agreement or development agreement, credits
resulting from the eligible capital facility will only be allocated to the
development if the entity legally assigns such rights and responsibilities to
its successor(s) in interest for the subject development.



   5.   If multiple entities jointly provide an eligible capital
facility, both entities must enter into a single credit agreement with the
city, and any request for the allocation of credit within the subject
development(s) must be made jointly by the entities that provided the
eligible capital facility.



   6.   Credits may only be reallocated from or within a subject
development with the city's approval of an amendment to an executed credit
agreement, subject to the following conditions:



   a.   The entity that executed the original agreement with the city,
or its legal successor in interest, and the entity that currently controls
the subject development are parties to the request for reallocation.



   b.   The reallocation proposal does not change the value of any
credits already issued for the subject development.



   7.   A credit agreement may authorize the allocation of credits to a
non-contiguous parcel only if all of the following conditions are met:



   a.   The entity that executed the original agreement with the city
or its legal successor in interest, the entity that currently controls the
subject development, and the entity that controls the non-contiguous parcel
are parties to the request for reallocation.



   b.   The reallocation proposal does not change the value of any
credits already issued for the subject development.



   c.   The non-contiguous parcel is in the same service area as that
served by the eligible capital facility.



   d.   The non-contiguous parcel receives a necessary public service
from the eligible capital facility.



   e.   The credit agreement specifically states the value of the
credits to be allocated to each parcel and/or SMU, or establishes a mechanism
for future determination of the credit values.



   f.   The credit agreement does not involve the transfer of credits
to or from any property subject to a development agreement.



   E.   Credit Agreement.  Credits shall only be issued pursuant to a
credit agreement executed in accordance with Subsection D of this section.
The city manager, or his or her authorized designee, is authorized by this
chapter to enter into a credit agreement with the controlling entity of a
subject development, subject to the following:



   1.   The developer requesting the credit agreement shall provide all
information requested by the city to allow it to determine the value of the
credit to be applied.



   2.   An application for a credit agreement shall be submitted to the
city by the developer within one year of the date on which ownership or
control of the capital facility passes to the city.



   3.   The developer shall submit a draft credit agreement to the city
manager, or authorized designee(s), for review in the form provided to the
applicant by the city.  The draft credit agreement shall include, at a
minimum, all of the following information and supporting documentation:



   a.   A legal description and map depicting the location of the
subject development for which credit is being applied.  The map shall depict
the location of the capital facilities that have been or will be provided.



   b.   An estimate of the total SMUs that will be developed within the
subject development depicted on the map and described in the legal
description.



   c.   A list of the capital facilities, associated physical
attributes, and the related costs as stated in the infrastructure
improvements plan.



   d.   Documentation showing the date(s) of acceptance by the city, if
the capital facilities have already been provided.



   e.   The total amount of credit to be applied within the subject
development and the calculations leading to the total amount of credit.



   f.   The credit amount to be applied to each SMU within the subject
development for each category of necessary public services.



   4.   Upon execution of the credit agreement by the city and the
applicant, credits shall be deemed allocated to the subject development. 
The city's determination of the credit to be allocated is final.



   5.   Any amendment to a previously approved credit agreement must be
initiated within two years of the city's final acceptance of the eligible
capital facility for which the amendment is requested.



   6.   Any credit agreement approved as part of a development
agreement shall be amended in accordance with the terms of the development
agreement and Section 4.01.130 of this chapter.



   F.   Issuance of Credits.  Credits allocated pursuant to Subsection
D of this section may be issued and applied toward the gross impact fees due
from a development, subject to the following conditions:



   1.   Credits issued for an eligible capital facility may only be
applied to the development impact fee due for the applicable category of
necessary public services, and may not be applied to any fee due for another
category of necessary public services.



   2.   Credits shall only be issued when the eligible capital facility
from which the credits were derived has been accepted by the city, or when
adequate security for the completion of the eligible capital facility has
been provided in accordance with all terms of an executed development
agreement.



   3.   Where credits have been issued pursuant to Subsection F.2 of
this section, an impact fee due at the time a building permit is issued shall
be reduced by the credit amount stated in or calculated from the executed
credit agreement.  Where credits have not yet been issued, the gross impact
fee shall be paid in full, and a refund of the credit amount shall be due
when the developer demonstrates compliance with Subsection F.2 of this
section in a written request to the city.



   4.   Once issued, credits may not be rescinded or reallocated to
another permit or parcel, except that credits may be released for reuse on
the same subject development if a building permit for which the credits were
issued has expired or been voided and is otherwise eligible for a refund
under Subsection 4.01.150.A.2.a of this chapter.



   5.   Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Section 4.01.120,
credits issued prior to January 1, 2012, may only be used for the subject
development for which they were issued.  Such credits may be transferred to
a new owner of all or part of the subject development in proportion to the
percentage of ownership in the subject development to be held by the new
owner. (Ord. 1397.04.34 § 3 (part), 2013)



4.01.130   Development agreements.



   Development agreements containing provisions regarding development
impact fees, development impact fee credits, and/or disbursement of revenues
from development impact fee accounts shall comply with the following:



   A.   Development Agreement Required.  A development agreement is
required to authorize any of the following:



   1.   To issue credits prior to the city's acceptance of an eligible
capital facility.



   2.   To allocate credits to a parcel that is not contiguous with the
subject development and that does not meet the requirements of  Subsection
4.01.120.D.7 of this chapter.



   3.   To reimburse the developer of an eligible capital facility
using funds from development impact fee accounts.



   4.   To allocate different credit amounts per SMU to different
parcels within a subject development.



   5.   For a single-family residential dwelling unit, to allow
development impact fees to be paid at a later time than the issuance of a
building permit, as provided in this section.



   B.   General Requirements.  All development agreements shall be
prepared and executed in accordance with A.R.S. § 9-500.05 and any
applicable requirements of the City Code.  Except where specifically
modified by this section, all provisions of Section 4.01.120 of this chapter
shall apply to any credit agreement that is authorized as part of a
development agreement.



   C.   Early Credit Issuance.  A development agreement may authorize
the issuance of credits prior to acceptance of an eligible capital facility
by the city when the development agreement specifically states the form and
value of the security (i.e. bond, letter of credit, and the like) to be
provided to the city prior to issuance of any credits.  The city shall
determine the acceptable form and value of the security to be provided.



   D.   Non-Contiguous Credit Allocation.  A development agreement may
authorize the allocation of credits to a non-contiguous parcel only if all of
the following conditions are met:



   1.   The non-contiguous parcel is in the same service area as that
served by the eligible capital facility.



   2.   The non-contiguous parcel receives a necessary public service
from the eligible capital facility.



   3.   The development agreement specifically states the value of the
credits to be allocated to each parcel and/or SMU, or establishes a mechanism
for future determination of the credit values.



   E.   Uneven Credit Allocation.  The development agreement must
specify how credits will be allocated amongst different parcels on a per-SMU
basis, if the credits are not to be allocated evenly.  If the development
agreement is silent on this topic, all credits will be allocated evenly
amongst all parcels on a per-SMU basis.



   F.   Use of Reimbursements.  Funds reimbursed to developers from
impact fee accounts for construction of an eligible capital facility must be
utilized in accordance with applicable law for the use of city funds in
construction or acquisition of capital facilities, including A.R.S. § 34-201
et seq.



   G.   Deferral of Fees.  A development agreement may provide for the
deferral of payment of development impact fees for a residential development
beyond the issuance of a building permit; provided that a development impact
fee may not be paid later than the fifteen days after the issuance of the
certificate of occupancy for that dwelling unit.  The development agreement
shall provide for the value of any deferred development impact fees to be
supported by appropriate security, including a surety bond, letter of credit,
or cash bond.



   H.   Waiver of Fees.  If the city agrees to waive any development
impact fees assessed on development in a development agreement, the city
shall reimburse the appropriate development impact fee account for the amount
that was waived.



   I.   No Obligation.  Nothing in this section obligates the city to
enter into any development agreement or to authorize any type of credit
agreement permitted by this section or chapter. (Ord. 1397.04.34 § 3 (part),
2013)



4.01.140   Appeals.



   A development impact fee determination by city staff may be appealed in
accordance with the following procedures:



   A.   Limited Scope.  An appeal shall be limited to disputes
regarding the calculation of the development impact fees for a specific
development and/or permit and calculation of SMUs for the development.



   B.   Form of Appeal.  An appeal shall be initiated on such written
form as the city may prescribe, and shall be submitted to the director of the
planning and development department.



   C.   Department Action.  The planning and development department
director shall act upon the appeal within thirty calendar days of the filing
of the appeal with the planning and development department, and the applicant
shall be notified of the director's decision in writing.



   D.   Appeal to Manager.  The applicant may further appeal the
decision of the planning and development department director to the city
manager, or his or her authorized designee, who shall be in a more senior
position than the planning and development department director, within
fourteen calendar days of the decision.



   E.   Action by Manager.  The city manager, or his or her authorized
designee, shall act upon the appeal within fourteen calendar days of receipt
of the appeal, and the applicant shall be notified of the city manager or
authorized designee's  decision in writing.



   F.   Final Decision.  The  city manager or authorized designee’s
decision regarding the appeal is final and no further appeals shall be
permitted.



   G.   Fees During Pendency.  Building permits may be issued during
the pendency of an appeal if the applicant (1) pays the full impact fee
calculated by the city at the time the appeal is filed, or (2) provides the
city with financial assurances in the form acceptable to the city manager, or
authorized designee, equal to the full amount of the impact fee calculated by
the city.  Upon final disposition of an appeal, the fee shall be adjusted in
accordance with the decision rendered, and a refund paid if warranted.  If
the appeal is denied by the city manager or his/her authorized designee, and
the applicant has provided the city with financial assurances as set forth in
clause (2) above, the applicant shall deliver the full amount of the impact
fee to the city within ten calendar days of the city manager or designee's
final decision on the appeal.  If the applicant fails to deliver the full
amount of the impact fees when required by this subsection, the city may draw
upon such financial assurance instrument(s) as necessary to recover the full
amount of the impact fees due from the applicant. (Ord. 1397.04.34 § 3
(part), 2013)



4.01.150   Refunds of development impact fees.



   A.   Refunds.  A refund (or partial refund) will be paid to any
current owner of property within the city who submits a written request to
the city and demonstrates that:



   1.   The permit(s) that triggered the collection of the development
impact fee have expired or been voided prior to the commencement of the
development for which the permits were issued, and the development impact
fees collected have not been expended, encumbered, or pledged for the
repayment of financing or debt; or



   2.    The owner of the subject real property or its predecessor in
interest paid a development impact fee for the applicable capital facility on
or after August 1, 2014, and one of the following conditions exists:



   a.   The capital facility designed to serve the subject real
property has been constructed, has the capacity to serve the subject real
property and any development for which there is reserved capacity, and the
service which was to be provided by that capital facility has not been
provided to the subject real property from that capital facility or from any
other infrastructure. 



   b.   After collecting the fee to construct a capital facility, the
city fails to complete construction of the capital facility within the time
period identified in the infrastructure improvements plan, as it may be
amended, and the corresponding service is otherwise unavailable to the
subject real property from that capital facility or any other infrastructure.



   c.   For a category of necessary public services other wastewater
facilities, any part of a development impact fee is not spent within ten
years of the city's receipt of the development impact fee.



   d.   Any part of a development impact fee for wastewater facilities
is not spent within fifteen years of the city's receipt of the development
impact fee.



   e.   The development impact fee was calculated and collected for the
construction cost to provide all or a portion of a specific capital facility
serving the subject real property, and the actual construction costs for the
capital facility are less than the construction costs projected in the
infrastructure improvements plan by a factor of ten percent or more.  In
such event, the current owner of the subject real property shall, upon
request as set forth in this Subsection A, be entitled to a refund for the
difference between the amounts of the development impact fee charged for and
attributable to such construction cost, and the amount the development impact
fee would have been calculated to be if the actual construction cost had been
included in the fee report.  The refund contemplated by this subsection
shall relate only to the costs specific to the construction of the applicable
capital facility, and shall not include any related design, administrative,
or other costs not directly incurred for construction of the capital facility
that are included in the development impact fee as permitted by A.R.S. §
9-463.05.



   B.   Earned Interest.  A refund of a development impact fee shall
include any interest actually earned on the refunded portion of the
development impact fee by the city from the date of collection to the date of
refund.  All refunds shall be made to the record owner of the property at
the time the refund is paid.



   C.   Refund to Government.  If a development impact fee was paid by
a governmental entity, any refund shall be paid to that governmental entity.
(Ord. 1397.04.34 § 3 (part), 2013)



4.01.160   Oversight of development impact fee program.



   A.   Annual Report.  Within ninety days of the end of each fiscal
year, the city shall file with the city clerk an unaudited annual report
accounting for the collection and use of the fees for each service area, and
shall post the report on its website in accordance with A.R.S. § 9-463.05,
Subsections N and O, as amended.



   B.   Biennial Audit.  In addition to the annual report described in
Subsection A of this section, the city shall provide for a biennial,
certified audit of the city's land use assumptions, infrastructure
improvements plan, and development impact fees.



   1.   An audit pursuant to this subsection shall be conducted by one
or more qualified professionals who are not employees or officials of the
city, and who did not prepare the infrastructure improvements plan.



   2.   The audit shall review the collection and expenditures of
development fees for each project in the plan, and provide written comments
describing the amount of development impact fees assessed, collected, and
spent on capital facilities.



   3.   The audit shall describe the level of service in each service
area, and evaluate any inequities in implementing the infrastructure
improvements plan or imposing the development impact fee.



   4.   The city shall post the findings of the audit on the city's
website and shall conduct a public hearing on the audit within sixty days of
the release of the audit to the public.



   5.   For purposes of this section, a “certified audit” shall
mean any audit authenticated by one or more of the qualified professionals
conducting the audit pursuant to Subsection B.1 of this section. (Ord.
1397.04.34 § 3 (part), 2013)



Chapter 4.02
RESERVED



Chapter 4.05
PAYBACK FEES



Sections:



Article I.  Sewer Line Payback Fees.



4.05.010   Main sewer line payback fees.



4.05.020   Thornton Road main sewer line payback.



4.05.030   Peart Road main sewer line payback.



Article I.  Sewer Line Payback Fees.



4.05.010  Main sewer line payback fees.



   In the event that a proposed main sewer line and its ultimate branches
and laterals increase sewer line capacity in a particular area not included
in development impact fees in Casa Grande Municipal Code Section 04.02.060,
the City may enact a sewer line payback fee for its costs in constructing
that sewer line.



(Ord. 1397.04.16 § 2 (part), 2003)



4.05.020  Thornton Road main sewer line payback.



   A.   Definitions. Unless otherwise indicated in the text of this
Section 4.05.020, the following terms as used herein shall have the following
meanings.  Capitalized terms not defined in this Section 4.05.020 shall have
the meaning as set forth in Casa Grande Municipal Code Chapter 13.08, Article
I.  Capitalized terms not defined in the Casa Grande Municipal Code or this
Section 4.05.020 shall have the meanings as set forth herein or the plain and
common meaning, unless the context requires otherwise.



   1.   "Thornton Road Sewer Line" is designed with a maximum capacity
of 1.56 million gallons per day ("MGD") and its location is generally
detailed in Exhibit 1, attached hereto and incorporated herein by this
reference.



   2.   "Inflation Factor" shall mean the quotient of the Engineering
News Road Construction Cost Index (ENR) existing in the month preceding the
issuance of the building permit for the residential or non-residential land
use being connected or serviced by the Thornton Road Sewer Line divided by
the ENR for April 2003. 



   3.   "Construction Cost" shall mean the base cost of $162,014.75 for
the construction of the Thornton Road Sewer Line.



   B.   Collection. The City will collect, along with the building
permit fees, a Thornton Road Payback Fee from all land uses that are served
by and connected to the Thornton Road Sewer Line.



   C.   The residential or non-residential uses that are served by and
connected to the Thornton Road Sewer Line shall pay, at the time of the
City's issuance of a building permit, the Thornton Road Payback Fee.  The
Thornton Road Payback Fee is defined by the equation set forth below.  The
Thornton Road Payback Fee will be determined on the amount of sewer line
capacity each residential or non-residential use will use in increments of
MGD, or portions thereof, based on the ADEQ and City standards existing at
the time of building permit issuance for that particular land use and
adjusted by the then-existing Inflation Factor. 



[(A/1.56 MGD) X  $162,014.75 x Inflation Factor]  = Thornton Road Sewer
Payback fee



where:
A = amount of sewer line capacity use by each residential or non-residential
use in increments of MGD



   D.   City will only receive reimbursement up to a maximum of the
Construction Cost plus Inflation Factor adjustments allowed by this Section
4.05.020.



(Ord. 1397.04.16 § 2 (part), 2003)



4.05.030  Peart Road Main Sewer Line Payback.



   A.   Definitions. Unless otherwise indicated in the text of this
Section 4.05.030, the following terms as used herein shall have the following
meanings.  Capitalized terms not defined in this Section 4.05.030 shall have
the meaning as set forth in Casa Grande Municipal Code Chapter 13.08, Article
I.  Capitalized terms not defined in the Casa Grande Municipal Code or this
Section 4.05.030 shall have the meanings as set forth herein or the plain and
common meaning, unless the context requires otherwise.



   1.   "Peart Road Sewer Line" is designed with a maximum capacity of
2.8 million gallons per day ("MGD") and its location is generally detailed in
Exhibit 1, attached hereto and incorporated herein by this reference.



   2.   "Inflation Factor" shall mean the quotient of the Engineering
News Road Construction Cost Index (ENR) existing in the month preceding the
issuance of the building permit for the residential or non-residential land
use being connected or serviced by the Peart Road Sewer Line divided by the
ENR for April 2003.



   3.   "Construction Cost" shall mean the base cost of $328,025.25 for
the construction of the Peart Road Sewer Line.



   B.   Collection. The City will collect, along with the building
permit fees, a Peart Road Payback Fee from all land uses that are served by
and connected to the Peart Road Sewer Line.



   C.   The residential or non-residential uses that are served by and
connected to the Peart Road Sewer Line shall pay, at the time of the City's
issuance of a building permit, the Peart Road Payback Fee.  The Peart Road
Payback Fee is defined by the equation set forth below.  The Peart Road
Payback Fee will be determined on the amount of sewer line capacity each
residential or non-residential use will use in increments of MGD, or portions
thereof, based on the ADEQ and City standards existing at the time of
building permit issuance for that particular land use and adjusted by the
then-existing Inflation Factor. 



[(A/2.8 MGD) X  $328,025.25 x Inflation Factor]  = Peart Road Sewer Payback
fee



where:



A = amount of sewer line capacity use by each residential or non-residential
use in increments of MGD



   D.   City will only receive reimbursement up to a maximum of the
Construction Cost plus Inflation Factor adjustments allowed by this Section
4.05.030.



(Ord. 1397.04.17 § 1 (part), 2003)



Title 5
BUSINESS TAXES, LICENSES
AND REGULATIONS



Chapters:



5.04   Business Transaction Tax



5.08   Pawnshops, Secondhand Dealers, Junk Collectors and Auction Houses



5.12   Peddlers, Solicitors and Transient Merchants



5.20   Massage Establishments



5.24   Sexually Oriented Businesses



Chapter 5.04
BUSINESS TRANSACTION TAX



Sections:



5.04.010   Tax liability.



5.04.020   Business tax receipt issuance—Authority— Terms and
conditions.



5.04.030   Payment in advance required.



5.04.040   Taxes due when.



5.04.050   Tax schedule.



5.04.060   Exemption from business transaction tax.



5.04.070   Taxes delinquent when—Penalty.



5.04.080   Separate business transaction tax liabilities for separate
locations.



5.04.090   Posting requirements.



5.04.100   Enforcement and administration authority.



5.04.110   Licenses transferable.



5.04.120   Authority to file complaints against violators.



5.04.130   Violation, conviction not to exempt from payment.



5.04.140   Revocation.



5.04.150   Appeal procedure.



5.04.160   Penalties.



5.04.010  Tax liability.



   It is unlawful for any person, whether as principal or agent, either
for himself or any other person, or for any body corporate, or an officer of
any corporation or as a member of any firm or co- partnership, or otherwise,
to commence, practice, transact or carry on any trade, calling, profession,
occupation or business as set out in this chapter, without first having paid
a business transaction tax to the city or without complying with any and all
rules and regulations of such trade, calling, profession, occupation or
business designated in this chapter, or without complying with any and all
regulations of such trades, callings, professions, occupations or businesses
contained in this chapter, shall constitute a separate violation of this
chapter for each and every day that such trade, calling, profession,
occupation or business is practiced, transacted or carried on. The issuance
of a business tax receipt is not to be deemed as evidence or proof that the
recipient has complied with the provisions of this chapter or other
provisions of this code, nor shall it stop the prosecution by the city for
any violation of this code. A person who has less than three apartments,
houses, trailer spaces, or other lodging spaces rented, leased or licensed or
available for rent, lease, or license within the state and no units of
commercial property for rent, lease, or license within the state, is not
deemed to be in the rental business, and is therefore exempt from the tax
imposed by this section on such income. However, a person who has one or more
units of commercial property is subject to the tax imposed by this section on
all such lodging spaces and commercial units rental, lease, or license income
even though said person may have fewer than three lodging spaces. In addition
to the above requirements, any person or entity who has an Arizona sales tax
number and who pays sales tax to the city, is required to pay a business
transaction tax pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 1397.05.4 § 2, 1994)



5.04.020  Business tax receipt issuance—Authority— Terms and conditions.



   A.   It shall be the duty of the finance director, or such other
person to whom may be assigned the duty, to prepare and issue a business tax
receipt under this chapter for every person, firm, company or corporation
liable to pay a business transaction tax.



   B.   In no case shall any mistake of the clerk prevent or prejudice
the collection for the city of what shall actually be due from anyone
carrying on a trade, calling, profession, occupation or business, subject to
the business transaction tax under this chapter.



   C.   No business tax receipt shall be issued to a person, firm or
corporation which has a past-due balance of fees assessed pursuant to
Chapters 8.08, 8.12 and 13.08 of this code.



   D.   The finance director may, in his discretion, issue a business
tax receipt when he believes it will assist the city in the collection of a
past due account.



(Ord. 1397.05.3 § 2 (part), 1993)



5.04.030  Payment in advance required.



   All taxes required by this chapter shall be paid in advance to the
finance director at the city hall, or in such manner as may be specified by
the finance director. The business transaction tax paid in advance shall not
be refunded once the business transaction tax application has begun to be
processed by the city.



(Ord. 1397.05.3 § 2 (part), 1993)



5.04.040  Taxes due when.



   A.   The daily business transaction tax shall be due and payable
each day, in advance.



   B.   The annual business transaction tax provided for shall be due
and payable on the first day of January of each year.



   C.   There shall be no proration of daily business transaction tax.



   D.   Annual business transaction taxes prescribed by this chapter
shall be diminished by one-twelfth of the full annual business transaction
tax for each month of the tax period which has fully lapsed at the date of
the business transaction tax application; provided, however, annual business
transaction taxes shall not be prorated to an amount less than one-half and
full annual business transaction tax.



(Ord. 1397.05.3 § 2 (part), 1993)



5.04.050  Tax schedule.



   The business transaction tax for businesses, occupations, trades,
callings and professions is hereby established in the City Consolidated Fee
Schedule pursuant to Section 1.04.170, and shall be paid by all persons who
shall practice, transact, carry on or engage in such businesses, occupations,
trades, callings and professions. The business transaction tax set out
therein shall be collected annually during the month of January, unless
otherwise specified.



   Any individual, group or company can only be issued one temporary
business tax receipt per calendar year; however, that issuance can be for any
number of days. If additional dates are required to conduct business in the
city, the individual, group or company shall be required to get an annual
license.



(Ord. 1397.02.10 § 2, 2008; Ord. 1397.05.3 § 2 (part), 1993)



5.04.060  Exemption from business transaction tax.



   A.   The finance director may, upon terms and conditions as he/she
deems advisable, waive any fee specified in this chapter for any event or
project sponsored by a local nonprofit, charitable, or religious organization
where the entire proceeds of such event or project are to be used for
charitable purposes.



   B.   The finance director shall have the authority to waive the fees
specified in this chapter for any event sponsored by a local merchant,
organization, or group, who may not qualify as nonprofit, but where the cost
of processing the business transaction tax application(s) exceeds the
potential tax generated.



(Ord. 1397.05.3 § 2 (part), 1993)



5.04.070  Taxes delinquent when—Penalty.



   When any annual business transaction tax provided for in this chapter
becomes due and unpaid for twenty days, and when the daily tax provided for
in this chapter becomes due and unpaid, the same shall become delinquent, and
the finance director shall, on the day the same becomes delinquent, add
thereto an amount equal to ten percent of the total amount of a tax unpaid
and delinquent as a penalty and no business tax receipt shall be issued by
the finance director until all taxes that are delinquent and the penalties
added thereto have been paid in full.



(Ord. 1397.05.3 § 2 (part), 1993)



5.04.080  Separate business transaction tax liabilities for separate
locations.



   A separate business transaction tax must be paid for each branch
establishment or separate place of business in which any trade, calling,
profession, occupation or business is practiced, transacted or carried on,
and for each trade, calling, profession, occupation or business practiced, or
transacted. When there is a question whether a company or individual needs to
pay additional business transaction taxes and the code is unclear, the
company or individual will pay the lesser rather than the higher tax.



(Ord. 1397.05.3 § 2 (part), 1993)



5.04.090  Posting requirements.



   Every person, firm, company or corporation having a business tax
receipt under the provisions of this chapter, and carrying on a trade,
calling, profession, occupation or business at a fixed place of business
shall keep such receipt posted and exhibited, while in force, in some
conspicuous part of the place of business. Every person having such a
business tax receipt and not having a fixed place of business shall carry
such license with him at all times while carrying on that trade, calling,
profession, occupation or business for which the same was granted. Every
person, firm, company or corporation having a business tax receipt under the
provisions of this chapter shall produce and exhibit the same, when applying
for a renewal thereof, and whenever requested to do so by any police officer,
the finance director or by any other officer authorized to issue, inspect or
collect taxes.



(Ord. 1397.05.3 § 2 (part), 1993)



5.04.100  Enforcement and administration authority.



   The finance director and police officers shall have and exercise the
power to enter free of charge, at any time, any place of business for which a
license is required by this chapter and so demand the exhibition of the
business tax receipt for the current term from any person engaged or employed
in the transaction of such business. Denial of right of entry by the owner or
his agents or employees shall be a petty offense. Police officers may make
arrests in the discharge of their duties for violations of any provisions of
this chapter.



(Ord. 1397.05.3 § 2 (part), 1993)



5.04.110  Licenses transferable.



   All business tax receipts issued hereunder are transferable and
assignable. The finance director will upon receipt of a transfer fee of five
dollars, transfer or assign any business tax receipt to any other person by
written endorsement thereon.



(Ord. 1397.05.3 § 2 (part), 1993)



5.04.120  Authority to file complaints against violators.



   It shall be the duty of the finance director or others to whom the duty
is given, to cause complaints to be filed against all persons violating any
of the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 1397.05.3 § 2 (part), 1993)



5.04.130  Violation, conviction not to exempt from payment.



   The conviction and punishment of any person for transacting any trade,
calling, profession, occupation or business without a business tax receipt
shall not excuse or exempt such person from the payment of any tax due or
unpaid at the time of such conviction.



(Ord. 1397.05.3 § 2 (part), 1993)



5.04.140  Revocation.



   Any business tax receipt issued under the provisions of this chapter
may be revoked for violation of the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 1397.05.3 § 2 (part), 1993)



5.04.150  Appeal procedure.



   Any person aggrieved by any decision of the finance director, or other
person to whom it is delegated the administration of this chapter with
respect to the issuance or refusal to issue any business tax receipt may
appeal to the city council by filing with the finance director a notice of
appeal. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing such
appeal. The finance director shall give notice to such person of the time and
place of hearing by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United
States Post Office at Casa Grande, Arizona, postage prepaid, addressed to
such person at his last known address.



(Ord. 1397.05.3 § 2 (part), 1993)



5.04.160  Penalties.



   Any person, firm, company or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter is guilty of a petty offense and, if no other
punishment is provided, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not
exceeding one hundred dollars. Each day a violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 1397.05.3 § 2 (part), 1993)



Chapter 5.08
PAWNSHOPS, SECONDHAND DEALERS, JUNK COLLECTORS AND AUCTION HOUSES



Sections:



5.08.010   Definitions.



5.08.020   Report to chief of police.



5.08.030   Report to be in English.



5.08.040   Report filing requirements—Failure to meet—Penalty.



5.08.050   Revocation of license.



5.08.010  Definitions.



   For the purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply:



   “Auction house” means any establishment in which is carried on the
business of auctioning articles for sale by public outcry and where such
items offered for auction are sold immediately to the highest bidder.



   “Junk collector” means a person not having a fixed place of
business in the city who goes from house to house and from place to place,
gathering, collecting, buying, selling or otherwise dealing in any old rags,
sacks, bottles, cans, papers, metals or other articles commonly known as junk.



   “Pawnbroker” means a person engaged in conducting, managing or
carrying on the business of pawnbroking or the business of loaning money for
himself or for any other person, receiving as security of the repayment
thereof pawns, or pledges of personal property, or the business of purchasing
personal property and reselling or agreeing to resell such article to
vendors, their personal representatives or their assignees, at prices agreed
upon at or before the time of such purchase, whether such business be the
principal or sole business so carried on, managed or conducted, or merely
incidental to, in connection with or a branch or department of some other
business or businesses.



   “Pawnshop” means any room, store or place in which such business is
engaged in, carried on or conducted.



   “Secondhand dealer” means a person engaged in, conducting, managing
or carrying on the business of buying, selling, or otherwise dealing in
secondhand goods, wares or merchandise or articles, whether such business be
the principal or sole business so carried on, managed or conducted, or be
merely incidental to, in connection with a branch or department of some other
business or businesses.



(Prior code § 10-4-1)



5.08.020  Report to chief of police required.



   Every person licensed to engage in the business of auction house, junk
dealer, pawnshop or secondhand dealer shall be required to make out and
deliver to the chief of police, within twenty-four hours after receipt, a
full, true and complete report of all goods, wares, merchandise or articles
received on deposit, in pawn, pledge, trade or exchange, or by purchase. Such
report shall show the hour of the day and the date when such articles were
received and shall show the signature of the seller and his name and address,
as nearly as the same are known or can be ascertained by the auction house,
junk dealer, pawnshop, or secondhand dealer, which description shall reveal
the dress, sex, approximate height, age, complexion, color of hair, and any
distinguishing marks of such person. Such report filed by the auction house,
junk dealer, pawnshop, or secondhand dealer shall show the number of the pawn
ticket, if any is given, the amount loaned for the article or the amount paid
therefor, the quantity or number purchased, and a brief description thereof.



(Prior code § 10-4-2)



5.08.030  Report to be in English.



   All reports required by the provisions of this chapter, made out and
delivered to the chief of police, shall be written or printed in the English
language in a clear and legible manner.



(Prior code § 10-4-3)



5.08.040  Report filing requirements—Failure to meet—Penalty.



   A.   It is unlawful for any pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, junk
dealer or junk collector to deface, alter, change or destroy, part with,
conceal, give away, sell or dispose of any goods, wares, merchandise or
article before or until one week after making out and delivering to the chief
of police the report hereinabove required in accordance with the provisions
herein stated. Special permission to sell in less than seven days may be
obtained upon personal inspection and written permission of the chief of
police.



   B.   Each failure, neglect or refusal to make out and deliver to the
chief of police the report required herein, within the time required, and
each defacement, alteration, change, destruction, parting with, concealing,
gift, sale or disposition of any goods, wares, merchandise or article before
or until one week after the making out and delivery of such report shall
constitute a violation of this chapter.



(Prior code § 10-4-4)



5.08.050  Revocation of license.



   The business license of any person licensed under this chapter may be
revoked by the council for any violation of this chapter.



(Prior code § 10-4-5)



Chapter 5.12
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS



Sections:



5.12.010   License required.



5.12.020   Definitions.



5.12.030   Exemptions.



5.12.040   Compliance required—Terms and conditions.



5.12.050   Application requirements—Individual.



5.12.060   Application requirements—Corporate or firm.



5.12.070   License nontransferable.



5.12.080   Investigation prior to issuance or denial of
license—Appeal—Records.



5.12.090   Application requirements—Charitable organizations.



5.12.100   License fees.



5.12.110   Bond required prior to issuance.



5.12.120   Posting requirements.



5.12.130   Location regulated.



5.12.140   Undue noise prohibited.



5.12.150   Administration and enforcement authority.



5.12.160   Revocation of license when.



5.12.170   Violation.



5.12.010  License required.



   It is unlawful for any peddler, solicitor, canvasser, transient
merchant or itinerant vendor, as the same are defined in this chapter, to
engage in such business within the corporate limits of the city without first
obtaining a license therefor in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter and all other applicable city regulations.



(Ord. 1309 §§ 1 (part), 2 (part), 1990)



5.12.020  Definitions.



   In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:



   “Canvasser” or “solicitor” means any person, corporate or
individual, or firm, who travels, or whose agents travel, either by foot,
wagon, automobile, motor truck or any other type of conveyance, from place to
place, from house to house, from street to street or business to business,
taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise,
edible foodstuffs, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future
delivery, or for the services to be furnished or performed in the future.



   “Clerk” means the finance director or his designee.



   “Peddler” means any person, individual or corporate, or firm, who
travels, or whose agents travel, by foot, wagon, automobile or any other type
of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, from street to
street or business to business, carrying provisions, offering and exposing
the same for sale or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers or
who, without traveling from place to place, shall sell or offer the same from
a wagon, automotive vehicle, railroad car or other conveyance.



   “Transient merchant,” “itinerant merchant” or “itinerant
vendor” means any person, corporate or individual, or firm, whether owner
or otherwise, who engages, or whose agents engage, in a temporary business of
selling and delivering goods, wares, merchandise, edible foodstuffs or
provisions, within the city, and who in furtherance of such purpose, hires,
leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, tent,
railroad boxcar, boat, public room in a hotel, lodginghouse, apartment, shop,
or any street, alley or other place within the city for the exhibition and
sale of such goods, wares, merchandise and edible foodstuffs, either
privately or at public auction. The person or firm so engaged shall not be
relieved from complying with the provisions of this chapter merely by reason
of associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or
auctioneer or by conducting such transient business in connection with, as
part of, or in the name of any such local dealer, trader, merchant or
auctioneer.



(Ord. 1309 §§ 1 (part), 2 (part), 1990)



5.12.030  Exemptions.



   A.   The terms of this chapter do not include the acts of newsboys,
persons selling personal property at wholesale to dealers in such articles,
nor to students on a school class project, nor to acts of merchants or their
employees in delivering goods in the regular course of business. The
producers of food products from agricultural lands, farms and gardens are
exempt from the provisions of this chapter when selling or disposing of their
products. Nothing contained in this chapter prohibits any sale required by
statute or by order of any court or prevents any person from conducting a
bona fide auction sale pursuant to law.



   B.   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to those
established merchants or businesses maintaining establishments in this city
and whom have properly filed and paid all city sales taxes on their business
activities conducted within the city over the past ninety days. These
businesses shall obtain a peddler's license, at no charge, to conduct those
activities defined in this chapter.



(Ord. 1309 §§ 1 (part), 2 (part), 1990)



5.12.040  Compliance required—Terms and conditions.



   All canvassers, solicitors and peddlers as defined in this chapter,
must comply with all provisions of this chapter. All transient merchants,
itinerant merchants or itinerant vendors must comply with all provisions of
this chapter except for subsections 5.12.050(G), (H), and (I) and
5.12.060(F)(1), (2), and (3). This would exempt these specific businesses
from having to provide fingerprints, photographs and character statements in
obtaining a peddlers license.



(Ord. 1309 §§ 1 (part), 2 (part), 1990)



5.12.050  Application requirements—Individual.



   Individual applicants for the permit and license under this chapter
must comply with the licensing requirements of Chapters 5.04 and 3.08 of this
code, as well as this chapter. An applicant shall supply the following
information required by Chapter 5.04:



   A.   Name and description of the applicant; date of birth; social
security number;



   B.   Address (legal and local); state sales tax number;



   C.   A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods
to be sold;



   D.   If employed, the name and address of the employer, together
with evidence establishing the exact relationship;



   E.   The length of time for which the right to do business is
desired;



   F.   If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together
with license number or other means of identification;



   G.   A photograph of the applicant taken within sixty days
immediately prior to the date of filing of the application, which picture
shall be approximately two inches by two inches, showing the head and
shoulders of the applicant in a clear distinguishing manner;



   H.   The fingerprints of the applicant and the names of at least two
reliable citizens of the city who will certify as to the applicant's good
character and business responsibility, or, in lieu of the names of
references, any other available evidence as to the good character and
business responsibility of the applicant as will enable an investigator to
properly evaluate such character and business responsibility;



   I.   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been
convicted of any crime, misdemeanor (except minor traffic violations) or
violation of any municipal laws, the nature of the offense and the punishment
or penalty assessed therefor;



   J.   Applicants proposing to sell edible foodstuffs shall file with
the application a statement by a reputable physician of the city, dated not
more ten days prior to the submission of the application, certifying the
applicant to be free of infectious, contagious or communicable disease, or,
in lieu thereof, a Pinal County health card;



   K.   Applicant must provide an estimate of the gross sales value, in
dollars, of the applicant's goods and services offered or made available for
sale within this city. Gross sales value may be defined as the total sales
value of all of the inventory offered for sale within this city.



(Ord. 1309 §§ 1 (part), 2 (part), 1990)



5.12.060  Application requirements—Corporate or firm.



   Corporate or firm applicants, for the permit and license under this
chapter, must comply with the licensing agreements of Chapters 5.04 and 3.08,
as well as this chapter. An applicant shall supply the following information
to the clerk, in addition to the information required in Chapter 5.04:



   A.   Name of applicant; date of birth; social security number;



   B.   Address (legal and local); state sales tax number;



   C.   A brief description of the nature of business and the goods,
etc., to be sold;



   D.   The length of time for which the right to do business is
desired;



   E.   If vehicles are to be used, the quantity and description of
same, together with the license numbers or other means of identification;



   F.   A list of all of the agents or representatives who will be
operating within the city, including their addresses. In this connection,
such firm or corporation shall furnish at the time of application the
following information and material pertaining to such representatives or
agents:



   1.   A photograph of each agent or representative taken within sixty
days immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application, which
picture shall be approximately two inches by two inches, showing the head and
shoulders of the agent or representative in a clear and distinguishing manner,



   2.   The fingerprints of each agent or representative and the names
of at least two reliable citizens of the city who will certify as to each
person's good character and business responsibility or, in lieu of the names
of references, any other available evidence as to the good character and
business responsibility of the agents or representatives concerned as will
enable an investigator to properly evaluate such character, and business
responsibility,



   3.   A statement as to whether each agent or representative has been
convicted of any crime, misdemeanor (except minor traffic violations), or
violation of any municipal laws, the nature of the offense and the punishment
or penalty assessed therefor,



   4.   Applicants proposing to sell foodstuffs shall file with the
application a statement by a reputable physician of the city, dated not more
than ten days prior to the submission of the application, certifying the
applicant to be free of infectious, contagious or communicable disease or, in
lieu thereof, a Pinal County health card,



   5.   Applicant must provide an estimate of the gross sales value, in
dollars, of the applicant's goods and services offered or made available for
sale within this city. Gross sales value may be defined as the total sales
value of all of the inventory offered for sale within this city.



(Ord. 1309 §§ 1 (part), 2 (part), 1990)



5.12.070  License nontransferable.



   No license issued hereunder shall be transferable, but corporate or
firm licenses may change, substitute or alter the list of their agents or
representatives furnished to the clerk at any time; provided, however, that
for each newly named agent or representative on such list, the information
and material required in subsection 5.12.060(F) shall be furnished therewith.



(Ord. 1309 §§ 1 (part), 2 (part), 1990)



5.12.080  Investigation prior to issuance or denial of
license—Appeal—Records.



   Upon receipt of the application, the city shall cause the investigation
of the person's business responsibility or moral character to be made as
deemed necessary for the protection of the public good. The investigation by
the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be completed within
fifteen days after the applicant has given the required information. If, as a
result of the investigation, the applicant's or his agents' or
representatives' business responsibility and character are found to be
unsatisfactory, the application shall be denied. Any applicant so denied, may
appeal the decision to the city manager. If, as a result of the
investigation, the character and business reputation appear to be
satisfactory, the clerk shall so certify in writing, and a license shall be
issued by the clerk. The clerk shall keep a full record in his office of all
licenses issued. Such license shall contain the number of the license, the
date the same is issued, the nature of the business authorized to be carried
on, the amount of the license fee paid, the expiration date of the license,
the place where the business may be carried on under the license and the name
of the person authorized to carry on the same.



(Ord. 1309 §§ 1 (part), 2 (part), 1990)



5.12.090  Application requirements—Charitable organizations.



   A.   Any organization, society, association or corporation desiring
to solicit or have solicited in its name money, donations of money or
property or financial assistance of any kind or desiring to sell or
distribute any item of literature or merchandise to persons other than
members of the organization upon the streets, in office or business
buildings, by house to house canvass or in public places for a charitable,
religious, patriotic or philanthropic purpose exclusively shall be exempt
from the provisions of this chapter; provided, there is filed a sworn
application in writing on a form to be furnished by the clerk which shall
give the following information:



   1.   Name and purpose of the cause for which the permit is sought;



   2.   Names and addresses of the officers and directors of the
organization;



   3.   Period during which the solicitation is to be carried on;



   4.   Whether or not any commission, fees, wages or emoluments are to
be expended in connection with the solicitation and the amount thereof.



   B.   Upon being satisfied that the organization, association or
corporation is a religious, charitable, patriotic or philanthropic
organization, the clerk shall issue a permit without charge to the
organization, association or corporation to solicit in the city. The
organization, association or corporation shall furnish all of its members,
agents or representatives conducting solicitations identification cards
stating the name of the organization, name of the agent and purpose of
solicitation.



(Ord. 1309 §§ 1 (part), 2 (part), 1990)



5.12.100  License fees.



   The license fees shall be paid at the time of issuance of the license.
The license fees are hereby established in the City Consolidated Fee Schedule
pursuant to Section 1.04.170.



(Ord. 1397.02.10 § 3, 2008: Ord. 1309 §§ 1 (part), 2 (part), 1990)



5.12.110  Bond required prior to issuance.



   A.   Before any license, as provided herein, shall be issued for
engaging in the business of canvasser or solicitor, peddler, transient or
itinerant merchant, as defined in this chapter, the applicant shall file with
the clerk a bond running to the city the penal sum of the greater of five
hundred dollars or ten percent of the estimated gross sales value, executed
by the applicant as principal and at least one surety upon which service of
process may be made in the state. The bond, to be approved by the city, is to
be subject to the condition that the applicant, agents or representatives
shall comply fully with all of the provisions of the laws of the city and the
state statutes regulating and concerning the business of the peddler
regarding sales taxes, business license fees, and other city fees required of
the peddler, and will pay all judgments rendered against the applicant or
agents or the name of the city to recover city sales taxes, city business
license fees, and other city fees required of the peddler. The bond shall be
approved by the city both as to form and as to the responsibility of sureties
thereon.



   B.   The bond shall remain in full force and effect throughout the
period of time such licensee shall be conducting his business in this city
or, upon thirty days' written notice to the city, the cancellation of the
bond by the sureties thereof. Upon the cancellation, the licensee shall have
ten days from the date of the cancellation within which to obtain a new bond
of like kind and quality. Should the applicant fail to procure the new bond,
his license shall be deemed void as of the day listed by the clerk. Nothing,
however, contained herein shall be construed as preventing the applicant from
re-applying for a new license at a later time. If in the judgment of the
clerk, under guidelines established by the finance director, the requirements
and obligations of this chapter will be met without requiring an applicant to
comply with this section, the clerk may indicate upon the application that
the applicant is exempted from complying with Section 5.12.150 in which event
the applicant will not be required to comply with this section.



(Ord. 1309 §§ 1 (part), 2 (part), 1990)



5.12.120  Posting requirements.



   The license issued to the individual or corporate licensees hereunder
shall be posted in a conspicuous place if the licenses are using a vehicle or
building. The clerk shall issue an identification card to each individual
licensee having upon it the pertinent information contained in the license.
Agents and representatives of corporate and firm applicants shall be issued
similar identification cards. All the cards shall be shown upon request.



(Ord. 1309 §§ 1 (part), 2 (part), 1990)



5.12.130  Location regulated.



   No licensee hereunder shall have any exclusive right to any location in
the public street, nor shall any licensee be permitted a stationary location
(except as may be permitted with a temporary use permit), nor shall he
transact business within five hundred feet of a public school (except as may
be permitted with a temporary use permit), nor shall he be permitted to
operate in any congested area where his operations might impede or
inconvenience the public. For the purpose of this chapter, the judgment of a
police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to
whether the area is congested or the public impeded or inconvenienced.



(Ord. 1309 §§ 1 (part), 2 (part), 1990)



5.12.140  Undue noise prohibited.



   No licensee nor any person in his behalf shall shout, make any outcry,
blow a horn, ring a bell or use any sound device, including any loud-speaking
radio or sound-amplifying system, upon any of the streets, alleys, parks or
other public places of the city or upon any private premises in the city
where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom to be
capable of being plainly heard upon the public thoroughfares for the purpose
of attracting attention to any goods, wares or merchandise which such
licensee proposes to sell without first having obtained a noise permit, in
addition to the required peddler license. Their permit must be obtained at
the time of application for a peddler's license.



(Ord. 1309 §§ 1 (part), 2 (part), 1990)



5.12.150  Administration and enforcement authority.



   A.   It shall be the duty of any police officer of the city or any
other designated city employee to enforce this chapter. The chief of police
shall report to the clerk all convictions for violation of this chapter, and
the clerk shall maintain a record for each license issued and record the
reports of violations therein.



   B.   Any person, firm, company or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter is guilty of a petty offense and, if no other
punishment is provided, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not exceeding
one hundred dollars. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.



(Ord. 1309 §§ 1 (part), 2 (part), 1990)



5.12.160  Revocation of license when.



   Permits and licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be
revoked by the clerk after notice and hearing for any of the following causes:



   A.   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements contained in the
application for license;



   B.   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in the course
of carrying on his business;



   C.   Any violation of this chapter;



   D.   Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude;



   E.   Conducting business in an unlawful manner or in such manner as
to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to public
health, safety or general welfare of the public.



(Ord. 1309 §§ 1 (part), 2 (part), 1990)



5.12.170  Violation.



   It is unlawful for any peddler, solicitor, canvasser or transient
merchant, their agents or representative, to come upon any premises whereon a
sign bearing the words “no peddlers” or “no canvassers” or “no
solicitors” or any combination of such terms or terms similar thereto is
exposed to public view or to remain on any whether such premises are posted
as specified above or not.



(Ord. 1309 §§ 1 (part), 2 (part), 1990)



Chapter 5.20
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS



Sections:



5.20.010   Purpose of provisions.



5.20.020   Definitions.



5.20.030   Exemptions.



5.20.040   License required.



5.20.050   License application requirements.



5.20.060   License—Investigation prior to issuance.



5.20.070   Trainee licensing requirements.



5.20.080   Denial of license.



5.20.090   License null and void when.



5.20.100   Revocation or suspension of license.



5.20.110   Home massage—Terms and conditions.



5.20.120   Restrictions on giving massages.



5.20.130   Penalties.



5.20.140   Conformance requirements.



5.20.150   Appeal procedure.



5.20.010  Purpose of provisions.



   It is intended that the provisions of this chapter shall operate to so
regulate the operation of massage establishments and the conduct of massage
therapists, as those terms are defined in this chapter, that they may serve
the legitimate health and physical massage needs of the residents of the
community. It is further intended that those establishments and individuals
be so regulated as to provide their services in compliance with minimal
standards of safety, hygiene and moral decency, to the end that the health,
welfare and morals of this community may be maintained.



(Ord. 536.6 § 1 (part), 1991; prior code § 10-6-1)



5.20.020  Definitions.



   In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:



   “Massage establishment” means any place of business or
establishment wherein any of the subjects or methods of treatment listed in
the definition of “massage therapist” in this section are administered,
practiced or used, or from which is dispatched a person for the purpose of
administering, practicing or using any of the subjects or methods of
treatment listed in the definition of “massage therapist” in this section.



   “Massage therapist” means a person who has studied the underlying
principles of anatomy and physiology, including the theory of massage, its
indications and contra-indications and who practices or administers any of
the following named subjects and methods of treatment at any location in the
city: oil rubs; alcohol rubs; salt glows; hot or cold packs; tub, shower, or
cabinet baths; colon irrigation; and procedures upon the external parts of
the body by hand or by any electrical, mechanical, or vibratory apparatus,
including stroking, friction, kneading, rolling, vibrating, cupping,
pettrasage, rubbing, effleurage, and tapotement.



   “Recognized school of massage” means any institution of learning
which has for its purpose the teaching of the theory, method and work of
massage operators, which institution requires a resident course of study of
not less than one thousand hours before a student shall be furnished with a
diploma or certificate of graduation therefrom, showing the successful
completion of such course of study or learning. If located within the state,
such institution shall be licensed by the State Board of Private Technical
and Business Schools.



(Ord. 536.6 § 1 (part), 1991; prior code § 10-6-2)



5.20.030  Exemptions.



   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:



   1.   Persons authorized by the laws of this state to practice
medicine, osteopathy, chiropractic, naturopathy or podiatry;



   2.   Registered nurses, licensed practical nurses or technicians,
when acting under the supervision of a licensed physician or osteopath;



   3.   Persons employed or acting as trainers for any bona fide
amateur, semiprofessional or professional athlete or athletic team;



   4.   Persons authorized by the laws of this state as barbers or
cosmetologists provided their activity is limited to the head, face or neck;



   5.   Registered physical therapists duly licensed by the state of
Arizona.



   B.   Any exemption granted in this section is effective only to the
extent that the bona fide practice of the business profession of the person
exempted from overlaps into the field comprehended by this chapter, and
exemptions granted herein are solely for those activities which are performed
in the course of the bona fide practice of the business or profession of the
person exempted.



(Prior code § 10-6-14)



5.20.040  License required.



   A.   It is unlawful for any person to practice or administer any
subject or method of treatment listed in paragraph two of Section 5.20.020,
whether for a fee or gratuity, without first obtaining and maintaining in
effect a massage therapist license as required by this chapter and paying the
required business license fee.



   B.   It is unlawful for any person, association, firm or corporation
to operate, own, carry on, or permit to be operated, owned, conducted, or
carried on any massage establishment without first obtaining and maintaining
in effect a massage establishment license as required by this chapter and
paying the required business license fee.



(Ord. 536.6 § 1 (part), 1991; prior code § 10-6-3)



5.20.050  License application requirements.



   A.   Any person, association, firm, or corporation desiring to
obtain a massage establishment license or massage therapist license shall
make application in person to the city clerk who shall refer each such
application to the chief of police for appropriate investigation. A person
desiring licenses authorizing him to perform the activities of a massage
therapist and, in addition thereto, to conduct or operate a massage
establishment shall submit two separate applications.



   B.   The application for a massage establishment license shall be in
writing, signed by the applicant or applicants, or, if the application is in
the name of a corporation, the signature of each officer of the corporation,
and shall set forth:



   1.   The full name, address and social security number of the
applicant;



   2.   The full name of the business and the address of the premises
for which the application is being made;



   3.   A statement that the applicant is of good moral character;



   4.   A statement that the contents of the application are true;



   5.   Proof that the applicant is an adult;



   6.   The type of business entity such as sole proprietorship,
partnership or corporation and, in the cases of a corporation, the names and
addresses of all officers, directors and stockholders of the corporation;



   7.   The name and address of the owner of the building where such
massage business will be located;



   8.   Certified copies of any lease or rental agreements governing
the applicant's rights in the building;



   9.   Each residence address of officers for the ten years next
preceding the date of the application.



   C.   All information required under the terms of subsection B of
this section for the applicant shall also be provided for every person who,
directly or indirectly, has any right to participate in the management or
control of the business to be conducted at the premises of the proposed
massage establishment.



   D.   The application for a massage therapist license shall be
presented in person by the applicant to the city clerk, shall be in writing,
signed by the applicant, and shall set forth:



   1.   The full name, address, age and social security number of the
applicant;



   2.   A statement that the applicant is of good moral character;



   3.   Proof that applicant is an adult;



   4.   A list of all training in massage that the applicant has
received;



   5.   A statement that the contents of the application are true;



   6.   Each residence address of applicant for the ten years next
preceding the date of application.



(Ord. 536.6 § 1 (part), 1991; prior code § 10-6-4)



5.20.060  License—Investigation prior to issuance.



   The police department shall have a reasonable time in which to
investigate the application and the background of each applicant. Based on
the investigation, the police department shall recommend to the city clerk
approval or denial of the license. If the recommendation is for denial, the
grounds upon which the recommendation is made shall be set forth in writing.



(Prior code § 10-6-5)



5.20.070  Trainee licensing requirements.



   A.   No massage therapist license shall be issued if the applicant
fails to furnish a diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized
school of massage.



   B.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section,
a trainee massage therapist license may be issued if the applicant has
furnished written proof that he is enrolled in a recognized school of massage
and has completed one hundred fifty hours of the required course of study.
The license shall expire six months after issuance and may at that time, or
at any time prior to expiration, be converted to that of a regular massage
therapist upon furnishing a diploma or certificate of graduation from a
recognized school of massage. No additional cost shall be borne by the
applicant for such conversion.



(Ord. 536.6 § 1 (part), 1991; prior code § 10-6-6)



5.20.080  Denial of license.



   A.   No massage establishment license or massage therapist license
shall be issued or renewed if the applicant has been convicted within the
last five years of any felony or other offense involving moral turpitude, if
the applicant is addicted to dangerous or narcotic drugs, or makes excessive
use of alcohol, or if the application was deliberately falsified.



   B.   The city clerk may refuse to issue or renew a massage
establishment license or massage therapist license if the applicant has been
convicted of any offense involving prostitution, of any offense involving
indecent exposure or pornography, of any offense involving abortion, child
molesting, lewd and lascivious acts, as enumerated in this code and as
defined in the Arizona Revised Statutes, sodomy or forcible rape, or of any
felony offense involving dangerous or narcotic drugs.



(Ord. 536.6 § 1 (part), 1991; prior code § 10-6-7)



5.20.090  License null and void when.



   Upon the sale or transfer of any interest in a massage establishment,
the license therefor shall forthwith become null and void. A new application
shall be made by any person, association, firm or corporation desiring to own
or operate the establishment. The provisions of Section 5.20.050 shall apply
to any person, association, firm or corporation applying for a massage
establishment license for the premises previously used as such establishment.



(Prior code § 10-6-8)



5.20.100  Revocation or suspension of license.



   A.   The license of a massage therapist or of a massage
establishment may be revoked or suspended, or the issuance or renewal thereof
denied, upon any one of the following grounds:



   1.   That the licensee is guilty of fraud in conducting the business
of massage therapist or massage establishment, or of fraud or deceit in
obtaining a license to conduct such business;



   2.   That the licensee has been convicted in a court of competent
jurisdiction of a felony or of any offense involving prostitution, homosexual
behavior, indecent exposure, pornography or lewd and lascivious acts as
enumerated in this code and as defined in the Arizona Revised Statutes;



   3.   That the licensee is addicted to the habitual use of
intoxicating liquors, narcotics or stimulants to such an extent as to
incapacitate him for the performance of professional duties;



   4.   That the licensee is guilty of untrue, fraudulent, misleading
or deceptive advertising;



   5.   That the licensee is grossly ignorant of or guilty of wilful
negligence in the business of massage therapist or massage establishment;



   6.   That the licensee is engaged in the business of massage
therapist or massage establishment under a false or assumed name, or is
impersonating another practitioner of a like or different name;



   7.   That the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this
chapter.



   B.   To suspend or revoke a license, the city clerk shall deliver
personally to the licensee, or by certified mail at the business address as
shown on the application or otherwise more recently of record, a written
notice that the license is suspended or revoked. The cause for the suspension
or revocation shall be set forth in the notice. A suspended or revoked
license shall besurrendered to the city clerk on demand.



   C.   No person, association, firm or corporation may apply for any
massage therapist or massage establishment license within one year from the
denial of any license to the applicant or from the suspension, revocation or
nonrenewal of any license, unless the cause of the denial, suspension,
revocation or nonrenewal has been removed to the satisfaction of the city
clerk.



(Ord. 536.6 § 1 (part), 1991; prior code § 10-6-9)



5.20.110  Home massage—Terms and conditions.



   Massages may be administered in the home of the patron by any massage
therapist having a license issued in accordance with the terms of this
chapter provided massages are prescribed in writing by a physician duly
licensed to practice medicine in the state of Arizona and the physician
certifies that the patron is unable for medical reasons to obtain such in a
massage establishment.



(Ord. 536.6 § 1 (part), 1991; prior code § 10-6-10)



5.20.120  Restrictions on giving massages.



   No massage therapist shall administer a massage:



   A.   If the massage therapist knows, or should know that he is not
free of any contagious or communicable disease or infection;



   B.   To any massage patron exhibiting any skin fungus, skin
infection, skin inflammation or skin eruption, but a physician may certify
that the person may be safely massaged prescribing the condition therefor;



   C.   To any person who is not free of communicable disease or
infection or whom the massage therapist believes or has reason to believe is
not free of communicable disease or infection.



(Ord. 536.6 § 1 (part), 1991; prior code § 10-6-11)



5.20.130  Penalties.



   Wherever in this chapter any act is prohibited or declared to be
unlawful, and wherever in this chapter the doing of any act is required or
the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, the violation of any
such provision of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not
more than three hundred dollars, or imprisonment for not more than three
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day the violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense. Revocation or suspension of a
license shall not be a defense against prosecution.



(Prior code § 10-6-13)



5.20.140  Conformance requirements.



   Any person who has applied for a license under the provisions of this
chapter within the six months immediately preceding the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this chapter shall be issued a temporary permit or
license and shall have three months from the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this chapter to conform to the provisions hereof.



(Prior code § 10-6-15)



5.20.150  Appeal procedure.



   Any person aggrieved by any decision of the city clerk, or other person
to whom is delegated the administration of this chapter with respect to the
issuance or refusal to issue the license may appeal to the city council by
filing with the clerk a notice of appeal. The council shall thereupon fix a
time and a place for hearing the appeal. The clerk shall give notice to the
person of the time and place of hearing by serving it personally or by
depositing it in the United States Post Office at Casa Grande, Arizona,
postage prepaid, addressed to the person at his last known address.



(Prior code § 10-6-16)



Chapter 5.24
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES



Sections:



5.24.010   Declaration of public record.



5.24.020   Criminal penalty.



5.24.030   Civil injunction.



5.24.040   Strict liability and liability for the conduct of others.



5.24.050   Procedure for amendment.



5.24.010  Declaration of public record.



   That certain document known as “The Adult Entertainment Ordinance of
the City of Casa Grande, Arizona,” three copies of which are on file in the
office of the city clerk which document was made a public record by
Resolution No. 2089 of the city is referred to, adopted and made a part
hereof as if fully set out in this chapter.



(Ord. 1397.05.2 § 1, 1993)



5.24.020  Criminal penalty.



   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or of the city
code as amended by this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon
conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed two thousand five
hundred dollars or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed six months, or by
both fine and imprisonment.



(Ord. 1397.05.2 § 2, 1993)



5.24.030  Civil injunction.



   Any person who violates this chapter, or the city code as amended by
this chapter, is subject to a civil suit for injunction as well as
prosecution for criminal violations and liability for licensing sanctions
such as suspension or revocation.



(Ord. 1397.05.2 § 3, 1993)



5.24.040  Strict liability and liability for the conduct of others.



   A.   The offenses and violations described in this chapter are
strict liability offenses and violations requiring no proof of culpable
mental state.



   B.   A licensee of a sexually oriented business is jointly and
individually liable for violations of and offenses under this chapter by the
employees of the sexually oriented business, and for all civil and criminal
sanctions or remedies for such violations and offenses, including but not
limited to license suspension or revocation, prescribed herein.



(Ord. 1397.05.2 § 4, 1993)



5.24.050  Procedure for amendment.



   Section 5.24.120 of the city code as enacted in the adult entertainment
ordinance adopted by reference in this chapter may be amended only after
compliance with the legal procedures required to amend zoning regulations.
Other sections of said ordinance or of the city code established under this
chapter may be amended directly by vote of the city council.



(Ord. 1397.05.2 § 7, 1993)



Title 6
ANIMALS



Chapters:



6.04   Dogs and Cats



6.05   Potbellied Pigs



6.08   Animal Control Regulations Generally



6.12   Impoundment



Chapter 6.04
DOGS AND CATS



Sections:



6.04.010   Definitions.



6.04.020   License requirements.



6.04.030   License—Vaccination requirements.



6.04.040   Running at large prohibited.



6.04.050   Causes for impoundment.



6.04.060   Biting dogs to be reported immediately.



6.04.070   Dog fighting prohibited.



6.04.080   Dog fighting violation—Penalty.



6.04.010  Definitions.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:



   “At large” means being neither confined by an enclosure nor
physically restrained by a leash nor under control of the owner, or other
persons acting for the owner.



   “Cat” means a member of the feline family.



   “Collar” means a band, harness or suitable device worn around the
neck of a dog to which a license may be affixed.



   “Dog” means a member of the canis familiaris family.



   “Owner” means any person owning, keeping, possessing, harboring or
maintaining a dog or cat.



   “Pound” or “animal shelter” means any establishment authorized
by the city for confinement, maintenance, safekeeping and control of animals
that come into custody of the city.



   “Vaccination” means an antirabies vaccination using a type of
vaccine approved by the state veterinarian.



(Ord. 1397.06.3 § 2 (part), 1994; prior code § 8-3-1)



6.04.020  License requirements.



   A.   All dogs and cats kept, harbored or maintained in the city must
be licensed if over four months of age. Dog and cat licenses shall be issued
by the city or its designated agents upon payment of license fees as
prescribed in Section 6.12.080 of this code. All licenses shall expire on the
last day of the month on year after the license is issued. The owner shall
state, at the time application is made for such license, his name and
address, his telephone number, the name, breed, color and sex of each dog and
cat owned or kept by him.



   B.   If the license is not obtained by the owner prior to the
expiration date of the license, or within thirty days of the date of first
possession of any dog or cat, or of its becoming four months old, or within
thirty days from the arrival of the dog or cat in the city, the license
payment shall be deemed delinquent and a penalty as provided in the fee
schedule set forth in Section 6.12.080 of this code shall be paid.



   C.   A guide dog belonging to a blind person or to any bona fide
nonprofit organization which is in the business of breeding, raising or
training dogs that are to be used for guiding the blind shall not be required
to pay a license fee.



   D.   Each dog or cat licensed under the terms of this chapter shall
receive, at the time of licensing, a tag on which shall be inscribed the name
of the city, the number of license and the date in which it expires.



   E.   Any person who knowingly fails within fifteen days after
written notification from the animal control officer to obtain a license for
a animal required to be licensed, or counterfeits an official animal license
or removes the license from the animal for the purpose of intentional and
malicious mischief or places a animal license upon an animal unless the
license was issued for that particular animal is guilty of a Class 2
misdemeanor.



   F.   Whenever the ownership of a dog or cat has been changed, the
new owner shall secure a transfer of license to the owner.



   G.   Dogs, while being used for hunting or dogs and cats while being
exhibited at shows or dogs while engaged in races approved by the Arizona
Racing Commission and dogs or cats while being transported to and from such
events, need not have the license tag affixed to the animal; provided, that
the animals are properly vaccinated and licensed. The owner, handler or agent
for owner shall be in physical possession of animal's license.



   H.   Any animal subject to licensing under this chapter found not to
be wearing a license shall be deemed unowned.



(Ord. 1397.06.3 § 2 (part), 1994; prior code § 8-3-2)



6.04.030  License—Vaccination requirements.



   A.   Before a license is issued for any dog or cat, the owner must
present a vaccination certificate signed by a veterinarian stating the
owner's name and address and giving the dog's or cat's description, date of
vaccination and type, manufacturer and serial number of the vaccine and date
revaccination is due. A duplicate of each rabies vaccination certificate
issued shall be transmitted to the city on or before the tenth day of the
month following the month during which the dog or cat was vaccinated. No dog
or cat shall be licensed unless it is vaccinated in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and the regulations promulgated hereunder.



   B.   A dog or cat vaccinated in any other place prior to entry into
the city may be licensed in the city provided that at the time of licensing,
the owner of the dog or cat presents a vaccination certificate, signed by a
veterinarian licensed to practice in that place or a veterinarian employed by
a governmental agency in that place, stating the owner's name and address and
giving the dog's or cat's description, date of vaccination and type,
manufacturer and serial number of the vaccine used. The vaccination must be
in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and the regulations
promulgated hereunder.



   C.   The animal control officer shall make provisions for low-cost
vaccination clinics as he deems necessary. The vaccination shall be performed
by a veterinarian.



   D.   If a dog or cat is impounded and found to be unvaccinated, the
animal control officer is authorized to cause the dog or cat to be vaccinated
at a cost to be borne by the owner. The vaccination shall be performed by a
veterinarian, who shall issue a certificate of vaccination.



(Prior code § 8-3-3)



6.04.040  Running at large prohibited.



   A.   No person owning, keeping, possessing, harboring or maintaining
a dog shall allow the dog to be at large. A dog is not deemed to be at large:



   1.   While the dog is actively engaged in a dog obedience training,
accompanied by and under the control of his owner or trainer, and that such
dog is actually enrolled in or has graduated from a dog obedience training
school which has been approved by the animal control officer;



   2.   While the dog is being used for hunting purposes;



   3.   While the dog is being exhibited at an American Kennel Club
approved show;



   4.   While the dog is engaged in races approved by the Arizona
Racing Commission.



   B.   No person in charge of any dog shall permit the dog in a public
park or upon any public school property unless the dog is physically
restrained by a leash, enclosed in a car, cage or similar enclosure, or being
exhibited or trained at a recognized Kennel Club event, public school or park
sponsored event.



   C.   The animal control officer may apprehend and impound any dog
running at large contrary to the provisions of this section.



(Prior code § 8-3-4)



6.04.050  Causes for impoundment.



   A.   The animal control officer may apprehend and impound any dog or
cat found without a current valid license tag.



   B.   Any dog or cat that bites any person shall be quarantined and
impounded or, at the request of and at the expense of the owner, placed in a
veterinary hospital for a period of not less than ten days. The owner of any
dog or cat that has bitten a person may voluntarily deliver the dog or cat.
If the dog or cat is impounded for observation as a result of a dog or cat
bite incident, the fee schedule shall determine the charges to be made. A dog
or cat properly licensed and vaccinated pursuant to these regulations that
bites any person, may be confined and quarantined at the home of the owner or
wherever the dog or cat is harbored and maintained with the consent of and in
a manner prescribed by the animal control officer.



(Ord. 1397.06.3 § 2 (part), 1994; prior code § 8-3-5)



6.04.060  Biting dogs to be reported immediately.



   Whenever a dog or cat bites any person, the incident shall be reported
to the city police department or animal control officer immediately by any
person having direct knowledge.



(Prior code § 8-3-6)



6.04.070  Dog fighting prohibited.



   A.   A person commits dog fighting by knowingly:



   1.   Owning, possessing, keeping or training any dogs with the
intent that the dogs engage in an exhibition of fighting with another dog;



   2.   Causing any dog to fight with another dog, or causing any dog
to injure another dog for amusement or gain;



   3.   Permitting any act in violation of subdivisions 1 or 2 above to
be done on any premises under his charge or control.



   B.   Dog fighting is unlawful and punishable pursuant to state law.



(Ord. 1397.06.3 § 2 (part), 1994: prior code § 8-3-11)



6.04.080  Dog fighting violation—Penalty.



   Any person who is knowingly present at any place or building where
preparations are being made for an exhibition of the fighting of dogs, or is
present at such exhibition, is guilty of a crime punishable pursuant to state
law.



(Ord. 1397.06.3 § 2 (part), 1994: prior code § 8-3-12)



Chapter 6.05
POTBELLIED PIGS



Sections:



6.05.010   Definitions.



6.05.020   Licenses and tags.



6.05.030   Running at large.



6.05.040   Impoundment.



6.05.050   Keeping of potbellied pigs.



6.05.060   Number permitted.



6.05.070   Commercial breeding prohibited.



6.05.010  Definitions.



   In this article, unless the context otherwise requires:



   A.   “Potbellied pig” means only registered purebred miniature
Vietnamese potbellied pigs or other similar purebred miniature potbellied
pigs which shall not exceed one hundred pounds in weight.



   B.   “Registered” means registration by the North American
Potbellied Pig Association.



(Ord. 1397.06.2 § 3 (part), 1992)



6.05.020  License and tags.



   A.   All potbellied pigs kept, harbored or maintained in the city
must be licensed and registered if over four months of age. Licenses shall be
issued by the city or its designated agents upon payment of license fees as
prescribed in Section 6.12.080 of this title. All licenses will be stamped
with a month and year expiration date and shall expire on the last day of the
month. Upon expiration, a penalty of one and one-half percent, not less than
fifty cents, per month will be assessed. The owner shall state at the time
application is made for such license, his name and address, his telephone
number, the name, color and sex of each potbellied pig owned or kept by him.



   B.   If the license is not obtained by the owner prior to the last
day of the month in the year it expires, or within thirty days of the date of
first possession of any potbellied pig, or of its becoming four months old,
or within thirty days from the arrival of the potbellied pig in the city, the
license payment shall be deemed delinquent and a penalty as provided in the
fee schedule set forth in Section 6.12.080 of this title shall be paid.



   C.   Each potbellied pig licensed under the terms of this chapter
shall receive, at the time of licensing, a tag on which shall be inscribed
the name of the city, the number of license and the date on which it expires.
The tag shall be attached to a collar, harness or other device, which shall
be worn by the potbellied pig at all times except as otherwise provided in
this chapter.



(Ord. 1397.06.2 § 3 (part), 1992)



6.05.030  Running at large.



   A.   No person owning, keeping, possessing, harboring or maintaining
any potbellied pig shall allow such potbellied pig to be at large.



   B.   The enforcement agent shall apprehend and impound any
potbellied pig running at large.



(Ord. 1397.06.2 § 3 (part), 1992)



6.05.040  Impoundment.



   All impounding regulations as contained in Chapter 6.12 of this title
shall be applicable.



(Ord. 1397.06.2 § 3 (part), 1992)



6.05.050  Keeping of potbellied pigs.



   The provisions of Chapter 6.08 of this title shall be applicable to the
keeping of potbellied pigs.



(Ord. 1397.6.2 § 3 (part), 1992)



6.05.060  Number permitted.



   No more than three potbellied pigs as defined in this chapter shall be
allowed per household. Potbellied pigs kept in this manner shall be
considered as pets provided, however, they are not kept for purposes of
retail sales or commercial breeding.



(Ord. 1397.06.2 § 3 (part), 1992)



6.05.070  Commercial breeding prohibited.



   No potbellied pig shall be kept for purposes of commercial breeding or
retail sales. Any potbellied pig as permitted under this chapter shall be
kept only as a pet or as a show animal within the limitations of Section
6.05.060.



(Ord. 1397.6.2 § 3 (part), 1992)



Chapter 6.08
ANIMAL CONTROL REGULATIONS GENERALLY



Sections:



6.08.010   Enforcement authority.



6.08.020   City court to have jurisdiction.



6.08.030   Confinement in motor vehicles.



6.08.040   Housing standards.



6.08.050   Prevention of strays.



6.08.060   Disturbing the peace prohibited.



6.08.070   Swine in city prohibited.



6.08.080   Diseased animals restricted.



6.08.090   Dangerous animals.



6.08.100   Dangerous animals—Destruction of authorized when.



6.08.110   Cruelty to animals prohibited.



6.08.010  Enforcement authority.



   All animal control officers shall be appointed with consent and advice
of the city manager. Animal control officers shall have all the powers and
authority required by law to enforce the provisions of this chapter and any
animal control provisions of the Arizona Revised Statutes.



(Prior code § 8-3-8)



6.08.020  City court to have jurisdiction.



   The city court shall have jurisdiction over all violations of this
chapter. A violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a Class 2
misdemeanor.



(Prior code § 8-3-7)



6.08.030  Confinement in motor vehicles.



   A.   For the purposes of this section only, the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this
subsection:



   1.   “Animal” means all species of mammals, except humans, and
all species of birds;



   2.   “Animal control officer” means those persons designated by
the city.



   B.   No person having charge or custody of an animal, as owner or
otherwise, shall place or confine the animal or allow the animal to be placed
or confined or to remain in a motor vehicle under such conditions or for such
period of time as may endanger the health or well-being of the animal due to
heat, lack of food or drink, or such other circumstances as may reasonably be
expected to cause suffering, disability or death.



   C.   No person having dominion or control over a motor vehicle, as
owner or otherwise, shall place or confine an animal or allow an animal to be
placed or confined or to remain in a motor vehicle under such conditions or
for such period of time as may endanger the health or well-being of the
animal due to heat, lack of food or drink, or such other circumstances as may
reasonably be expected to cause suffering, disability or death.



   D.   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the
transportation of horses, cattle, sheep, poultry or other agricultural
livestock in trailers or other vehicles designed and constructed for such
purpose.



   E.   A peace officer or an animal control officer who finds an
animal in a motor  vehicle in violation of this section may break and enter
the motor vehicle if necessary to remove the animal. The officer or agent
removing the animal shall take the animal to an animal shelter or other place
of safe keeping and shall, in the event the person having custody cannot be
otherwise contacted, leave in a prominent place in the motor vehicle a
written notice bearing his name and office and the address where the animal
may be claimed by the owner thereof. The animal will be surrendered to the
owner if the owner claims the animal within five days from the time the
animal was removed from the motor vehicle and pays all reasonable charges
that have accrued for the maintenance of the animal. If the owner fails to
claim the animal within three days after its removal from the motor vehicle,
the animal control officer will make reasonable effort to contact the owner
and give notice that the animal is in their custody and must be reclaimed by
the owner upon payment of the reasonable maintenance charges within two days.
In the event the owner cannot be contacted, or expresses no interest in
reclaiming the animal, the animal control officer may dispose of the animal
pursuant to Section 6.12.030 of this code.



   F.   A person who violates any provision of this section is guilty
of a Class 2 misdemeanor.



(Prior code § 8-3-9)



6.08.040  Housing standards.



   A.   It is unlawful to cause or allow any stable, kennel, pet shop,
or place where any animal is or may be kept to become unclean or unwholesome.



   B.   Every person maintaining a pet shop shall cause a notice,
framed and enclosed under glass, containing the names, addresses and
telephone numbers of persons to be notified during any hour of the day or
night who will proceed immediately to the location so as to permit contact by
the animal control officer.



(Prior code § 8-1-5)



6.08.050  Prevention of strays.



   Any person who keeps or causes to be kept any horses, mules, cattle,
burros, goats, sheep or other livestock or poultry within the corporate
limits of the city shall keep livestock or poultry in a pen or similar
enclosure to prevent them from roaming at large.



(Prior code § 8-1-4)



6.08.060  Disturbing the peace prohibited.



   It is unlawful to harbor or keep any animals which disturb the peace by
loud noises at any time of the day or night.



(Prior code § 8-1-3)



6.08.070  Swine in city prohibited.



   It is unlawful to keep any live swine or pigs in the city except
registered purebred miniature Vietnamese potbellied pigs or other similar
registered purebred miniature potbellied pigs. Such miniature pigs shall not
exceed one hundred pounds in weight. Any such miniature pigs shall be subject
to all other conditions and requirements as set forth in Chapter 6.05 of this
title.



(Ord. 1397.06.2 § 2, 1992)



6.08.080  Diseased animals restricted.



   It is unlawful to allow any domestic animal afflicted with a contagious
or infectious disease to run at large, or to be exposed in any public place
whereby the health of man or beast may be affected. It is unlawful for such
diseased animal to be shipped or removed from the premises of the owner
thereof, except under the supervision of the animal control officer or his
designate.



(Prior code § 8-1-7)



6.08.090  Dangerous animals.



   A.   “Vicious animal” means any animal of the order carnivora
that has a propensity to bite human beings or other animals without
provocation, kills another animal without provacation and/or has been so
declared after hearing before a justice of the peace or a city magistrate.



   B.   It is unlawful to permit any dangerous or vicious animal to run
at large within the city, and the animal shall be immediately impounded by
the animal control officer, the officer to be designated by the city.



   C.   Vicious animals shall be destroyed in a manner provided by law.



   D.   Exhibitions or parades of animals which are ferae naturae in
the eyes of the law may be conducted only upon securing a permit from the
animal control officer.



(Ord. 1397.06.3 § 2 (part), 1994; prior code § 8-1-1)



6.08.100  Dangerous animals—Destruction of authorized when.



   The animal control officer is authorized to kill any dangerous animal
of any kind when it is necessary for the protection of any person or property.



(Prior code § 8-1-2)



6.08.110  Cruelty to animals prohibited.



   A.   Any person who maliciously kills, maims, or wounds an animal
which is the property of another, or who, having charge or custody of an
animal as owner or otherwise, overdrives, overloads, drives when overloaded,
overworks, tortures, torments, deprives of necessary sustenance, drink or
shelter, cruelly beats, mutilates or cruelly kills an animal, or subjects an
animal to needless suffering, or inflicts unnecessary cruelty upon the
animal, or in any manner abuses an animal, or who cruelly drives, rides or
otherwise uses the animal when unfit for labor is guilty of a Class 2
misdemeanor.



   B.   Any person who abandons an animal, or drops or leaves an animal
on the street, road or highway, in a public place or on private property with
intent to abandon is guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. An animal also is
abandoned when the owner, possessor or custodian fails to claim it from a
boarding facility or veterinarian within ten days of the date a registered
letter is received by such person from the boarding facility or veterinarian
requesting that the owner, possessor or custodian reclaim the animal.



   C.   Any person who conducts a shooting event at which any person
uses a firearm to shoot, kill or wound a live bird or animal that is tied,
staked out, caged, held or restrained in any manner and used as a target to
be fired at in such an event is guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor.



   D.   The animal control officer may destroy a dog or cat impounded
for cruelty to prevent the animal from further suffering.



(Prior code § 8-3-10)



Chapter 6.12
IMPOUNDMENT



Sections:



6.12.010   Animal control officer authority.



6.12.020   Authority to impound.



6.12.030   Notice to owner.



6.12.040   Descriptive report required.



6.12.050   Conditions and duration.



6.12.060   Redemption procedure.



6.12.070   Adoption or destruction of unredeemed animals.



6.12.080   Fee schedule.



6.12.090   Payment of fees.



6.12.100   Impeding animal control officer prohibited.



6.12.110   Biting animals—Procedure.



6.12.010  Animal control officer authority.



   The animal control officer shall be designated by city and shall be
charged with the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, except as may
be otherwise provided by the city.



(Prior code § 8-2-1)



6.12.020  Authority to impound.



   The animal control officer may impound any animal found at large in
violation of this chapter, or off of the owner's property, not under control
or on a leash of some person in the streets, alleys or other public places or
vacant or enclosed lots in the city.



(Prior code § 8-2-2)



6.12.030  Notice to owner.



   If the owner of any impounded animal is known to the animal control
officer and resides or has a known place of business in the city, the animal
control officer shall notify the owner of the animal by telephone or by
letter through the post office within twenty-four hours after the animal has
been impounded. The notice shall contain a description of the animal and
shall state that unless reclaimed, the animal shall be placed for adoption or
destroyed in manner provided by law.



(Prior code § 8-2-3)



6.12.040  Descriptive report required.



   The animal control officer shall, within twenty-four hours after
impounding any animal, make a report stating the kind of animal and
describing it by color or otherwise or by any marks or brands that may be on
it, and when it was impounded. Each report shall be maintained on file for
not less than six months.



(Prior code § 8-2-4)



6.12.050  Conditions and duration.



   The animal control officer shall provide for the keeping of all animals
impounded in a safe, convenient and comfortable place within or conveniently
near the city limits and shall feed the animals at least once every
twenty-four hours and treat them in a humane manner during the time they are
impounded, which shall not be less than three days, unless sooner claimed by
the owner.



(Prior code § 8-2-5)



6.12.060  Redemption procedure.



   If the owner of any animal shall within three days after the animal has
been impounded, apply to the animal control officer and pay the fees and
charges provided by this chapter, the agent shall release the animal to the
owner.



(Prior code § 8-2-6)



6.12.070  Adoption or destruction of unredeemed animals.



   All animals impounded under the provisions of this chapter which have
not been claimed and the fees and charges have not been paid to the city by
the owner within three days, shall be placed for adoption or destruction in a
manner prescribed by law.



(Prior code § 8-2-7)



6.12.080  Fee schedule.



   The fees for dogs, cats, and potbellied pigs are hereby established in
the City Consolidated Fee Schedule pursuant to Section 1.04.170. 



(Ord. 1397.02.10 § 4, 2008; Ord. 1397.06.3 § 2 (part), 1994; Ord. 1397.06.2
§ 4, 1992)



6.12.090  Payment of fees.



   A.   The animal control officer of the city will accept all fees and
costs involved in the impoundment of all animals for any reason.



   B.   Any person may:



      1.   Bring an unwanted animal to the pound and transfer
ownership to the animal control officer;



      2.   Have the animal control officer pick-up, destroy, and
bury an owned animal;



      3.   Rent animal traps; and



      4.   Upon proof of compliance of vaccination and licensing
provisions of this code, and compliance with applicable state laws, may adopt
an unwanted or impounded animal upon the expiration of the impoundment period.



   C.   All fees associated with such animal control services are
hereby established in the City Consolidated Fee Schedule pursuant to Section
1.04.170.



(Ord. 1397.02.10 § 5, 2008; Ord. 1397.06.3 § 2 (part), 1994; Ord. 1397.01.1
§ 3, 1992)



6.12.100  Impeding animal control officer prohibited.



   It is unlawful for any person to in any manner intervene, impede,
prevent, obstruct or intimidate the animal control officer when he is
discharging his duties pursuant to this chapter.



(Prior code § 8-2-9)



6.12.110  Biting animals—Procedure.



   Whenever any animal, except a dog or cat, bites a person, the person so
bitten and the owner of the animal shall immediately notify the animal
control officer who shall cause an examination of the animal to be made by a
duly licensed physician or a duly licensed veterinarian, and shall order the
animal held on the owner's premises or have it impounded as long as necessary
for a complete examination. If it is determined that the animal is infected
with rabies or other dangerous, contagious or infectious disease, it shall be
the duty of the animal control officer to destroy the animal in a manner
provided by law. If, at the end of the quarantine or impoundment, a
veterinarian documents that the animal is free from such diseases, the animal
shall be released to the owner at the place of impoundment. If the animal
dies during the period of quarantine or impoundment, its head shall be sent
to the State Department of Health for examination. The owner shall bear any
costs involved in the quarantine or impoundment of the animal including
boarding costs.



(Prior code § 8-2-10)



Title 7
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT



Chapters:



7.01   Economic Development Incentives



7.02   Arizona Public Service Franchise Fee



Chapter 7.01
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES



Sections:



7.01.001   Definitions.



7.01.002   Authorization to rebate fees, City sales tax revenues and
expend public funds in furtherance of economic development in the City.



7.01.003   Council approval or City Manager approval.



7.01.004   Criteria.



7.01.005   Agreement required.



7.01.006   Developer obligations.



7.01.007   Reports to the Council.



7.01.001  Definitions.



   Unless otherwise indicated in this Title 7, Chapter 1, terms in this
chapter shall have the following meanings:



   A.   Commercial projects which are eligible for the incentives or
enhancement established in Section 7.01.002 do not include retail projects.



   B.   "Retail" shall mean a commercial enterprise which sells
tangible goods to a buyer who is the end user or consumer.



   C.   "New industrial or commercial project" shall mean an enterprise
which is different in function from the land use or enterprise in the
location being considered for incentives or enhancements.



   D.   Expansion of an "existing industrial or commercial project"
shall mean an increase in the land, buildings, equipment or machinery of an
enterprise which is the same in function as the existing land use or
enterprise in the location being considered for incentives or enhancements.



   E.   "Compliance period" shall mean the time period specified in the
agreement between the recipient and the City during which the recipient shall
comply with the Section 7.01.004 criteria on which it supported its
eligibility for the incentives or enhancements in Section 7.01.002.  The
compliance period may be longer than the time period for payment of the
incentives or enhancements to the recipient.



(Ord. 1397.07.01 § 1 (part), 2000)



7.01.002  Authorization to rebate fees, city sales tax revenues and expend
public funds in furtherance of economic development in the City.



   The City may encourage economic development and authorize the rebate of
certain fees, except development fees enacted pursuant to the authority of
Arizona Revised Statutes (A.R.S.) § 9-463.05, taxes or provide construction
of off-site public improvements including, but not limited to, the following:



   A.   Any or all fees required to be paid in connection with the
construction or expansion of a commercial or industrial project, including,
but not limited to, plan checking fees, inspection fees, and sewer connection
fees;



   B.   General funds to pay the costs of construction of off-site
public improvements which the City determines are required to be constructed
in connection with a commercial or industrial project.



   C.   All or a portion of the sales tax revenues levied, generated
and received by the City as a result of the construction of a new, or
expansion of an existing, commercial or industrial project unless such sales
tax revenues are subject to a prior senior pledge.



   D.   All or a portion of the property tax revenues levied, generated
and received by the City as a result of the construction of a new, or
expansion of an existing, commercial or industrial project unless such tax
revenues are subject to a prior senior pledge.



(Ord. 1397.07.01 § 1 (part), 2000)



7.01.003  Council approval or City Manager approval.



   If the aggregate of the fees, costs of the City-constructed
improvements and sales or property tax rebate is more than $75,000, the City
Council must approve any incentive in this Section 7.01.002.  If the
aggregate of the fees, costs of City-constructed improvements and sales or
sales tax rebate is less than $75,000, the City Manager may approve any
incentive in this Section 7.01.1.



(Ord. 1397.07.01 § 1 (part), 2000)



7.01.004  Criteria.



   A.   The City shall not grant the incentives authorized in Section
7.01.002 without finding the potential recipient meets the following:



   1.   The rebating of the fees, expenditure of the funds or rebate of
City sales tax revenues will assist in the creation or retention of a
significant number of jobs in the City with the average hourly wage for
non-exempt positions (pursuant to the FSLA) of at least 75% higher than the
federal minimum hourly wage and wherein the recipient pays at least 25% of it
average hourly wage for non-exempt positions in benefits; and



   2.   New eligible industrial and commercial projects must expend a
minimum of One Million, Five Hundred Thousand dollars ($1,500,000.00) in
equipment, machinery, land, and building improvements as its initial
investment at a single location; or expansions of existing eligible
industrial and commercial projects must expend a minimum of Seven Hundred,
Fifty Thousand dollars ($750,000.00) in equipment, machinery, land, and
building improvements as its expansion investment at a single location.



   B.   The City may also consider the following factors in determining
whether the potential recipient should be granted incentives:



   1.   Economic development will be furthered by rebating the fees,
expenditure of funds or rebate of City sales tax revenues.



   2.   The recipient's operation will otherwise improve or enhance the
economic welfare of the inhabitants of the City.



   3.   The recipient's operation will not disproportionately expend
natural resources or public infrastructure and services, such as
transportation infrastructure or public safety services.



   4.   The benefits the City will receive from the commercial or
industrial project outweigh the economic costs to the City, as demonstrated
through the City's fiscal impact analysis model.



   5.   The potential recipients' use of and availability of other
funds and rebates from the City or other sources including other governmental
entities.



(Ord. 1397.07.01 § 1 (part), 2000)



7.01.005  Agreement required.



   In order to utilize the incentives provided in Section 7.01.002, the
recipient and the City must enter into an enforceable agreement, including a
development agreement pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-500.05, as to the terms and
conditions of the development and such other provisions as may be requested
by the City.  The agreement must be consistent with the requirements of this
chapter and shall further identify the rights and obligations of the
parties.  The City may request that the agreement be secured or
collateralized such that the recipient's obligations are reasonably assured.



(Ord. 1397.07.01 § 1 (part), 2000)



7.01.006  Developer obligations.



   The recipient, in order to receive, or continue receiving, incentives
or enhancements, shall:



   A.   Provide information, including capital investment and
employment projections, to enable the City to prepare a fiscal impact
analysis;



   B.   Begin construction of the improvements within twelve months of
the date of the offer by the City or twelve months from the effective date of
the development agreement, if there is one;



   C.   Complete construction, remodeling or improvement within
twenty-four months, or the time period specified in the development
agreement, of the date of the offer or effective date of any development
agreement with the City;



   D.   Upon purchase of the parcel or parcels for the economic
development project, the owner/developer agrees to commence construction of
the improvements no later than ninety (90) days after issuance by City of a
building permit.



   E.   Owner/developer agrees to comply with such zoning, building and
planning requirements as are applicable to construction of said improvements,
including cooperating with the City in connection with site plan approvals
and the obtaining of such other permits as are required in connection with
the development of the land and construction and occupancy of the
improvements.  In addition, owner/developer agrees to provide City with
information necessary for the City to complete its fiscal impact analysis
model.  Such information shall not include proprietary or certain financial
information that, in the reasonable opinion of the owner/developer, could be
used to owner/developer's competitive disadvantage by market competitors.



   F.   Owner/developer agrees to be wholly responsible for paying city
impact fees, development fees, plan check fees, permit fees, expedited review
fees and fees required by the City for studies, reports and other
project-related analyses.



   G.   Owner/developer shall make every reasonable effort to have
improvements satisfactorily completed, to obtain a Certificate of Occupancy,
and to have the economic development project open for business on or before a
certain date which shall be identified in the development agreement.



   H.   On each anniversary date of the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy through the compliance period, the recipient shall provide to the
City Manager an informational update, including capital investment and
employment projections, which demonstrates the recipient's compliance with
its obligations under its agreement with the City.



(Ord. 1397.07.01 § 1 (part), 2000)



7.01.007  Reports to the Council.



   A.   The City Manager shall report to the Council any rebate of
fees, tax revenues or expenditure of public funds in which the aggregate of
the expenditure or rebate is less than $75,000.00.  The report will be
provided to Council within 30 days of the recipient's acceptance and shall
include, but is not limited to:



   1.   Company name and description.



   2.   Amount of capital investment by the company for construction,
remodeling or improvements.



   3.   Number of additional jobs added or created by the company.



   4.   Purpose of the City offering enhancements.



   5.   Preliminary fiscal impact analysis prior to business operation.



   B.   The City Manager shall within 30 days of his receipt submit to
the City Council the reports received from recipients in compliance with
7.01.006H.



(Ord. 1397.07.01 § 1 (part), 2000)



Chapter 7.02
ARIZONA PUBLIC SERVICE FRANCHISE FEE



Sections:



7.02.01      [Distribution.]



7.02.02      Distribution and accrual.



7.02.01  [Distribution.]



   The franchise fee Arizona Public Service pays to the City pursuant to
the franchise agreement adopted by Casa Grande Ordinance 3104 shall be
distributed as set forth below under the direction of the Casa Grande City
Council for aesthetic revitalization projects, economic development projects,
and a portion of the fee will be deposited in the General Fund and not
dedicated to specific projects.



(Ord. 1397.7.2 § 1 (part), 2002)



7.02.02  Distribution and accrual.



   A.   There shall be a separate accounting for the franchise fee paid
by Arizona Public Service Company to the City of Casa Grande pursuant to the
franchise agreement adopted in Casa Grande Ordinance 3104.



   B.   The franchise fee shall be accrued by the Casa Grande City
Council as follows:



   1.   For each dollar of the franchise fee paid to the City, 34 %
will be deposited into an Aesthetic Revitalization Fund.  Projects funded by
the Aesthetic Revitalization Fund will include: underground dark conduit or
live wires, landscaping of rights-of-way, widening of rights-of-way, fixing
drainage on rights-of-way, assuring better traffic accessibility on
rights-of-way, multi-modal transportation, Americans with Disability Act
(ADA) compliance on rights-of-way, sewer line work, pavement restoration,
greenbelt and open space planning, redevelopment projects, or other projects
as determined by the City Council.



   2.   For each dollar of the franchise fee paid to the City, 33% will
be deposited into the General Fund and is not dedicated to a specific purpose.



   3.   For each dollar of the franchise fee paid to the City, 33% will
be deposited into an Economic Development Fund until the Economic Development
Fund balance reaches $250,000.00.  The $250,000.00 limit is meant to be an
accrual limit and in no way shall limit the Council allocation of City funds
for economic development projects from this or other sources.  The
provisions of Chapter 7.01 of the Casa Grande Municipal Code shall govern the
distribution of the Economic Development Fund. 



   4.   When the Economic Development Fund balance accrues to
$250,000.00, each additional dollar of franchise fee payment will be split
equally and deposited into the Aesthetic Revitalization Fund and the General
Fund.



   5.   If the Economic Development Fund balance falls below
$250,000.00, the method of distribution will be returned to the original
distribution among the three funds until the $250,000 accrual limit on the
Economic Development Fund is met.



(Ord. 1397.7.2 § 1 (part), 2002)



Title 8
HEALTH AND SAFETY



Chapters:



8.04   Health Code Adopted



8.08   Garbage and Refuse Collection and Disposal



8.12   Nuisances, Litter, Abandoned or Junk Vehicles



8.16   Fire Code Adopted



8.20   Fire Lanes



8.24   Alarm Systems



8.28   Sale of Ephedrine and Pseudoephedrine Products



8.32   Graffiti



Chapter 8.04
HEALTH CODE ADOPTED



Sections:



8.04.010   Adoption.



8.04.010  Adoption.



   That certain code entitled “Pinal County Sanitary Code” published
by the Pinal County Health Department is hereby adopted as the “Sanitary
Code of the City of Casa Grande” and made a part of this chapter the same
as though the code was specifically set forth in full herein; and at least
three copies of the code shall be filed in the office of the clerk and kept
available for public use and inspection.



(Prior code § 11-2-1)



Chapter 8.08
GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL



Sections:



8.08.010   Definitions.



8.08.020   Enforcement authority.



8.08.030   Refuse collection.



8.08.040   Reserved



8.08.050   Reserved



8.08.060   Reserved



8.08.070   Use of collection system.



8.08.080   Refuse containers—Provision and
maintenance—Placement—Contents.



8.08.090   Collection frequency.



8.08.100   Collection fee schedule.



8.08.110   Residential rubbish and specially treated solid waste requiring
special handling.



8.08.120   Business route collection.



8.08.130   Disposal site.



8.08.140   Disposal site rules and regulations.



8.08.150   Inspection authority.



8.08.160   Billing cycles created—Collection authority.



8.08.170   Authority to waive penalty.



8.08.180   Refuse accumulation unlawful.



8.08.190   Burning and dumping unlawful.



8.08.200   Violations; enforcement.



8.08.210   Criminal penalty.



8.08.220   Alternative enforcement measures.



8.08.010  Definitions.



   A.   "Collector" wherever herein used means the City or its
authorized representative.



   B.   "Garbage" means and includes all putrescible waste, except
sewage and body waste, including waste accumulated of animal, food or
vegetable matter, and including waste that attends the preparation, use,
cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit and vegetable, and
shall include all of such wastes or accumulations or vegetable matter of
residences, restaurants, hotels and places where food is prepared for human
consumption. The term "garbage" shall not include recognized industrial
byproducts.



   C.   "Encapsulate" means either of the following two methods:



   1.   Placement of medical sharps in a rigid, puncture-proof,
leakproof container with a locking cap, after rendering them incapable of
creating a stick hazard by using an encapsulation agent or any other process
that renders them incapable of creating a stick hazard; or



   2.   Grinding such that the medical sharps are incapable of creating
a stick hazard and are unrecognizable.



   D.   "Green waste" means brush, leaves, weeds, and cuttings from
trees, lawns, shrubs, and gardens.



   E.   "Inspector" means the public works director or his/her
designated employee or employees of the City having the duty of the
enforcement of this chapter.



   F.   "Landfill" means the Casa Grande Municipal Landfill at its
present and any future locations.



   G.   "Landfill disposal" shall mean the delivery of green waste,
refuse, rubbish, and waste to the Landfill by the Landfill user(s) or
his/their agent(s).



   H.   "Landfill user" or "user," which terms shall be used
interchangeably, shall mean each owner or occupant subject to this chapter,
or a person who disposes refuse or causes to be disposed refuse in the
Landfill.



   I.   "Medical sharps" shall mean discarded sharps used in animal or
human patient care, medical research, or clinical laboratories. This includes
hypodermic needles; syringes; pipettes; scalpel blades; blood vials; needles
attached to tubing; broken and unbroken glassware; and slides and coverslips.



   J.   "Owner" and "occupant," which terms herein are used
interchangeably, shall mean every person in possession, in charge or in
control of any dwelling, flat, roominghouse, or any eating place, shop, place
of business, manufacturing or business establishment where garbage or other
refuse is created or accumulated.



   K.   “Person” means a corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, society, or other legal entity, as well as a natural person.



   L.   “Refuse” means solid wastes, including garbage and rubbish.



   M.   “Residence” means any structure or premises used as a
domicile, dwelling, or habitation, including single-family dwellings,
multifamily dwelling units, duplexes, patio homes, mobile home parks, trailer
courts, rooming houses, boardinghouses, assisted living facilities,
apartments, condominiums, townhouses, or any complex of the foregoing.



   N.   “Residential refuse” means any refuse generated by a
residence.



   O.   “Roll on/roll-off” means that method of container hauling
where large capacity refuse containers are loaded into the transporting
vehicle by tipping the rear rails, hauling the container onto rails by a
cable pulley system and tipping the rear rails back to the horizontal
position.



   P.   “Rubbish” means refuse other than garbage, tin cans,
bottles, ashes, paper, pasteboard, cardboard, or wooden boxes, brush, leaves,
weeds, and cuttings from trees, lawns, shrubs, and gardens or other waste
materials produced in the normal course of everyday living.



   Q.   "Specially treated solid waste" means and includes solid waste
defined as medical waste, biohazardous medical waste, and special waste in
Arizona Revised Statutes ("A.R.S.") Title 49, Chapter 4, and the Arizona
Administrative Code, Title 18, Chapter 13.



   R.   “Waste” means unwanted solid, liquid or gaseous materials.
(Ord. 1397.08.23 § 1, 2010; Ord. 1397.08.16  1 (part), 2004; Ord.
1397.08.13 § 1 (part), 2002; Ord. 645.17 § 2 (part), 1989; prior code §
11-1-1)



8.08.020  Enforcement authority.



   The public works director, or his designee, shall be responsible for
the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and other duties as the
public works director may prescribe.



(Ord. 1397.08.16 § 1 (part), 2004; prior code § 11-1-2)



8.08.030  Refuse collection.



   There is established a system of residential refuse collection,
transportation and disposal. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the
business of collecting, transporting, hauling or conveying any residential
refuse or recyclables, or to dump or dispose of the same, except by the City
or its authorized representatives. (Ord. 1397.08.23 § 2, 2010; Ord.
1397.08.16  1 (part), 2004; Ord. 1397.08.2 § 2 (part), 1992)



8.08.040  Reserved



8.08.050  Reserved



8.08.060  Reserved



8.08.070  Use of collection system.



   A.   Every owner and occupant of premises within the prescribed
limits of this chapter shall use the refuse collection and disposal system
herein provided, and shall deposit or cause to be deposited in accordance
with this chapter all rubbish and garbage which is accumulated on the
premises that is of the nature that it is perishable, or may decompose, or
may be scattered by wind or otherwise, unless authorized by the City to do
his own collecting and permitted to dispose at the Landfill.



   B.   Upon the request of the inspector, in addition to compliance
with this chapter, every user shall demonstrate compliance with the
appropriate state laws or Arizona Administrative regulations in the user's
storage, handling, treatment, or disposal of the refuse for which it wishes
to deposit or cause to be deposited in accordance with this chapter. 
Compliance with state laws or Arizona Administrative regulations shall
include possession of the appropriate permits and approval of appropriate
plans required by the various federal or state regulatory agencies.



(Ord. 1397.08.16 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 1397.08.13 § 1 (part), 2002; prior
code § 11-1-4)



8.08.080  Refuse containers—Provision and
maintenance—Placement—Contents.



   A.   On new residential construction, each lot or combination of
lots shall be supplied with a refuse container, at the expense of the
developer or subdivision, to be owned and maintained by the City, as approved
by the public works director.



   B.   For residences already constructed and occupied, the City shall
provide and maintain the container.



   C.   On new and existing commercial and industrial facilities, the
owner shall be responsible for the initial purchase and following maintenance
of the containers, as approved by the public works director. The public works
director may have the container maintained and pass any cost on to the owner
of the property, if such users do not maintain the container(s) in accordance
with the public works director's approved guidelines.



   D.   All garbage shall, before deposit in any refuse container, be
wrapped in paper or other material so as to prevent the escape of liquids
therefrom.



   E.   All refuse containers shall be kept in a place accessible to
the collector, as determined by the public services director;



   F.   No tires shall be mixed in with other refuse.



   G.   The public works director shall designate the type of service
and container size to be utilized by each user.



   H.   Specially treated solid waste shall be containerized or
properly packaged as mandated by the most stringent of the following
regulations or laws:



   1.   Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 49, Chapter 4;



   2.   Arizona Administrative Code, Title 18, Chapter13; or



   3.   This chapter of the Casa Grande Municipal Code.



   J.   The user shall encapsulate medical sharps prior to their
disposal at the Landfill or in a container designated for deposit in the
Landfill.



(Ord. 1397.08.16 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 1397.08.13 § 1 (part), 2002; prior
code § 11-1-7)



8.08.090  Collection frequency.



   The frequency of collection or the users' delivery of garbage, refuse,
green waste, or rubbish shall be no less than that shown in the following
schedule:



   A.   Garbage only—twice weekly;



   B.   Refuse with garbage—twice weekly;



   C.   Rubbish—as often as necessary to prevent nuisances but no
less than once weekly, subject to the inspection by the public works director
or his authorized representative.



(Ord. 1397.08.16 § 1 (part), 2004; prior code § 11-1-8)



8.08.100  Collection fee schedule.



   A.   Monthly collection fee rates for residences within the City
limits are as established in the City Consolidated Fee Schedule and include
two collections each week of ninety gallon or three hundred gallon plastic
containers.



   B.   Single pickup collection fee rates for non-residential users
within the City limits are as established in the City Consolidated Fee
Schedule for ninety gallon or three hundred gallon plastic containers, metal
containers filled with loose refuse, roll-on/roll-off containers loose or
compacted. The non-residential rates established in the City Consolidated Fee
Schedule do not require or authorize the City's collection of uncontainerized
rubbish, nor do they establish the full rate for disposal of specially
treated solid waste. Non-residential brush truck service shall be charged in
accordance with the loose refuse volumes established in the City Consolidated
Fee Schedule.



   C.   Landfill Disposal Fee by Permit:



   1.   Except for disposal of appliances as set forth in Subsection
8.08.100.C.2.b., Landfill disposal is free to residential users who show
proof of residence within the City.



   2.   Non-residential facilities, except those disposing of specially
treated solid waste, within the City limits shall pay Landfill user fees
established in the City Consolidated Fee Schedule, except as follows:



   a.   Green waste delivered to the Landfill that has been chipped to
a two inch or less size has no charge. If mixed with other refuse or waste,
it will be charged at regular Landfill usage rates as established in the City
Consolidated Fee Schedule.



   b.   For City residents or City non-residential entities, appliances
with demonstrated proof that Freon has been removed will be accepted for
Landfill disposal at no charge. For City residents or City non-residential
entities, appliances that contain Freon, or lack proof that the Freon was
removed, will be assessed a Freon removal fee as established in the City
Consolidated Fee Schedule.



   3.   Residential users or non-residential facilities outside the
City limits shall pay for Landfill usage pursuant to the City Consolidated
Fee Schedule. Roll-off service outside the City limits will be charged a
fifty percent surcharge over and above that charged inside the City limits,
plus the appropriate Landfill fees, as established in the City Consolidated
Fee Schedule.



   4.   The Landfill will not accept tires or specially treated solid
waste from residential users or non-residential facilities outside the City.



   5.   There will be a minimum one ton charge for all containers
charged by weight.



(Ord. 1397.08.16 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 1397.08.14 § 1, 2003; Ord.
1397.08.13 § 1 (part), 2002; Ord. 1397.08.12 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord.
1397.08.11 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord. 1397.08.09 § 1, 1999; Ord. 1397.08.08 §
1, 1998; Ord. 1397.08.06, 1998; Ord. 1397.08.3 § 4, 1992)



   D.   Fees shall be billed and paid monthly.



   E.   Specially treated solid waste from residential or
non-residential users within the City limits shall pay the base charge
according to § 8.08.100.B., plus the relevant rate established below for the
type of specially treated solid waste being deposited at the Landfill:



   1.   Actual costs of any remediation, if impossible to separate
specially treated solid waste that was improperly deposited at the Landfill
because of user's non-compliance with this chapter.



   2.   Actual costs for any staff time for collection, Landfill
observation, and special covering; and actual costs for the equipment time
for special covering activities at Landfill.



   F.   The finance director shall bill all known users monthly by
approximately the first day of the following month for which the sanitation
or landfill service is provided.  Sanitation service fees and Landfill fees
shall be due and payable at the office of the financial director when the
monthly statement is rendered, and shall be delinquent twenty calendar days
thereafter. If the total bill for any such charge is not paid within five
calendar days after the date of delinquency, a late fee of one and one-half
percent of the unpaid balance (including any unpaid late fees or similar
charges) shall be charged each month of delinquency to be collected, in
addition to the amount then due. Failure to receive an invoice shall not be a
defense to payment for any user; provided, however, that the finance director
may waive late fees or otherwise compromise amounts due and owing if the
failure to receive an invoice was due to an error on the part of the city. 
Failure on the part of a person or entity to notify the city that sanitation
service or landfill service was being supplied, or failure to notify the city
that appropriate monthly billings are not being received, constitute error on
the part of the consumer, and not the city, for purposes of this subsection.
The finance director is authorized and directed to use any legal means or
procedures to ensure collection of sanitation service and Landfill fees, and
to compromise, settle or dispose of such fees in the normal course of
collection.



   G.   The finance director may, as an accommodation to a property
owner, bill a tenant or other party for sanitation charges, in which case the
property owner, as well as the user, are jointly and severally liable for
such charges. All unpaid sewer charges for a property, however, remain the
responsibility of the property owner. If a tenant does not pay a charge when
rendered, the finance director may notify the property owner of the tenant's
nonpayment, and the property owner shall pay the amount due within seven
calendar days of the notice to the property owner. If such payment is
promptly made the finance director may waive applicable late fees.



   H.   All sanitation charges are the responsibility of the property
owners. If a tenant does not pay a charge when due, the City will notify the
property owner, at its last known address, of the tenant's nonpayment, and
the property owner will be required to pay the amount due within five
business days of the mailing of the City notice.



   I.   City-owned six and eight cubic yard front load metal containers
and roll-on/roll-off metal containers will only be rented to contractors or
non-residential users on a short-term or project basis. Non-residential
customers who have a continuing need for a container will be required to
purchase or lease a suitable container from a private enterprise.



   J.   The public works director, or his designee, will assess a fee
for replacement of lost containers, or for containers negligently or
intentionally damaged by users. The fee will be based on the actual cost of
the replacement container, plus a delivery fee, as  established in the City
Consolidated Fee Schedule. This fee does not apply to containers damaged due
to reasonable wear and tear.



   K.   Users must bring Landfill disposal to the Landfill covered by
tarp or fully contained within a vehicle/trailer. The public works director,
or his designee, will assess a failure-to-cover fee as established in the
City Consolidated Fee Schedule. 



(Ord. 1397.08.22 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1397.08.16 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord.
1397.08.13 § 1 (part), 2002; Ord. 1397.08.12 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord.
1397.08.11 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord. 1397.08.09 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord.
1397.08.08 § 1, 1998; Ord. 1397.08.06, 1998; Ord. 1397.08.3 §§ 2, 3, 4,
1992; Ord. 1397.08.2 § 2 (part), 1992; Ord. 1397.08.1 § 2, 1991; Ord.
645.18 § 1, 1989; Ord. 1086.2 § 1 (part), 1988; prior code § 11-1-9)



8.08.110  Residential rubbish and specially treated solid waste requiring
special handling.



   A.   Rubbish consisting only of cardboard, wooden boxes, furniture,
appliances, and green waste from residences within the City limits may be
kept separately without depositing in the appropriate containers issued by
the City. Green waste, if not placed in containers, shall be in a sack or
receptacle for ease of loading. Compost piles may be maintained on the users'
private property for fertilization purposes, and matter used for
fertilization purposes only may be transported, kept, or used. Nothing in
this section shall be construed so as to permit the violation of any
provision of this code, any ordinance, or any rule or regulation of the fire
department.



   B.   Specially Treated Solid Waste.



   1.   Upon collection from the user, the user shall, if requested by
the inspector, show compliance with § 8.08.070.B.;



   2.   Owners/occupants may only deposit, or cause to be deposited,
specially treated solid waste at the Landfill when sufficient Landfill staff
is available to timely collect the specially treated solid waste so that
Landfill personnel can appropriately locate a suitable location at the
Landfill, witness the dumping of the specially treated solid waste to ensure
compliance with this chapter, and appropriately cover the specially treated
solid waste after it is deposited.



(Ord. 1397.08.16 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 1397.08.13 § 1 (part), 2002; prior
code § 11-1-10)



8.08.120  Business route collection.



   A.   The inspector shall designate premises, such as, but not
limited to, restaurants and grocery stores, hospitals and butcher shops,
wherein large accumulations of garbage occur, and shall notify the premises
owner, at the last known address (and the occupant, at the property address),
of such designation. From and after the notification by the inspector, all
rubbish and garbage accumulated upon the premises shall be deposited
separately, in approved containers for garbage as provided in Section
8.08.080 of this chapter.



   B.   The City may enter into a contract for the collection of the
garbage and other refuse. It is unlawful for any person, except the City's
designated collector, to collect, or to haul or transport garbage and other
refuse from any premises so designated under the provisions of this Section
8.08.120, except as permitted under Section 8.08.030.



   C.   Specially treated solid waste will only be picked up by
appointment, at least two business days in advance of the anticipated
collection, with the office of the public services director or his designee.



(Ord. 1397.08.16 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 1397.08.13 § 1 (part), 2002; Ord.
645.17 § 2 (part), 1989; prior code § 11-1-11)



8.08.130  Disposal site.



   There is established at places and locations as the council may from
time to time designate, by motion or order, a place for the dumping and
depositing of rubbish and garbage and any such place or location shall be
known and the same designated as the City disposal site. The inspector shall
have the authority of a police officer to enforce all provisions of this
code, ordinances, rules and regulations governing the City disposal site.



(Ord. 1397.08.16 § 1 (part), 2004; prior code § 11-1-12)



8.08.140  Disposal site rules and regulations.



   The inspector is authorized to make rules and regulations in
cooperation and agreement with the health authorities designating the manner
of and hours and limits of time dumping or depositing rubbish and garbage at
the City disposal site, and no person shall dump or deposit rubbish or
garbage in violation thereof; providing, that before the rules and
regulations become effective, appropriate signs shall be placed at or upon
the premises of the City disposal site giving notice of the rules and
regulations.



(Ord. 1397.08.16 § 1 (part), 2004; prior code § 11-1-13)



8.08.150  Inspection authority.



   No person shall deny the inspector the right of ingress or egress to
any premises for the purpose of inspecting all places and containers where
rubbish or garbage is accumulated or kept.



(Ord. 1397.08.16 § 1 (part), 2004; prior code § 11- 1-14)



8.08.160  Billing cycles created—Collection authority.



   A.   All users located in the City's collection area shall be billed
monthly by approximately the fifth day of the month for which the trash
collection is to be provided.



   B.   All fees for sanitation service shall be collected by the
finance director and deposited in the City sanitation fund. Users may pay
fees in advance quarterly, semi-annually or annually, but shall be
responsible for making up any balance due caused by a legislative increase in
the City's Consolidated Fee Schedule effective during the payment period for
which the user made advance payment.  The finance director is authorized and
directed to use any legal means or procedures to ensure collection of
sanitation fees.



(Ord. 1397.08.16 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 1397.08.09 § 1 (part), 1999: prior
code § 11-1-15)



8.08.170  Authority to waive penalty.



   The finance director shall have the authority to waive the penalties
charged on past due trash bills based on his/her determination that the
application of the penalty would create an undue hardship and that the user
has a good payment record with the City.



(Ord. 1397.08.16 § 1 (part), 2004; prior code § 11-1-16)



8.08.180  Refuse accumulation unlawful.



   A.   It is unlawful for any person to permit or suffer to accumulate
in or about any yard, lot, place or premises, or upon any street, alley, or
sidewalk adjacent to the lot, yard, place or premises, owned or occupied by
the person, any garbage or refuse so as to cause the yard, lot, premises, or
the street, alley or sidewalk adjacent thereto to be or remain in such
condition as to cause or create a nuisance or offensive odor or atmosphere,
or thereby to be or become, or cause or create, a public nuisance.



   B.   It is the responsibility of the owner or legal occupant of the
property to trim trees or shrubbery on their property and in the adjacent
right-of-way, when such vegetation interferes with the movement of solid
waste collection vehicles. Upon a violation of this section, an inspector
shall issue a notice of violation to the responsible party to trim or remove
the vegetation.  Failure to do so within ten calendar days after the notice
has been issued may result in the City's removal of the vegetation, and
billing the owner/occupant (and possibly imposing a lien on the property) for
the City's costs of removal.



(Ord. 1397.08.16 § 1 (part), 2004; prior code § 11-1-5)



8.08.190  Burning, dumping unlawful.



   No person shall burn, incinerate, bury, dump, collect, remove or in any
other manner dispose of rubbish, garbage, green waste, or waste, except with
special permit, within the limits of the City. No person shall throw, discard
or deposit any refuse or waste in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or
vacant ground, or in or upon any canal, irrigation ditch, drainage ditch or
other watercourse.



(Ord. 1397.08.16 § 1 (part), 2004; prior code 11-1-6)



8.08.200  Violations; enforcement.



   Nothing in this chapter shall imply or mandate that the Casa Grande
Municipal Landfill accept or retain refuse, waste, or specially treated solid
waste that is otherwise prohibited or not permitted to be accepted in
accordance with state statutes or regulations.



   A.   The City may reject collection or may return Landfill disposal
of refuse from users who do not comply with the requirements of this chapter.



   B.   If the City has refused collection or returned a particular
location's refuse three times in any 180-day period for non-compliance with
the requirements of this chapter, the City may suspend the user's ability to
use the Landfill until the user shows sufficient and relevant evidence of
compliance with this chapter such that the City can be reasonably assured
that non-compliance will not reoccur. Upon resumption of the suspended use of
Landfill for repeated violations, and upon resumption, if any, of the City's
collection activities for that user, the user must post financial
assurance(s), in the form approved by the City Attorney, which are twice the
amount of the last billing for that type of refuse or waste.



   C.   Upon ten days written notice to the user of intent to revoke
Landfill privileges and of a time for a meeting with the public services
director, the City may revoke the user's Landfill rights after more than two
suspensions of Landfill privileges within any eighteen-month time period.



(Ord. 1397.08.16 § 3 (part), 2004; Ord. 1397.08.13 § 2 (part), 2002)



8.08.210  Criminal penalty.



   A.   In addition to any enforcement action or penalty assessments
against a user as established in § 8.08.200, a person who commits a
violation of this Chapter may be charged and convicted in Casa Grande
Municipal Court of a class two misdemeanor.



   B.   Upon conviction of a non-enterprise person of a violation of
this Chapter, the Court may impose a sentence of incarceration not to exceed
four months in jail or a fine not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars,
exclusive of surcharges prescribed by law, or both.



   C.   Upon conviction of an enterprise, as defined in Casa Grande
Municipal Code § 8.12.010.A., of a violation of this Chapter, the Court may
impose a fine not to exceed ten thousand dollars, exclusive of surcharges
prescribed by law, or both.



   D.   Every action or proceeding under this chapter shall be
commenced and prosecuted in accordance with the laws of the State of Arizona
relating to criminal misdemeanors and the Arizona Rules of Criminal Procedure.



(Ord. 1397.08.16 § 3 (part), 2004; Ord. 1397.08.13 § 2 (part), 2002)



8.08.220  Alternative enforcement measures.



   Nothing in this Chapter shall preclude the public services director or
the inspector from seeking voluntary compliance with the provisions of this
Chapter or from enforcing this Chapter through notices of violation,
warnings, or other informal devices designed to achieve compliance in the
most efficient and effective manner under the circumstances.



(Ord. 1397.08.16 § 3 (part), 2004; Ord. 1397.08.13 § 2 (part), 2002)



Chapter 8.12
NUISANCES, LITTER, ABANDONED OR JUNK VEHICLES



Sections:



Article I.



8.12.010   Definitions.



8.12.020   Defendants and responsible parties.



8.12.030   Public nuisances defined.



8.12.040   Public nuisances designated.



8.12.050   Parking in front or side yard.



8.12.060   Littering in public places prohibited.



8.12.070   Placement of litter in receptacles.



8.12.080   Depositing litter in gutters prohibited.



8.12.090   Throwing litter from vehicles prohibited.



8.12.100   Requirements for transportation of litter.



8.12.110   Littering in parks prohibited.



8.12.120   Littering on private property prohibited.



8.12.130   Private property owner to maintain.



8.12.135   Reserved



8.12.140   Public rights-of-way ­ owner of adjacent property to maintain.



8.12.150   Littering on vacant lots prohibited.



8.12.160   Unsightly premises prohibited.



8.12.170   Accumulation of litter on construction/demolition site
prohibited.



8.12.180   Storing, parking or leaving on private property unlawful.



8.12.190   Disabled vehicles on public right-of-way unlawful.



8.12.200   Cesspools in city prohibited.



8.12.205   Smoking in and around hospital prohibited.



8.12.210   Failure to provide evidence of identity.



8.12.220   Remedies not exclusive.



8.12.230   Each day is a separate violation.



8.12.240   Alternative enforcement measures.



8.12.250   Violation ­ penalty.



8.12.260   Civil citation ­ authority to issue.



8.12.270   Habitual offender.



Article II. Abatement



8.12.280   Definitions.



8.12.290   Abatement.



8.12.300   Abatement procedure.



8.12.310   City abatement upon failure to abate by person with interest in
property.



8.12.320   Satisfaction of assessment for abatement.



8.12.330   Assessments run with the land and due in equal payments with
interest.



8.12.340   Abatement is additional remedy for violations.



8.12.350   Emergency abatement.



Article III. Appeals for notice to abate, emergency abatement action or
assessment



8.12.360   Appeals of abatement actions.



Article I.



8.12.010  Definitions.



   A.   Unless otherwise specified, the following words shall have the
meanings provided below. The definitions contained in Title 17 of the City
Code shall apply unless otherwise defined herein.



   "Abandoned or junk vehicle" means any motor vehicle or major portion
thereof, the condition of which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled,
inoperative, incapable of movement under its own power, or from which the
wheels, engine, transmission or other substantial part thereof has been
removed.



   "Enterprise" includes any corporation, association, labor union or
other legal entity.



   "Garbage" means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from
the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.



   "Graffiti" means a drawing or an inscribed message, slogan, sign,
symbol or mark of any type that is made on any public or private building,
structure or surface, without permission of the owner.



   "Improved parking area" has the same definition of "Paved Parking Space
or Surface" as defined in Title 17, section 17.12.1140 (an area covered by an
impervious dust free surface of asphalt or concrete designed to
specifications of the city engineer).  If the improved parking area existed
without substantial modification prior to the initial enactment of Casa
Grande Ordinance 1178, the surface may consist of asphalt, concrete, crushed
rock, gravel, masonry, or wood maintained free of all vegetation and
contained within a permanent curb or border as defined herein.



   "Litter" means garbage, refuse, and rubbish and all other waste
material which, if thrown or deposited in such a manner prohibited by this
chapter, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.



   "Major repair" means the removal from any vehicle of a major portion
thereof including, but not limited to, the differential, transmission, head,
engine block or oil pan.



   "Motor vehicle" means any vehicle which is self-propelled and designed
to travel along the ground and includes, but is not limited to, automobiles,
motor homes, buses, motor bikes, motorcycles, motor scooters and trucks,
which are required to be registered and licensed with the Arizona State
Department of Motor Vehicles.



   "Permanent curb or border" means a delineation of the improved parking
area from the remainder of the yard area constructed of asphalt, concrete,
masonry, metal, wood or other approved permanent material secured in or
embedded in the ground.



   "Private premises" means any dwelling, house, building, place of
business or other structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for
private residential purposes or business purposes, whether inhabited or
temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant; and shall include any
yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps or vestibules belonging to or
appurtenant to the dwelling, house, building, place of business or other
structure.



   "Public place" means any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards,
alleys, or other public ways and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds
and buildings.



   "Recreational vehicle" means a vehicular type portable structure
without permanent foundation, which can be towed, hauled or driven primarily
designed as a temporary living accommodation for recreational, camping and
travel use and including but not limited to travel trailers, truck campers,
camping trailers and self-propelled motor homes.



   "Refuse" means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes except
body wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead
animals, abandoned, wrecked or junked vehicles or parts thereof and solid
market and industrial wastes.



   "Rubbish" means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, weeds,
cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, metal, wood, glass,
bedding, crockery, construction materials, and similar materials.



   "Utility Trailer" means a vehicle without motive power designed for
carrying property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle.



   "Watercraft" means any craft or vehicle specifically designed for use
on water such as, but not limited to, a boat, canoe, jet ski, Pontoon or
similar type craft.



(Ord. 1397.08.15 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1397.08.10 § 1, 2000; Ord. 1397.08.07 § 3
(part), 1998)



8.12.020  Defendants and responsible parties.



   A.   Any person or enterprise who causes, permits, facilitates,
aids, or abets any violation of this Chapter or who fails to perform any act
or duty required pursuant to this Chapter is subject to the enforcement
provisions of this Chapter.



   B.    The person(s) or enterprise which is the owner, occupant,
lessee, lessor, manager, agent or other with an interest in a building,
structure or parcel of land in violation of this Chapter are jointly and
severally responsible for the violation, the prescribed civil or criminal
sanctions, and for abating the violation.



   C.   The owner of record, as recorded in the county recorder's
office, of the property upon which the violation of this Chapter exists shall
be presumed to be the person having lawful control over the structure or
parcel of land.  If more than one person shall be recorded as the owner of
the property, such persons shall be jointly and severally presumed to be
persons having lawful control over a structure or parcel of land.  This
presumption shall not prevent the enforcement of the provisions of this
Chapter against any person specified in subsection (A) of this section.



(Ord. 1397.08.07 § 3 (part), 1998)



8.12.030  Public nuisances defined.



   A.   A public nuisance consists of doing any act, or omitting to
perform a duty, or suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be or
exist, which act, omission, condition or thing consists of one of the
following:



   1.   Injures or endangers the health or safety of others;



   2.   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct or
renders dangerous the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any
stream, public park, parkway, square, sidewalk, street or highway in the
City, and is no less a nuisance because the extent of the annoyance or damage
inflicted is unequal;



   3.   In any way renders other persons insecure in the life or the
use of property;



   4.   Obstructs the free use of property so as to essentially
interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property by an entire
community or neighborhood, or by a considerable number of persons;



   5.   Damages or contributes to the deterioration of public property
or improvements.



(Ord. 1397.08.07 § 3 (part), 1998)



8.12.040  Public nuisances designated.



   Specific acts, omissions, places, conditions and things, such as the
erecting, maintaining, using, placing, depositing, causing, allowing, leaving
or permitting to be or remain in or upon any private lot, building, structure
or premises, in or upon any public right-of-way, street, avenue, alley, park,
parkway or other public or private place in the City of any one or more of
the following places, conditions, things or acts, to the prejudice, danger or
annoyance of others by any person, firm or corporation, are declared to be
public nuisances, including, but not limited to the following:



   1.   Privies, vaults, cesspools, sumps, pits, or like places which
are not securely protected from insects or rodents, or which are foul or
malodorous;



   2.   Filthy, littered or trash covered exterior areas, including all
buildings or structures thereon and areas adjacent thereto;



   3.   Animal manure in any quantity which is not securely protected
from insects and the elements, or which is kept or handled in violation of
this code or any other ordinance of the City or county; provided, however,
that nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to prohibit the utilization
of such animal manure on any farm, garden, lawn or ranch in such a manner and
for such purposes as are compatible with customary methods of good husbandry;



   4.   Poison oak, poison ivy, or any noxious or toxic weeds or
uncultivated plants, whether growing or otherwise, weeds, tall grass,
uncultivated shrubs or growth higher than twenty-four inches, or which
presents a fire hazard;



   5.   Accumulations of bottles, glass, cans, ashes, small pieces of
scrap iron, wire, metal articles, bric-a-brac, broken stone or cement, broken
crockery, broken glass, broken plaster, and all other trash or abandoned
material, unless the same be kept in covered bins or metal receptacles
approved by the county health officer or any ordinance of the City;



   6.   Accumulations of trash, litter, rags, empty barrels, boxes,
crates, packing cases, mattresses, bedding, excelsior, packing straw, packing
hay, or other packing material, lumber not neatly piled or anything
whatsoever in which insects may breed or multiply or which provides harborage
for rodents or which may create a fire hazard;



   7.   Any unsightly and dangerous building, billboard or other
structure, or any old abandoned or partially destroyed building or structure,
or any building or structure commenced and abandoned;



   8.   Any putrid, unsound or unwholesome bones, meat, hides, skins or
the whole or any part of any dead animal, fish or fowl, butcher's trimmings
and offal, or any waste vegetable or animal matter in any quantity, garbage,
human excreta, sewage, or other offensive substances; provided, nothing
herein contained shall prevent the temporary retention of waste in all
receptacles in the manner approved by the health officer of the county or
ordinance of the City;



   9.   The erection, continuance or use of any building, room or other
place in the City for the exercise of any trade, employment or manufacture
which, by noxious exhalations, including but not limited to smoke, soot,
dust, fumes, or other gases, offensive odors, or other annoyances, is
discomforting or offensive or detrimental to the health of individuals or of
the public;



   10.   Causing, allowing or permitting any artificial illumination of
such intensity as to interfere substantially and unnecessarily with the use
and enjoyment of public or private property by any considerable number of
people, or with the lawful use of any school, public place or public street,
or with any governmental or public function of the City, or as to constitute
a hazard or threat to the public health, safety, and welfare of the people of
the City;



   11.   Burning or disposal of refuse, sawdust, or other material in
such manner as to cause or permit ashes, sawdust, soot or cinders to be cast
upon the streets or alleys of the City, or to cause or permit the smoke,
ashes, soot or gases arising from such burning to become annoying to any
considerable number of persons or to injure or endanger the health, comfort
or repose of the persons; provided, this paragraph shall not apply where the
persons responsible for the action has properly obtained a fire permit from
the fire department of the City or the county health officer;



   12.   An unguarded or abandoned excavation, pit, well or hole
dangerous to life;



   13.   To leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building
or other structure, or within any unoccupied or abandoned building, dwelling
or other structure under the control of any person and in a place accessible
to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded ice box, refrigerator or
other container which has an airtight door or lid, snaplock or other locking
device which may not be released from the inside, without first removing the
door or lid, snaplock or other locking device from the ice box, refrigerator
or container;



   14.   The doing of any act, or omitting to perform a duty or
suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be or exist, which act,
omission, condition or thing either:



   a.   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct or
renders dangerous the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any
stream, public park, parkway, square, sidewalk, street or highway in the
City, and is no less a nuisance because the extent of the annoyance or damage
inflicted is unequal, or



   b.   Obstructs the free use of property so as to essentially
interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property by an entire
community or neighborhood, or by a considerable number of persons.



(Ord. 1397.08.07 § 3 (part), 1998)



8.12.050  Parking in front or side yard.



   It shall be unlawful to park or store any motor vehicle, recreational
vehicle, watercraft, or utility trailer within the front or corner side yard
of a single or two-family dwelling, except a motor vehicle, other than a
recreational vehicle, may be parked on an Improved Parking Area in the front
or corner side yard provided that the Improved Parking Area does not exceed a
maximum of fifty percent of the combined area of the front and corner side
yard.



(Ord. 1397.08.07 § 3 (part), 1998)



8.12.060  Littering in public places prohibited.



   No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street,
sidewalk, alley or other public place within the City except in public
receptacles, or in authorized private receptacles for collection.



(Ord. 1397.08.07 § 3 (part), 1998)



8.12.070  Placement of litter in receptacles.



   Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried,
or deposited by the element upon any street, sidewalk or other public place
or upon private property.



(Ord. 1397.08.07 § 3 (part), 1998)



8.12.080  Depositing litter in gutters prohibited.



   No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other
public place within the City the accumulation of litter from any public or
private sidewalk or driveway or any building or lot. Persons owning or
occupying property or places of business shall keep the sidewalk and parkway
in front of their premises free of litter.



(Ord. 1397.08.07 § 3 (part), 1998)



8.12.090  Throwing litter from vehicles prohibited.



   No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or
deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the City, or upon
private property.



(Ord. 1397.08.07 § 3 (part), 1998)



8.12.100  Requirements for transportation of litter.



   No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the
City unless the vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any land,
contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or
other public place. Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck
within the City, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any
street or other public place sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of
any kind.



(Ord. 1397.08.07 § 3 (part), 1998)



8.12.110  Littering in parks prohibited.



   No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the City
except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of
the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles
are not provided, all litter shall be carried away from the park by the
person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of as provided in
this chapter.



(Ord. 1397.08.07 § 3 (part), 1998)



8.12.120  Littering on private property prohibited.



   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied or unoccupied
private property within the City, whether owned by such person or not, except
that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain
authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter
will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any
public place.



(Ord. 1397.08.07 § 3 (part), 1998)



8.12.130  Private property owner to maintain.



   The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all
times maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this
section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private
receptacles for Collection.



(Ord. 1397.08.07 § 3 (part), 1998)



8.12.135  Reserved



8.12.140  Public rights-of-way owner of adjacent property to maintain.



   The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all
times maintain adjacent unutilized street right-of-way and the portion of the
alley contiguous with the property up to the centerline of the alley free of
litter.



(Ord. 1397.08.07 § 3 (part), 1998)



8.12.150  Littering on vacant lots prohibited.



   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the City whether owned by such person or not.



(Ord. 1397.08.07 § 3 (part), 1998)



8.12.160  Unsightly premises prohibited.



   Every person owning, or managing, or having charge, control or
occupancy of any real property in the City shall not allow any part of such
property visible from the street or adjoining premises to become so unsightly
or untidy as to substantially detract from the appearance of the immediate
neighborhood or tend to threaten the safety and welfare of the immediate
neighborhood.



(Ord. 1397.08.07 § 3 (part), 1998)



8.12.170  Accumulation of litter on construction/demolition site prohibited.



   It is unlawful for the owner, agent or contractor in charge of any
construction or demolition site to cause, maintain, permit or allow to be
caused, maintained or permitted the accumulation of any litter on the site
before, during or after completion of a demolition project.



(Ord. 1397.08.07 § 3 (part), 1998)



8.12.180  Storing, parking or leaving on private property unlawful.



   A.   It is unlawful for a person to park, store, leave, or permit
the parking, storing or leaving of any junk motor vehicle for a period in
excess of five days upon any private property within the City; provided,
however, that the provisions of this article shall not apply to any junk
motor vehicle in:



   1.   an enclosed building or an area completely screened from view
by fencing, shrubbery, or otherwise; or



   2.   the premises of a business enterprise which is properly
operated in the appropriate business zone pursuant to the zoning laws of the
City.



(Ord. 1397.08.07 § 3 (part), 1998)



8.12.190  Disabled vehicles on public right-of-way unlawful.



   A.   It is unlawful for the owner or any person having control of a
motor vehicle which is inoperable or disabled to allow the motor vehicle to
remain parked or located upon the paved or unpaved portion of any street or
alley within the City for a period of time in excess of seventy-two hours.



   B.   In the event that the owner or person having control of the
vehicle cannot be readily located, then the City may cause the vehicle to be
removed from the public right-of-way pursuant to the A.R.S. 28-4801 et seq.



(Ord. 1397.02.05 § 2, 1998; Ord. 1397.08.07 § 3 (part), 1998)



8.12.200  Cesspools in city prohibited.



   All cesspools, open vaults and privies within the City are declared to
be a nuisance, and subject to abatement. Each person, firm or association
owning any lot, grounds or premises within the City upon which there are any
cesspools, open vaults or privies, is required to forthwith remove, fill up
and abate the same, except in such cases where the City Engineer, for good
cause shown, shall grant temporary permission to maintain and use the same.



(Ord. 1397.08.07 § 3 (part), 1998)



8.12.205  Smoking in and around hospital prohibited.



   A.   Purpose.



   1.   The smoking of tobacco and other plants or weeds is a health
danger to those exposed to the smoke, and is a source of annoyance and
discomfort to those present.



   2.   For this reason, the purpose of this section is to regulate
smoking in and around the Casa Grande Regional Medical Center.



   B.   Definitions.



   "Hospital," as defined in this section, is the Casa Grande Regional
Medical Center.



   "Smoke or smoking," as defined in this section, includes the:



   a.   Carrying or placing of a lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe or any
other lighted smoking equipment in one's mouth to inhale and exhale smoke, or
to blow smoke rings;



   b.   Placing of a lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe or any other
lighted smoking equipment in an ashtray or other receptacle, and allowing
smoke to diffuse in the air; or



   c.   Carrying or placing of a lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe or any
other lighted smoking equipment in one's hands or any appendage or devices,
and allowing smoke to diffuse in the air.



   C.    Prohibition. Smoking is prohibited on hospital grounds, inside
hospital buildings and in hospital parking lots.



   D.   Civil Fine and Penalties Imposed. The civil fine/penalty for
violating the provisions of this section shall not exceed $50.00 for the
first offense, and $75.00 for each successive offense.



(Ord. 1397.08.17, 2005)



8.12.210  Failure to provide evidence of identity.



   A person who fails or refuses to provide evidence of his identity to a
duly authorized agent of the City upon request, when such agent has
reasonable cause to believe the person has committed a violation of this
Chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor.  Sufficient evidence of identity shall
consist of a person's full legal name, residence address, and date of birth.



(Ord. 1397.08.07 § 3 (part), 1998)



8.12.220  Remedies not exclusive.



   Violations of this Chapter are in addition to any other violation
established by law, and this Chapter shall not be interpreted as limiting the
penalties, actions, or abatement procedures which may be taken by the City or
other persons under existing laws, ordinances, or rules.



(Ord. 1397.08.07 § 3 (part), 1998)



8.12.230  Each day is a separate violation.



   Each day in which a violation of this Chapter continues shall
constitute a separate civil violation.



(Ord. 1397.08.07 § 3 (part), 1998)



8.12.240  Alternative enforcement measures.



   Nothing in this Chapter shall preclude City employees from seeking
voluntary compliance with the provisions of this Title/Chapter or from
enforcing this Title/Chapter through notices of violation, warnings, or other
informal devices designed to achieve compliance in the most efficient and
effective manner under the circumstances.



(Ord. 1397.08.07 § 3 (part), 1998)



8.12.250  Violation - penalty.



   A.   Any person or enterprise who is found by the court to be in
violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed
responsible for a civil violation, unless otherwise designated in this
Chapter.



   B.   Upon the Court finding a non-enterprise person responsible for
a civil violation of this Chapter, the court shall impose a fine in an amount
not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 for each violation.



   C.   Upon the Court finding an enterprise responsible for a civil
violation of this Chapter, the Court shall impose a fine in an amount of not
less than $250.00 nor more than $1000.00 for each violation.



(Ord. 1397.08.07 § 3 (part), 1998)



8.12.260  Civil citation - authority to issue.



   The City Manager or his designee may issue a civil citation pursuant to
this Chapter.



(Ord. 1397.08.07 § 3 (part), 1998)



8.12.270  Habitual offender.



   A.   A person who commits a violation of this Chapter after
previously having been found responsible for committing three or more civil
violations of this Chapter within a twenty-four month period, whether by
admission, by payment of the fine, by default, or by judgment after hearing,
shall be guilty of a class one misdemeanor.



   B.   The Casa Grande City Attorney's Office shall file a criminal
misdemeanor complaint in the Casa Grande City Court against habitual
offenders who violate this Chapter.



   C.   For purposes of calculating the twenty-four month period under
this section, the dates of the commission of the offenses are the determining
factor.



   D.   Upon conviction of a non-enterprise person of a violation of
this Chapter, the Court may impose a sentence of incarceration not to exceed
six months in jail or a fine not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars,
exclusive of penalty assessments prescribed by law, or both.  The Court
shall order a person who has been convicted of this section to pay a fine of
not less than $500.00 for each count upon which a conviction has been
obtained.



   E.   Upon conviction of an enterprise of a violation of this
Chapter, the Court may impose a fine not to exceed twenty thousand dollars,
exclusive of surcharges or penalty assessments prescribed by law, or both. 
The Court shall order an enterprise who has been convicted of this section to
pay a fine of not less than $1000.00 for each count upon which a conviction
has been obtained.



   F.   Every action or proceeding under this Section shall be
commenced and prosecuted in accordance with the laws of the State of Arizona
relating to criminal misdemeanors and the Arizona Rules of Criminal Procedure.



(Ord. 1397.08.07 § 3 (part), 1998)



Article II.Abatement



8.12.280  Definitions.



   "Property" includes buildings, grounds, lots and tracts of land.



   "Structures" includes buildings, improvements and other structures that
are constructed or placed on land.



(Ord. 1397.08.07 § 3 (part), 1998)



8.12.290  Abatement.



   As an additional remedy, or an alternative to a civil or criminal
complaint, the City shall compel any persons with an interest in the property
or agents of such persons to abate any violations of this chapter.  Such
abatement shall proceed independently of any civil or criminal violation
filed pursuant to this chapter.



(Ord. 1397.08.07 § 3 (part), 1998)



8.12.300  Abatement procedure.



   A.   The City shall give reasonable written notice to abate any
violation of this chapter to all persons with an interest in the property or
agents of such persons.



   B.   Notice shall contain: 



   1.   The legal description of the property;



   2.   The cost of such removal to the City if notified persons do not
comply;



   3.   A date for compliance which shall not be less than thirty days
after the date notice was given;



   4.   Identification of the property in violation by street address
if it exists; and



   5.   A statement of the violation(s) in sufficient detail to allow a
reasonable person to identify and correct them.



   C.   Said written notice shall be either personally served, mailed
by certified mail at their last known address or the address to which the tax
bill for the subject property was last sent; or served in accordance with the
Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.



   D.   The City may record the notice in the Office of Pinal County
Recorder.  If such notice is recorded and compliance with the notice is
subsequently satisfied, the City shall record a release of the notice.



(Ord. 1397.08.07 § 3 (part), 1998)



8.12.310  City abatement upon failure to abate by person with interest in
property.



   A.   Upon failure of any notified person, to abate a public nuisance
within compliance time set in the written notice, the City may remove, abate,
enjoin or cause removal of the violation.



   B.   Removal, abatement, or the acquisition of an injunction may be
accomplished, at the sole discretion of the City, by City staff or an
independent contractor.



   C.   The City Manager, or his authorized representative, shall
prepare a verified statement and account of the actual cost of abatement
action, legal fees, additional inspection and other incidental connected
costs.



   D.   The amount in the verified statement and account is declared as
an assessment upon the lot or tract of land on which the violation
occurred.  Said assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same
manner as other City assessments are collected.



   E.   A copy of the statement and account shall be personally
delivered; sent by certified mail, return receipt requested; or served in
accordance with the Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure to all persons with an
interest in the property and/or their agents.



   F.   The assessment shall be recorded in the Pinal County Recorder's
Office and from the date of its recording shall be a lien on the lot or tract
of land and the several amounts assessed against the lot or tract of land
until paid.



   1.   If the assessment was recorded before July 15, 1996, the
assessment shall be subject and inferior to the lien for general taxes and to
all other prior recorded mortgages.



   2.   If the assessment is recorded after July 15, 1996, the
assessment shall be prior and superior to all other liens, obligations
mortgages or other encumbrances, except liens for general taxes.



(Ord. 1397.08.07 § 3 (part), 1998)



8.12.320  Satisfaction of assessment for abatement.



   A.   A sale of the property to satisfy an assessment obtained under
the provisions of this section shall be made upon judgment of foreclosure and
order of sale.



   B.   The City may institute an action to enforce the lien in a
competent court of the county at any time after the recording of the
assessment, but failure to enforce the lien by such action shall not affect
its validity.



   C.   The recorded assessment shall be prima facie evidence of the
truth of all matters recited therein and of the regularity of all proceedings
prior to the recording thereof.



   D.   A prior assessment or lien for the purposes provided in this
section shall not be a bar to a subsequent assessment or assessments, or lien
or liens, for such purposes, and any number of assessments or liens on the
same lot or tract of land may be enforced in the same action.



(Ord. 1397.08.07 § 3 (part), 1998)



8.12.330  Assessments run with the land and due in equal payments with
interest.



   A.   Assessments that are imposed under Chapter 8.12 run against the
property until paid and are due and payable in equal annual installments as
set forth in A.R.S. 9-499(E) or any subsequent replacement state statutory
provision thereof.



   B.   An assessment that is past due accrues interest at the rate
prescribed by A.R.S. 44-1201 or any subsequent replacement state statutory
provision thereof.



(Ord. 1397.08.07 § 3 (part), 1998)



8.12.340  Abatement is additional remedy for violations.



   In addition to any fine which may be imposed for a violation of any
provision of this chapter, the person, firm or corporation shall be liable
for all costs which may be assessed pursuant to sections of this chapter for
the removal of the public nuisance.



(Ord. 1397.08.07 § 3 (part), 1998)



8.12.350  Emergency abatement.



   A.   If a situation presents an imminent hazard to life or public
safety, the City may issue a notice to abate directing the owner, occupant,
operator, or agent to take such action as is appropriate to correct or abate
the emergency upon notice by the enforcement official to the responsible
person(s). In the alternative, and at the sole discretion of the City if such
situation presents an imminent hazard to life or public safety, the City may
act to correct or abate the emergency. In the event the City is unable to
contact the owner, occupant, agent or responsible party, it in no way effects
the City's right to correct or abate the emergency. The owner, occupant,
operator, agent or responsible party shall be granted a hearing before the
Building Board of Appeals on the matter upon his/her request, as soon as
practicable, but such appeal shall in no case stay the abatement or
correction of such emergency.



(Ord. 1397.08.07 § 3 (part), 1998)



Article III: Appeals for Notice to Abate, Emergency Abatement Action or
Assessment



8.12.360  Appeals of abatement actions.



   Any owner, lienholder, or other person with a property interest may
appeal any notice to abate, emergency abatement action or abatement
assessment, other than actions or assessments ordered by a court, in
accordance with the provisions and procedures of Title 17, Zoning, Chapter
17.68, Administrative Procedures, Article VI, Procedures for Appeals to the
Board of Adjustment.



(Ord. 1397.08.27 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1397.08.07 § 3 (part), 1998)



Chapter 8.16
FIRE CODE ADOPTED



Sections:



8.16.010   International Fire Code.



8.16.020   Violation—Penalties.



8.16.010  International Fire Code.



   Those certain documents known as (i) “International Fire Code, 2018
Edition” including appendices A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, L and N; and (ii)
“City of Casa Grande Amendments to the International Fire Code, 2018
Edition,” as set forth in the document entitled “2019 Amendments to the
City of Casa Grande Building, Health, and Safety Codes,” both of which were
made a public record by Resolution No.5170 of the City of Casa Grande,
Arizona, three copies of which are on file in the office of the Casa Grande
City Clerk, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if
fully set out in this section.



(Ord. 1397.08.28 § 1, 2019; Ord. 1397.08.25 § 2, 2014)



8.16.020  Violation—Penalties.



   A.    It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to
erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or
demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building, structure or building
service equipment, or cause or permit the same to be done, in violation of
this chapter and the other technical codes adopted by the City of Casa Grande.



   B.   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this chapter is guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor; and each such person,
firm or corporation shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every
day or portion thereof during which any violation of any provision of the
code is committed, continued or permitted. Upon conviction, each violation is
punishable by a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars (plus any
applicable surcharges), by imprisonment for not more than four months, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.



   C.   The imposition of one penalty for any violation of this chapter
shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. Application of the
above penalty shall not be held to preclude the forced removal of prohibited
conditions.



(Ord. 1397.08.20 § 10 (part), 2008)



Chapter 8.20
FIRE LANES



Sections:



8.20.010   Defined.



8.20.020   Established.



8.20.030   Required—Specifications.



8.20.040   Established for new and existing structures—Conformance
required.



8.20.050   Applicability.



8.20.060   Obstruction of prohibited.



8.20.070   Violation—Penalty.



8.20.010  Defined.



   “Fire lane” means an area, parking lot, driveway, roadway or
portion thereof that shall be:



   A.   Designated or approved by the fire chief;



   B.   Marked with standard signs and/or other markers as approved by
the fire chief; and



   C.   Maintained clear of obstructions its entire length.



(Prior code § 5-2-11(B))



8.20.020  Established.



   The fire chief may require that fire lanes for new and existing
structures be established on private property to provide access for fire
suppression operations by the use of an improved public street, areaway,
parking lot, driveway or roadway.



(Prior code §  5-2-11(A))



8.20.030  Required—Specifications.



   Fire lanes shall be required for all structures, except residential
structures of four dwelling units or less, constructed after September 1,
1978, in accordance with the following specifications:



   Fire lanes shall be:



   A.   To within one hundred fifty feet of an entrance to the interior
or to a point as approved by the fire chief for buildings two stories or less
in height;



   B.   To within fifty feet of an entrance to the interior or to a
point as approved by the fire chief for buildings three stories or more in
height;



   C.   Be a minimum of sixteen feet in width and to have vehicle
passing points twenty-five feet in width and of length and interval as
designated by the fire chief;



   D.   Surfaced to support maximum weight of fire apparatus; surfacing
may be concrete, asphaltic concrete, brick, stone, but not necessarily
limited to such materials, as approved by the fire chief; engineering data
shall be submitted with plans review submittal to substantiate weight-bearing
capacity when required by the fire chief;



   E.   Have a vertical clearance of not less than twelve feet;



   F.   Have a maximum gradient of eight percent (eight feet in one
hundred feet);



   G.   Have forty feet minimum center line radius on curves; and



   H.   Be dead ended at no more than two hundred feet maximum length;
or allow through passage; or terminate in minimum forty foot centerline
radius cul-de-sac.



(Prior code § 5-2-11(E))



8.20.040  Established for new and existing structures—Conformance required.



   Fire lanes established for new and existing structures, except as
provided in Section 8.20.030, shall conform to fire lane requirements
applicable at the time of construction provided that if no fire lane
requirements were applicable at the time of construction, the fire chief may
require establishment of fire lanes to conform with the requirements of
Section 8.20.030, insofar as is practicable without requiring any
construction, structural modification or substantial financial hardship.



(Prior code § 5-2-11(F))



8.20.050  Applicability.



   The specific requirements of this chapter as applicable to a specific
structure may be modified by the fire chief in recognition of varying
occupancies, sizes and hazards of buildings and the provision of other means
of access or fixed fire protection.



(Prior code § 5-2-11(G))



8.20.060  Obstruction of prohibited.



   It is unlawful for any person to park motor vehicles within, or
otherwise obstruct any fire lane except as may be specifically permitted by
the fire chief and violation of this section shall be treated as a
misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars
or imprisonment not to exceed ten days or both.



(Prior code § 5-2-11(C))



8.20.070  Violation—Penalty.



   Any vehicle stopped or parked within a fire lane, established,
designated and marked in accordance with this section, may be removed at the
expense of the vehicle owner. Removal of a vehicle under such circumstances
may be authorized by the person in lawful possession of the property or by
the fire chief or his representative. The person in lawful possession of the
property shall keep designated fire lanes free of vehicles and all other
obstructions.



(Prior code § 5-2-11(D))



Chapter 8.24
ALARM SYSTEMS



Sections:



8.24.010     Purpose and intent.



8.24.020     Applicability.



8.24.030     Definitions.



8.24.040     Alarm business duties.



8.24.050     Alarm user duties.



8.24.060   Proprietor alarm user’s responsibilities.



8.24.070   Duties of the monitoring agency.



8.24.080   Alarm user permit required.



8.24.090   Prohibition against automatic dialing devices.



8.24.100   Removal of non-compliant equipment.



8.24.110     Violations.



8.24.120   Right to privacy.



8.24.130   Liability of city limited.



8.24.140   Governmental immunity.



8.24.150   Penalties.



8.24.160   Fees payable.



8.24.170   Appeal procedures.



8.24.180   Enforcement.



8.24.010  Purpose and intent.



   A.   This chapter is intended to encourage improvement in the
reliability of alarm systems, devices and services, and to insure that law
enforcement will not be unduly diverted from responding to actual criminal
activity as a result of responding to false alarms.



   B.   This chapter governs burglary, panic, robbery and holdup
alarms, both audible and inaudible, intended to summon law enforcement
response, and requires alarm permit registration, provides for a fee schedule
to be adopted, provides for penalties for violations, establishes a system of
administration and sets conditions for revocation of permits, and if
necessary, suspension of law enforcement response.



(Ord. 1397.08.19 § 2 (part), 2008)



8.24.020  Applicability.



   This chapter addresses those persons who purchase, lease or rent, and
those persons who own or conduct the business of selling, leasing, renting,
maintaining or monitoring, alarm systems, devices or services within the
City. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to alarm systems owned
by city, county, state or federal governments or agencies, when such systems
are utilized on premises owned, operated and installed by the respective
city, county, state or federal government or agency. This chapter shall apply
to schools and other public and quasi-public uses. The provisions of this
chapter shall not apply to audible fire alarms or audible alarms affixed to
automobiles.



(Ord. 1397.08.19 § 2 (part), 2008)



8.24.030  Definitions.



   Except where otherwise indicated by the context, the following
definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:



   “Act of nature” means an unusual, extraordinary, sudden and
unexpected manifestation of the forces of nature, the effects of which cannot
be prevented by reasonable human care, skill or foresight.



   “Alarm or alarm system” means any mechanical or electrical device
used for alerting others of unauthorized entry, an emergency, or the
commission of an unlawful act within buildings or on premises. 



   “Alarm agent” means any person employed by an alarm business,
either directly or indirectly, whose duties include any of the following:
installing, maintaining, servicing or repairing an alarm or alarm system in
or on any building, place or premises. Any person whose duties consist solely
of resetting an alarm following activation is not an alarm agent.



   “Alarm business” means any person, firm or corporation that is in
the business of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing or repairing any
alarm or alarm system in or on any building, structure or facility.



   “Alarm coordinator” means the police chief, or an individual
designated by the police chief to enforce the provisions of this chapter.



   “Alarm permit” means written authorization granted by the alarm
coordinator to an alarm user to operate an alarm system.



   “Alarm site”  means any single location served by an alarm system
or alarm systems.  Each unit, if served by separate alarm systems in a
multi-unit building/complex, shall be considered a separate alarm site.



   “Alarm user” means any person or business that leases, rents,
purchases or uses a monitored or proprietor alarm, alarm system, device or
service.



   “Audible alarm” means a device designed for the detection of
unauthorized entry of premises and which, when activated, generates an
audible sound on the premises.



   “Automatic dialing device” means a device that is interconnected to
a telephone line, and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone
number and transmit an emergency message indicating a need for emergency
response, either by voice or code signal or by maintaining an open line with
emergency services.



   “Cost recovery” means an assessment for the recovery of costs
incurred by the police department in responding to false alarm activations.



   “False alarm” means an alarm signal or message indicating an
emergency, causing the police department to respond and which, upon
investigation, results in a police officer finding no evidence of a criminal
offense or an emergency situation. Excluded from the definition of “false
alarm” are:



   1.   Alarms occurring as a result of an acts of nature;



   2.   Any disruption of the telephone circuit beyond the control of
the alarm company and/or user;



   3.   Electrical power disruptions or failure; and



   4.   Alarms caused by failure of the equipment at the monitoring
station.



   “Holdup/robbery alarm” means any signal manually activated to
indicate a robbery or holdup in progress, but is not the result of a robbery,
holdup, or any exclusion from the “false alarm” definition listed above.



   “Monitoring station” means any person in the business of providing
monitoring services that will notify the police department of an emergency.



   “Panic alarm” means an alarm system signal generated by the manual
activation of a device intended to signal a life-threatening or emergency
situation, requesting law enforcement response.



   “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture,
association, corporation, estate, trust, or any other group or combination
acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular number.



   “Proprietor alarm” means any alarm or alarm system that is not
leased or rented from, or owned or maintained under contract by an alarm
business.



(Ord. 1397.08.19 § 2 (part), 2008)



8.24.040  Alarm business duties.



   In addition to other duties that may be set forth in this chapter, the
duties of an alarm business shall be as follows:



   A.   To install an alarm system compatible with the environment, to
take reasonable measures to prevent the occurrence of false alarms, and, if
it has agreed to provide maintenance or repair service to the system, to
service the system within seventy-two hours of a request for service. The
alarm business shall not install a single-action, non-recessed button as a
device to activate a holdup or panic alarm.



   B.   To provide written and oral instructions to each of its alarm
subscribers, and the principal occupants of the buildings or premises
protected by an alarm system, in the proper use and operation of the
system.  Such instruction will specifically include all instructions to turn
the alarm system on and off, and to avoid false alarms.



   C.   To provide each purchaser and subscriber with a copy of this
chapter, an alarm subscriber/proprietor permit application, and false alarm
prevention material. The alarm business shall complete and sign the alarm
subscriber/alarm company information form with the alarm subscriber/user, and
submit the form as required in Subsection G. of this section.



   D.   Upon leasing or renting an alarm system:



   1.   To conspicuously place on the premise a tag identifying the
alarm business, including a telephone number to call when the alarm has been
activated.



   2.   To maintain current records of the locations of alarm system,
devices or services, and the names and telephone numbers of the persons and
alternates to be notified whenever the alarm is activated.



   3.   To inactivate or cause to be inactivated the audible alarm
within thirty minutes of the notification of its activation, in the event the
primary and alternate cannot be contacted or do not respond.



   E.   Upon leasing, renting, selling or monitoring an alarm system:



   1.   To establish a central receiving station that will monitor
these alarm systems.  The central receiving station shall attempt to contact
the alarmed location by telephonic or other electronic means on every alarm
signal, except a holdup, robbery, panic or similar duress alarm activation,
whether or not actual contact with a person is made, before requesting a
police response to an alarm system signal.



   2.      To organize its central receiving station in order to be
able to readily and positively identify the type of alarm, including but not
limited to, burglary, holdup or panic alarm, and the location of the alarm,
if there is more than one system, whether the alarm is audible or silent, the
alarm subscriber permit number, the description of the zone or sensor
activated, and the name and response time of a responsible party.



   3.      To maintain records as to each of these alarm systems,
devices or services, which shall include the name of the owner or occupant of
the premises, the name and the telephone number of the subscriber, a primary
person and at least one alternate responsible for responding to the premises
when the alarm is activated, information concerning whether the alarm system
includes an audible alarm, and records of any alarm activation for a period
of one year from the date of the activation. The records required by this
paragraph shall be made available for inspection to any state law enforcement
officer or city regulatory licensing inspections official, upon twenty days'
prior written demand. The business may require the law enforcement officer or
inspector to complete an inspection log with name, serial or badge number,
time, date, and purpose of the inspection.



   4.   To notify the police department of activated alarm systems in
the manner prescribed by the police chief, including such reasonable
information concerning the alarm system as the police department may request.
Reasonable information shall include copies of central station alarm activity
reports, the names of persons from the activated alarm location who have
contracted with the alarm business, and any mailing or telephonic information
for the activated alarm location. The information shall be made available at
any reasonable time upon request for inspection by police department
representatives.



   5.   To arrange for either the alarm subscriber, alarm agent or
other responsible representative to go to the premises of an activated alarm
system within thirty minutes of the activation of the alarm, in order to be
available to assist the police in determining the reason for activation, and
in securing the premises. In no event shall there be an unreasonable delay in
arriving at the location of the alarm.



   6.   To notify the alarm subscriber or other responsible person, in
the case of a monitored alarm system, of all alarm activations at the alarm
subscriber's premises within twenty-four hours of activation, not including
weekends and holidays, by telephone, facsimile transmission, or written
notice deposited in the United States mail.



   F.   To cease responsibility for an alarm system pursuant to the
chapter, the alarm business shall send written notice to the police
department in the event the alarm business ceases to lease, rent, maintain
service, or monitor any alarm system. The notice shall be sent within ten
days after the date service or responsibility is discontinued.



   G.   To submit, on a form and in the manner prescribed by the police
chief, such information concerning compliance of the alarm business with its
duties under this section as the police chief may request. An alarm business
representative and the subscriber shall complete and sign the alarm
subscriber/alarm company information form, and the alarm business shall
submit the form to the police department within ten days of commencement of
service for the alarm system.



   H.   Alarm businesses that do not monitor, maintain, service or
install alarms or alarm systems, except as set forth in this Subsection H.,
shall not be subject to Subsections A. through F. of this section, but shall
be responsible for instructing each person who purchases an alarm or alarm
system in the proper use and operation of the alarm, informing each alarm
subscriber or alarm purchaser to contact the police department for
information regarding this chapter, advising each alarm subscriber or alarm
purchaser of the requirement of an alarm subscriber permit, and providing a
copy of this chapter to each alarm subscriber or alarm purchaser. Such
instruction will specifically include all instructions necessary to turn off
the alarm and to avoid false alarms. Any alarm business that sells an alarm
or an alarm system with monitoring services, or leases, rents, installs,
maintains or services an alarm or alarm system with monitoring services,
shall be subject to Subsections A. through G. of this section.



   I.   Any alarm business that monitors, but does not sell, lease,
rent, install, service or maintain alarms or alarm systems shall be subject
to Subsections E., F. and G. of this section.



   J.   Any alarm business that sells or installs alarms or alarm
systems without monitoring services, and does not lease, rent, install,
maintain or service alarms or alarm systems, shall be subject to Subsections
C., D. and G. of this section.



(Ord. 1397.08.19 § 2 (part), 2008)



8.24.050  Alarm user duties.



   In addition to other duties that may be set forth in this chapter, the
duties of an alarm user shall be:



   A.   To obtain an alarm permit within ten days of installation of an
alarm system.



   B.   To inform persons authorized to place the alarm system into
operation of the provisions of this chapter, emphasizing the importance of
avoiding false alarms. A current copy of the provisions of this chapter shall
be maintained on the premises, and shall be made available to persons
authorized to install an alarm system into operation. 



   C.   To obtain a new permit within ten days if the alarm user moves
to another location. Any other change in the alarm user's service shall be
sent to the alarm coordinator within ten days of the change.



   D.   To respond in person or via designated responsible party to the
alarm system's location within thirty minutes of alarm activation, or when
requested by law enforcement, in order to:



   1.   Deactivate an alarm system; and/or



   2.   Provide access to the alarm site.



   E.   To renew the permit annually, as long as the alarm system is in
operation.



   F.   To maintain the alarm or alarm system in good working order,
and take reasonable measures to prevent the occurrence of false alarms.



   G.   To disconnect any alarm system upon notice of revocation.



   H.   To ensure that the alarm system is not subject to false alarms.



(Ord. 1397.08.19 § 2 (part), 2008)



8.24.060  Proprietor alarm user’s responsibilities.



   In addition to other duties that may be set forth in this chapter, the
duties of a proprietor alarm user shall be:



   A.   To be familiar with the provisions of this chapter, and to
obtain an alarm permit from the alarm coordinator within ten days of
installation of any alarm system.



   B.   To maintain the alarm system in good working order, and to take
reasonable measures to prevent the occurrence of false alarms.



   C.   To notify the alarm coordinator of the names, addresses, and
telephone numbers of the primary person and at least two alternates to be
notified, in case the alarm is activated and law enforcement is called to
respond.



   D.   To deactivate the alarm system within thirty minutes of
notification of its activation.



   E.   To ensure that the alarm system is not subject to false alarms.



(Ord. 1397.08.19 § 2 (part), 2008)



8.24.070  Duties of the monitoring agency.



   In addition to other duties that may be set forth in this chapter, the
duties of a monitoring agency shall be:



   A.   To establish a monitoring station in order to monitor alarm
systems.



   B.   To organize its monitoring station in order to be able to
readily and positively identify the type of alarm (i.e., burglary,
robbery/holdup, or panic), and the location of the alarm(s) if there is more
than one system.



   C.   To maintain current records as to each of the alarms or alarm
systems, which shall include the alarm permit number, the name of the owner
or occupant of the premises, the name and telephone number of the user or
primary person and at least two alternates responsible for responding to the
premises when the alarm is activated, and information concerning whether the
alarm system includes an audible alarm.



   D.   To provide law enforcement with the alarm permit number for the
premises, residence or location of the alarm activation at the time law
enforcement is dispatched.



   E.   To arrange for either the alarm user, alarm agent, or other
responsible representative to go to the premises of an activated alarm
system, in order to assist law enforcement in determining the reason for
activation, and in securing the premises.



   F.   To cease responsibility for an alarm system pursuant to this
chapter, the alarm business shall promptly notify the alarm coordinator in
the event the alarm business ceases to lease, rent, maintain, service or
monitor any alarm system. Such notice that the alarm business is no longer
providing service shall be sent to the alarm coordinator within ten days of
termination of service.



   G.   Alarm businesses that sell alarms but do not monitor, maintain,
lease, service or install alarms or alarm systems shall not be subject to
Subsections B. and E. of this section, but shall be responsible for
instructing each person that purchases an alarm or alarm system in the proper
use and operation of the alarm. Each instruction will specifically include
necessary instructions in turning off the alarm(s), and in avoiding false
alarms.



   H.   Alarm businesses and monitoring agencies shall possess a City
business license.



(Ord. 1397.08.19 § 2 (part), 2008)



8.24.080  Alarm user permit required.



   A.   Each alarm user shall obtain an alarm permit from the alarm
coordinator for each alarm system within ten days of installation of an alarm
system. For alarms installed prior to the effective date of this chapter
(June 1, 2008), alarm permits must be obtained from the alarm coordinator's
office no later than August 31, 2008. The application for an alarm permit
provided by the alarm coordinator must include two alternate parties, along
with appropriate contact information, designated to respond in the event of
an alarm activation. The application shall include a permit fee as
established in the City's Consolidated Fee Schedule. An alarm permit must be
available within the premises protected by the alarm, and available for
inspection by the police department when responding to an alarm activation. 
Alarm permits are not transferable from one user to another user, or from one
address to another address.



   B.   Each alarm user shall renew its permit yearly. As part of the
renewal, each alarm user shall attest annually that the alarm system remains
active, and that the information provided on the application remains current
at all times. Alarm users shall notify the alarm coordinator of any changes
to the information provided on the application, and shall further notify the
alarm coordinator if the alarm system is deactivated as set forth elsewhere
in this chapter.



(Ord. 1397.08.19 § 2 (part), 2008)



8.24.090  Prohibition against automatic dialing devices.



   No person shall use, or cause to be used, any automatic telephone
device or telephone attachment that directly or indirectly causes a public
primary telephone trunk line of Pinal County to be utilized, and then
reproduces a prerecorded message or signal or otherwise maintains an open
line without direct person-to-person communication, or prevents termination
of a call.



(Ord. 1397.08.19 § 2 (part), 2008)



8.24.100  Removal of non-compliant equipment.



   In addition to any other remedy provided by law, the police department
may, upon obtaining knowledge of the use of any device or attachment not
operated or maintained in accordance with the provision of this chapter,
obtain an order for the removal of such device or attachment, without
liability or cost to the City. All alarm systems and components must comply
with the provisions of the City’s building codes.



(Ord. 1397.08.19 § 2 (part), 2008)



8.24.110  Violations.



   A.   Failure or refusal to comply with any section of this chapter
shall be a violation and subject to assessment of a fee, penalty, sanction or
cost recovery fee as set forth in Section 8.24.150. 



   B.   No person shall intentionally cause the activation of an alarm
system, knowing that it may result in the dispatch of police or fire
personnel and equipment, when no criminal or emergency condition exists. Any
person causing such alarm activation shall be guilty of a Class 1
misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be liable for a fine of not less than
five hundred dollars, nor more than one thousand dollars, plus any additional
surcharges authorized or mandated by law, or sentenced to not more than one
hundred eighty days in jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment.



(Ord. 1397.08.19 § 2 (part), 2008)



8.24.120  Right to privacy.



   Information provided pursuant to this chapter shall be maintained for
use by the police department, and shall not be made available to the public
without the authorization of the applicant or order of the court.  The City
is not subject to liability in the event that information provided to the
police department is inadvertently released.



(Ord. 1397.08.19 § 2 (part), 2008)



8.24.130  Liability of city limited.



   The police department shall take every reasonable precaution to assure
that alarm notifications received are given appropriate attention and acted
upon with appropriate dispatch. Nevertheless, the City shall not be liable
for any failure or neglect to respond upon receipt of an alarm notification,
or the failure or neglect of any person with a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter, or with a franchise in connection with the installation and
operation of equipment, the transmission of alarm signals, or the relaying of
such signals and messages. In the event the alarm coordinator revokes the
alarm user's permit or causes the disconnection of an alarm device, the City,
county, state, and their agents and employees shall incur no liability
resulting from such action.



(Ord. 1397.08.19 § 2 (part), 2008)



8.24.140  Governmental immunity.



   An alarm permit issued pursuant to this chapter does not establish or
create any duty or obligation of response from law enforcement personnel. Any
and all liability and consequential damages resulting from a failure to
respond to a notification is hereby disclaimed, and governmental immunity as
provided by law is retained. By applying for an alarm permit, the alarm user
acknowledges that law enforcement response may be influenced by factors such
as: the availability of police units, priority of calls, weather conditions,
traffic conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels and prior response
history.



(Ord. 1397.08.19 § 2 (part), 2008)



8.24.150  Penalties.



   A.   For any alarm user or proprietor alarm failing to prevent false
alarms (other than panic, robbery/holdup and similar manually operated
distress alarms, which are governed by Subsection B. of this section) during
a permit year, a cost recovery fee for responding to such false alarms is
hereby established. The amount of the fee shall be set forth in the City's
Consolidated Fee Schedule; provided, however, that no fee shall be assessed
for the first two false alarms in any permit year. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this chapter, any alarm user or proprietor with ten false alarms
shall have their permit revoked.



   B.   For any alarm user or proprietor alarm failing to prevent false
alarms of a panic, robbery/holdup, or other similar manually operated
distress alarm during a permit year, a cost recovery fee for responding to
such false alarms is hereby established. The amount of the fee shall be set
forth in the City's Consolidated Fee Schedule; provided, however, that no fee
shall be assessed for the first false alarm in any permit year. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any alarm user or
proprietor with six false alarms shall have their permit revoked.



   C.   Fees for violations of any provision of this chapter, other
than those set forth in Subsections A. and B. above, shall be set forth in
the City's Consolidated Fee Schedule. Each violation of a provision of this
chapter, and each day that such violation continues, shall be a separate
offense.



   D.   In the event of five or more false alarms within a permit year
for any alarm system, the alarm coordinator shall notify the alarm user of
these excessive false alarm violations by certified mail, and shall direct
the alarm user, within ten days of receipt of this notice, to submit a report
to the alarm coordinator, describing the corrective actions to be taken to
eliminate the false alarms. A copy of the notification shall be sent to the
alarm business or agent providing service to the alarm user. Refusal of an
alarm user to accept or receive the certified mail shall not excuse the alarm
user from compliance with this section, and any alarm user so refusing or
failing to accept certified mail shall be deemed to have received notice as
of the date of final attempt of the United States Postal Service to affect
delivery.



   E.   Upon receipt of an alarm user's report detailing the corrective
measures to be taken, the alarm coordinator shall determine whether such
measures are reasonably calculated to correct future false alarms, and if
acceptable, shall confirm with the alarm user that the permit shall be
continued conditioned upon faithful performance of the corrective measures
detailed in the report. In the event an alarm user whose corrective measures
have been accepted by the alarm coordinator suffers additional false alarms
during the permit year as a result or related to failure to follow the
corrective measures, the alarm coordinator may revoke the permit by providing
notice via certified mail to the alarm user that the permit is revoked
effective ten days from the date that notification is received. 



   F.   If no report is submitted or if the alarm coordinator
determines that the actions taken are not reasonably calculated to prevent
the reoccurrence of false alarms, the alarm coordinator shall give notice by
certified mail to the alarm user that the alarm permit is revoked effective
ten days from the date notification is received.



   G.   If an alarm user fails to pay any fee, cost recovery fee, or
other assessment imposed in accordance with this chapter, within the time set
forth in Section 8.24.160, the alarm permit shall be revoked and late
penalties may be assessed as set forth in the City's Consolidated Fee
Schedule. The alarm coordinator shall give notice by certified mail to the
alarm user that the alarm permit is revoked, effective ten days from the date
notification is received. 



   H.   An alarm user whose permit has been revoked shall be
immediately furnished written notification by certified mail of such
revocation, and shall discontinue the use of the alarm system with respect to
which a permit has been revoked. It shall be a violation of this chapter for
any alarm user to fail to disconnect such system within ten days after
written notification has been received advising the alarm user of the
revocation of the alarm permit. Failure to disconnect the alarm system shall
subject the alarm user to a penalty, in addition to the cost recovery fee,
pursuant to the City's Consolidate Fee Schedule.



   I.   For purposes of this chapter, notice shall be effective if the
same is mailed to the alarm user at the address furnished to the alarm
coordinator on the permit application form, or at such other address as the
alarm user may subsequently furnish in writing to the alarm coordinator. Such
notice shall also be effective if mailed to the alarm business at the address
provided to the alarm coordinator in connection with the filing of alarm user
instructions, or alternatively, to the last known address of the alarm
business. In this chapter, for notices other than by certified mail, notice
shall be deemed given on the third day after the notice has been deposited in
the United States mail with sufficient postage attached. For notices required
to be sent by certified mail, such notice is effective when received;
provided, however, that failure or refusal of to accept or receive certified
mail shall not excuse performance of any duties, and any person or entity so
refusing to accept certified mail shall be deemed to have received notice as
of the final attempt of the United States Postal Service to affect delivery.



   J.   An alarm user whose alarm permit has been revoked may have it
reinstated by paying all fees and/or penalties, submitting a corrective
report detailing the corrective action taken, with verification of inspection
for malfunctions attached, and payment of a reinstatement fee. Any further
violations during a permit year shall be grounds for summary revocation, upon
providing notice by certified mail as set forth above.



(Ord. 1397.08.19 § 2 (part), 2008)



8.24.160  Fees payable.



   Any and all fees provided for by this chapter shall be paid to the
finance department within thirty days from the date a bill therefor is
deposited in the regular first class U.S. Mail, with postage fully paid and
addressed to the user at the address where the alarm system is operated. Fees
not paid in full at the end of such period shall be subject to a late fee,
and may result in permit revocation proceedings by the alarm coordinator, as
set forth in Subsection 8.24.150.G.



(Ord. 1397.08.19 § 2 (part), 2008)



8.24.170  Appeal procedures.



   Within ten days after the effective date of written notification of a
violation of this chapter or of revocation of a permit, the alarm user or
other aggrieved party may appeal to the chief of police, on forms provided by
and subject to procedures established by the chief.  Upon receipt of a
notice of appeal, the chief of police shall cause an investigation into the
reason for the City's action, and shall inform the alarm user of his findings
and decision within twenty days. If the alarm user is dissatisfied with the
decision of the chief of police, he/she may appeal to the city manager within
ten days from the effective date of written notification of the decision of
the chief of police. The decision of the city manager shall be final.



(Ord. 1397.08.19 § 2 (part), 2008) 



8.24.180  Enforcement.



   A.   The City may pursue any and all lawful remedies necessary for
the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter.  Action may be
commenced in the name of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction, for
the amount of any delinquent fees or fines.  Such legal action shall also
require the inclusion of court costs, legal and attorneys' fees.



   B.   The finance director shall withhold the issuance of any
business license, until any and all fees prescribed in this chapter have been
paid in full. Upon notification of outstanding fees resulting from violations
of this chapter, the City may withhold other permits, licenses or
administrative approvals.



(Ord. 1397.08.19 § 2 (part), 2008)



Chapter 8.28
SALE OF EPHEDRINE AND PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCTS



Sections:



8.28.010   Definitions.



8.28.020   Security of ephedrine and pseudoephedrine products.



8.28.030   Sale by pharmacist or licensed pharmacy technician..



8.28.040   Purchaser identification requirements.



8.28.050   Minimum age requirement.



8.28.060   Duty to maintain log.



8.28.070   Duty to submit log to the chief of police.



8.28.080   Violation—Penalty.



8.28.010  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   “Licensed pharmacy technician” is a person licensed by the state to
assist a pharmacist.



   “Pharmacist” means a person licensed by the state in the art,
practice, or profession of preparing, preserving, compounding, and dispensing
medical drugs.



   “Product containing ephedrine or pseudoephedrine” includes any
compound, mixture or preparation that contains any detectable quantity of
ephedrine or pseudoephedrine or its salts, optical isomers or salts of
optical isomers.  Product packaging that lists ephedrine or pseudoephedrine
as an active ingredient shall constitute prima facie evidence that it is a
“product containing ephedrine or pseudoephedrine.”



   “Proper photo identification” shall mean a recognized
government-issued photo identification of the purchaser, including but not
limited to, a driver's license, identification card, tribal identification
card or passport.



   “Retail establishment” means any place of business that offers any
pseudoephedrine product for sale. 



(Ord. 1397.08.18 § 1 (part), 2006)



8.28.020  Security of ephedrine and pseudoephedrine products.



   The operator of a retail establishment shall keep all products
containing ephedrine or pseudoephedrine behind the pharmacy counter or
otherwise in a manner that is inaccessible to customers without the
assistance of a pharmacist or a licensed pharmacy technician.



(Ord. 1397.08.18 § 1 (part), 2006)



8.28.030  Sale by pharmacist or licensed pharmacy technician.



   It shall be required that any compound, mixture or preparation that
contains detectable quantities of ephedrine or pseudoephedrine be sold by a
pharmacist or a licensed pharmacy technician.



(Ord. 1397.08.18 § 1 (part), 2006)



8.28.040  Purchaser identification requirements.



   Pharmacists and licensed pharmacy technicians selling products
containing ephedrine or pseudoephedrine shall require proper photo
identification from the purchaser.



(Ord. 1397.08.18 § 1 (part), 2006)



8.28.050  Minimum age requirement.



   It shall be unlawful to sell products containing ephedrine or
pseudoephedrine to persons under the age of eighteen, and it shall be
unlawful for persons under the age of eighteen to purchase or attempt to
purchase products containing ephedrine or pseudoephedrine.



(Ord. 1397.08.18 § 1 (part), 2006)



8.28.060  Duty to maintain log.



   A.   Pharmacists and licensed pharmacy technicians shall record in a
log:  the purchaser's name, date of birth, address, and quantity of
ephedrine or pseudoephedrine product purchased.  The pharmacist or the
licensed pharmacy technician shall initial the log and the purchaser shall
sign the log.



   B.   The log will be considered a confidential document and shall
only be available to the retailer, City of Casa Grande Police Department
Officers, Arizona Department of Public Safety Officers, Pinal Sheriff's
Department Deputies, and other law enforcement officers. 



   C.   The log requirements set forth in this section do not apply to
ephedrine or pseudoephedrine dispensed pursuant to a valid prescription.



(Ord. 1397.08.18 § 1 (part), 2006)



8.28.070  Duty to submit the log to the chief of police.



   By the tenth day of each month, any person required to maintain a log
in Section 8.28.060 shall submit the log containing the previous month's
sales to the chief of police.



(Ord. 1397.08.18 § 1 (part), 2006)



8.28.080  Violation—Penalty.



   A.   A violation of any provision of this chapter is a Class 1
misdemeanor.



   B.   Each day a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute
a separate violation.



   C.   Each violation of any requirement of this chapter constitutes a
separate offense.



(Ord. 1397.08.18 § 1 (part), 2006) 



Chapter 8.32
GRAFFITI



Sections:



8.32.010   Definitions.



8.32.020   Sale and display of aerosol spray paint container.



8.32.030   Graffiti removal.



8.32.010  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   “Aerosol spray paint container” means any aerosol container adapted
or made for the purpose of applying spray paint or any other substance
capable of defacing property.



   “Felt tip marker” means any broad-tipped marker pen with a tip
exceeding one-quarter of one inch in width, or any similar implement
containing an ink that is not water soluble.



   “Graffiti” means a drawing or an inscribed message, slogan, sign,
symbol or mark of any type that is made on any public or private building,
structure or surface, without permission of the owner.



   “Graffiti implement” means an aerosol paint container, a felt-tip
marker, paint stick or graffiti stick, etching tool, or any other device
capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on glass, metal, concrete, wood
or any other surface.



   “Paint stick” or “graffiti stick” means any device containing a
solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance capable of
being applied to a surface by pressure, and upon application, of leaving a
mark at least one-eighth of an inch in width.



(Ord. 1397.08.24 § 2 (part), 2012)



8.32.020  Sale and display of aerosol spray paint containers.



   A.   No person other than a parent, guardian or other adult person
acting in their place shall sell or otherwise provide aerosol spray paint
containers to any person less than eighteen years of age, and no person less
than eighteen years of age shall buy or attempt to buy any aerosol spray
paint containers. An Arizona driver's license, an identification card issued
to a member of the Armed Forces, or an identity card issued pursuant to
A.R.S. § 28-3165 shall be prima facie proof of age.



   B.   Every person who owns, manages or operates a place of business
selling aerosol spray paint containers shall store or cause such aerosol
spray paint containers to be stored either:



   1.   In the line of sight of one or more work stations that are
normally continuously occupied during business hours, or



   2.   In an area viewable by the public, but not accessible to the
public, in the regular course of business without employee assistance,
pending legal sale or disposition of such aerosol spray paint containers.



   C.   Any person who owns, manages or operates a place of business
wherein aerosol spray paint is sold shall conspicuously post:



   1.   At or near the aerosol spray paint display, in clear public
view, a sign stating: “GRAFFITI IS A CRIME.  THE DEFACING OF PUBLIC OR
PRIVATE PROPERTY IS PUNISHABLE BY A FINE OR IMPRISONMENT”, and



   2.   At or near the aerosol spray paint display, in clear public
view, a sign stating: “NO AEROSOL SPRAY PAINT CONTAINERS SOLD TO MINORS. 
SELLING SPRAY PAINT TO OR PURCHASE OF AEROSOL SPRAY PAINT CONTAINERS BY
PERSONS LESS THAN 18 YEARS OF AGE IS AGAINST THE LAW.  VIOLATORS CAN BE
FINED OR IMPRISONED."



   D.   Notwithstanding any other criminal penalty provided for in this
chapter, failure to comply with this section is a civil offense punishable by
a civil fine as follows:



   1.   First offense: mandatory minimum fine of not less than $100.



   2.   Second offense (within one calendar year): mandatory minimum
fine of not less than $500.



   3.   Third and subsequent offenses (within one calendar year):
mandatory minimum fine of not less than $1,000.



   E.   Notwithstanding any other civil penalty provided for by this
chapter, any violation of any prohibition or requirement imposed by this
chapter is a Class Three misdemeanor.



(Ord. 1397.08.24 § 2 (part), 2012)



8.32.030  Graffiti removal.



   No owner or occupant of a building or structure within the City shall
permit graffiti on the building or structure, or fail to eradicate graffiti
from the building or structure, within ten business days of owner/occupant's
receipt of notice of the existence of graffiti.



   A.   Upon failure of any notified person to eradicate graffiti
within compliance time set in the written notice, the City may remove, abate,
enjoin or cause removal of the violation.



   B.   The City has established the Graffiti Abatement Program to
assist members of the community who are willing to, but lack the resources to
remove graffiti from their property, or are willing to purchase supplies to
accomplish the removal of graffiti from their property.  These will be
reviewed on a case-by-case basis. The City will not guarantee a paint match
and will only cover the area affected by the graffiti. This does not relieve
the property owner in away from their responsibility for compliance with this
chapter.



(Ord. 1397.08.24 § 2 (part), 2012)



Title 9
PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE



Chapters:



9.04   Offenses By or Against Public Officers and Government



9.08   Offenses Against Public Peace and Decency



9.12   Offenses Pertaining to Property



9.16   Offenses By or Against Minors



9.20   Weapons and Explosives



9.22   Fireworks



9.24   Prohibitions Against Unreasonable or Excessive Noise



Chapter 9.04
OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST PUBLIC OFFICERS AND GOVERNMENT



Sections:



9.04.010   False reports unlawful.



9.04.010  False reports unlawful.



   It is unlawful for any person wilfully to make to the police department
of the city any false, fraudulent, misleading or unfounded report or
statement, or wilfully to misrepresent any fact for the purpose of
interfering with the operation of the police department or with the intention
of misleading any police officer.



(Prior code § 12-1-6)



Chapter 9.08
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND DECENCY



Sections:



9.08.010   Unruly gatherings.



9.08.020   Drinking malt beverages in public prohibited.



9.08.030   Prostitution unlawful.



9.08.010  Unruly gatherings.



   A.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, unless the
context otherwise requires, the following terms or phrases are defined as:



   1.   “Owner” means any owner, as well as any agent of an owner
acting on behalf of the owner to control or otherwise regulate the occupancy
or use of the property.



   2.   “Premises” means the property that is the site of an unruly
gathering. For residential properties, “premises” means the dwelling unit
or units where the unruly gathering occurs.



   3.   “Unruly gathering” means a gathering of five (5) or more
persons on any private property, including property used to conduct business,
in a manner which causes a disturbance of the quiet enjoyment of private or
public property by any person or persons.  Such disturbances include, but
are not limited to, excessive noise or traffic, obstruction of public streets
by crowds or vehicles, drinking in public, the service of alcohol to minors
or consumption of alcohol by minors, fighting, disturbing the peace, and
littering.



   B.   Abatement of unruly gathering. A peace officer may abate an
unruly gathering by reasonable means including, but not limited to, citation
or arrest of violators under applicable ordinances or state statutes, and
dispersal of the persons attending the gathering.



   C.   Notice of unruly gathering; posting; removal of notice
prohibited; right to contest posting.



   1.   Contents of notice. The premises at which the unruly gathering
occurs shall be posted with a notice stating:



   a.   That an unruly gathering has occurred at the premises;



   b.   The date of the unruly gathering;



   c.   That any subsequent unruly gathering on the same premises
within a one hundred and eighty (180) day period shall result in liability
for the penalties provided in this section. Parties liable include any
persons in attendance causing the gathering to be unruly, or any owner,
occupant or tenant of the premises at which the unruly gathering occurred, or
any sponsor of the event constituting the unruly gathering; and



   d.   The right to contest the posting as provided in Subsection C.4.
of this section.



   2.   Posting requirements. 



   a.   Premises shall be posted with a notice as provided in this
section each time an unruly gathering occurs. The owner, occupant or tenant
of the premises, or sponsor of the event constituting the unruly gathering,
if present, shall be consulted as to the location in which such notice is
posted, in order to achieve both the security of the notice and its prominent
display.



   b.   In the event that a premises is already posted at the time of a
subsequent posting, the one hundred and eighty (180) day period from the date
of the existing posting shall be extended to one hundred and eighty (180)
days from the date of the subsequent posting. Once a premises is initially
posted as a result of an unruly gathering and the conduct causing the
gathering to be unruly has ceased, a resumption of unruly behavior on the
premises resulting in another police response shall constitute a new and
separate unruly gathering for purposes of this section.



   3.   Removal of notice prohibited. The owner, occupant, or tenant of
the posted premises shall be responsible for ensuring that the notice is not
removed, defaced, or concealed. The removal, defacement, or concealment of a
posted notice is a civil infraction carrying a penalty of a minimum,
mandatory one hundred dollar ($100) fine, in addition to any other penalties
which may be imposed under this section.



   4.   Right to contest posting.



   a.   An owner, occupant, or tenant of the posted premises may
contest the posting of the notice by filing a written petition for review
with the civil infractions division of the city court, requesting that the
court determine whether justification existed for posting of the notice under
the provisions of this section. The petition must be filed within ten (10)
days after the posting of the notice or, if the notice is given by mail,
within fifteen (15) days after the date of the mailing of the notice, and not
thereafter. The court shall set a time and date for a hearing to be held no
later than fifteen (15) days after receipt of the written petition, and shall
notify both the petitioner and the criminal division of the city attorney's
office of the hearing date. In order to avoid the possibility of conflicting
rulings, if more than one (1) petition is filed under this subsection
relating to a single posting, for example by multiple lawful occupants of the
posted premises, the court shall set only one (1) hearing and shall
consolidate the petitions and notify all petitioners of the hearing date and
time. At the hearing, the city has the burden of proving by a preponderance
of evidence that the posting of the notice was justified pursuant to the
provisions of this section.



   b.   An owner of a posted premises, at any time after the posting or
the mailing of the notice, may petition the court for an order directing the
removal of the notice on the grounds that the owner has taken reasonable and
necessary actions, such as evicting a tenant responsible for the violation,
to prevent the occurrence of a subsequent unruly gathering at the posted
location. The court shall set a time and date for a hearing to be held no
later than fifteen (15) days after receipt of the petition, and shall notify
both the petitioner and the criminal division of the city attorney's office
of the hearing date. At the hearing, the petitioner has the burden of proving
by a preponderance of evidence that the petitioner has taken reasonable and
necessary actions to prevent the occurrence of a subsequent unruly gathering.
This petition process is not available to an owner who was present at the
unruly gathering and engaged in conduct causing the gathering to be unruly.



   D.   Notification of property owner.



   1.   Notification of the posting of the notice of unruly gathering
shall be mailed to any property owner at the address shown on the Pinal
County Property Tax Assessment Records. The notification shall advise the
property owner that any subsequent unruly gathering within one hundred and
eighty (180) days on the same premises shall result in liability of the
property owner for all applicable penalties as provided in this section.
Notification shall be made by certified mail. The return receipt shall be
prima facie evidence of service.



   2.   Additionally, notice shall be provided to an agent of the owner
who controls or regulates the use of the premises, if known. Notice to the
owner's agent may be provided by hand delivery or by certified or regular
mail sent to the agent's last known address.



   3.   The failure to serve notice to any person described in this
subsection shall not invalidate any citation or other proceedings as to any
other person duly served, or relieve any such person from any duty imposed by
this section.



   E.   Unruly gathering a civil infraction; parties responsible. An
unruly gathering is unlawful and constitutes a civil infraction. The
following parties, if found responsible for such an infraction, are liable
for the penalties provided in Subsection G.1.:



   1.   The person or persons who organized or sponsored the event
constituting the unruly gathering, including any owner or occupant in
attendance at the unruly gathering.



   2.   Any person in attendance at the unruly gathering who engaged in
any conduct causing the gathering to be unruly.



   F.   Subsequent unruly gathering a civil infraction; parties
responsible. The occurrence of an unruly gathering on the same premises more
than once in any one hundred and eighty (180) day period is a civil
infraction. The following parties, if found responsible for such an
infraction, are liable for the penalties provided in Subsection G.2.:



   1.   The owner of the property where the subsequent unruly gathering
occurred, if either:



   a.    The owner was present when the property was posted, or



   b.   Notification of posting was mailed or delivered to the owner of
the property per Subsection D, and the subsequent unruly gathering occurred
not less than two (2) weeks after the mailing of such notification.



   2.   The occupant or tenant of the property where the subsequent
unruly gathering occurred.



   3.   The person or persons who organized or sponsored the event
constituting the subsequent unruly gathering.



   4.   Any person in attendance at the subsequent unruly gathering who
engaged in any conduct causing the gathering to be unruly.



   Nothing in this section shall be construed to impose liability on the
owner, occupant, or tenant of the premises or sponsor of the event
constituting the unruly gathering, for the conduct of persons who are in
attendance without the express or implied consent of the owner, occupant,
tenant, or sponsor, as long as the owner, occupant, tenant or sponsor has
taken steps reasonably necessary to prevent a subsequent unruly gathering or
to exclude the uninvited persons from the premises, including owners who are
actively attempting to evict a tenant from the premises. Where an invited
person engages in unlawful conduct which the owner, occupant, tenant or
sponsor could not reasonably foresee and could not reasonably control without
the intervention of the police, the unlawful conduct of the person shall not
be attributable to the owner, occupant, tenant or sponsor for the purposes of
determining liability under this section.



   G.   Penalties.



   1.   Unruly gathering. The penalty for a party found responsible for
an unruly gathering, as provided in Subsection E, shall be a minimum
mandatory fine of one hundred dollars ($100).



   2.   Subsequent unruly gathering. The penalty for a party found
responsible for the occurrence of a subsequent unruly gathering, as provided
in Subsection F., shall be a minimum mandatory fine of five hundred dollars
($500) for a first violation, a minimum mandatory fine of one thousand
dollars ($1,000) for a second violation, and minimum mandatory fines of one
thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500) for each third or subsequent violation.



   3.   Abatement. The civil fines provided herein shall be in addition
to any other penalties imposed by law for particular violations of law
committed during the course of an unruly gathering. The court shall also
enter an order of abatement against a party found responsible for a violation
of this section pursuant to Title 8 of the City of Casa Grande Municipal Code.



   H.   Enforcement. The police department is authorized to enforce the
provisions of this section, provided that enforcement is initiated by a
complaint from a member of the public. The complaining member of the public
shall not necessarily be required to appear in court before a violator may be
found responsible.



(Ord. 1397.09.05 § 2, 2009)



9.08.020  Drinking malt beverages in public prohibited.



   A.   It is unlawful for any person to consume or have in his
possession any malt beverage or broken package of such malt beverage in any
public park or recreational area located within the area enclosed by a radius
of one thousand feet of the Casa Grande Union High School, except on
Saturdays, Sundays and those holidays enumerated in A.R.S. 1-301 as amended.



   B.   Violation of the provisions of subsection A of this section
shall constitute a misdemeanor to be punishable by a fine of not more than
three hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than
six months, or both.



(Prior code § 12-1-27)



9.08.030  Prostitution unlawful.



   A.   Definitions. As used in this section:



   1.   “Prostitution” means engaging in or agreeing or offering to
engage in sexual conduct with another person under a fee arrangement with
that person or any other person.



   2.   “Sexual conduct” means sexual contact, sexual intercourse,
oral sexual contact or sadomasochistic abuse.



   3.   “Sexual contact” means any direct or indirect fondling or
manipulating of any part of the genitals, anus or female breast.



   4.   “Sexual intercourse” means penetration into the penis,
vulva, or anus by any part of the body or by any object.



   5.   “Oral sexual contact” means oral contact with the penis,
vulva or anus.



   6.   “Sadomasochistic abuse” means flagellation or torture by or
upon a person who is nude or clad in undergarments or in revealing or bizarre
costume or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically
restrained on the part of one so clothed.



   B.   Prostitution prohibited. Prostitution shall constitute a Class
I misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed two thousand five hundred
dollars, imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both.



(Ord. 1368 §§ 1 (part), 2 (part), 1990)



Chapter 9.12
OFFENSES PERTAINING TO PROPERTY



Sections:



9.12.020   Damage to railroad property unlawful.



9.12.050   Obstructing driver's view unlawful.



9.12.060   Unauthorized use of searchlights unlawful.



9.12.070   Unauthorized signs and banners unlawful.



9.12.090   Causing and permitting excessive water flow onto public streets
unlawful.



9.12.020  Damage to railroad property unlawful.



   It is unlawful for any person within the city to throw stones or other
missiles at railroad trains; or to let off the brakes of railroad cars
standing on the side tracks or tamper with the couplings of railroad cars, or
to uncouple cars standing on railroad tracks, or to uncouple the air hose of
the air brake system on railroad cars; or to remove, tamper with or break
switch lamps or other signals set to control the movements of trains, or to
jump on or off moving trains, or to throw refuse upon or in any way litter
the depot or station grounds of any railroad.



(Prior code § 12-1-2(E))



9.12.050  Obstructing driver's view unlawful.



   It is unlawful for any person to maintain or allow any tree, hedge,
billboard, or other obstructions which prevent persons driving vehicles on
public streets, alleys or highways from obtaining a clear view of traffic
when approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk.



(Prior code § 12-1-16)



9.12.060  Unauthorized use of searchlights unlawful.



   It is declared to be unlawful for any person or persons to operate
within the city any incandescent or arc type searchlight, beacon light or
similar lighting device designed to and capable of projecting a beam of light
into the sky for a distance in excess of one half mile unless permission is
obtained from the council. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
emergency searchlights or beacons operated pursuant to public authority.



(Prior code § 12-1-22)



9.12.070  Unauthorized signs and banners unlawful.



   It is unlawful for any person to place any banner or sign upon any
street light pole, traffic signal pole or utility pole within the city
without first obtaining authorization from the council.



(Prior code § 12- 1-23)



9.12.090  Causing and permitting excessive water flow onto public streets
unlawful.



   A.   It is unlawful for any person to wilfully or negligently permit
or cause the escape or flow of water in such quantity as to cause flooding,
or to impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic, to create a hazardous condition
to such traffic, or to cause damage to the public streets of the city.



   B.   It is unlawful for any person to wilfully or negligently permit
or cause the escape or flow of irrigation water in such quantity as to cause
flooding, or impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic, to create a hazardous
condition to such traffic, or to cause damage to the public streets of the
city through failure or neglect to properly operate or maintain any
irrigation structure, delivery ditch, or waste ditch in which the person has
a vested right or interest or through the wilful or negligent failure of the
person to accept irrigation water after it has been ordered by him.



(Prior code § 12-1-25)



Chapter 9.16
OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS



Sections:



9.16.010   Definitions.



9.16.020   Curfew offenses and penalties.



9.16.030   Curfew defenses and exceptions.



9.16.040   Curfew enforcement.



9.16.050   Permitting or encouraging underage drinking.



9.16.060   Possession of graffiti implements by minors prohibited.



9.16.010  Definitions.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   "Emergency" means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is
not limited to, a fire, natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any
situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss
of life.



   "Guardian" means a person who, under court order, is the guardian of
the person of a minor or a public or private agency with whom a minor has
been placed by an authorized agency or court; or at least 21 years of age and
authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.



   "Insufficient control" means failure to exercise reasonable care and
diligence in the supervision of the juvenile.



   "Minor" means any person under eighteen years of age.



   "Parent" means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent or
step-parent of the minor.



(Ord. 1397.09.03 § 3 (part), 1997)



9.16.020  Curfew offenses and penalties.



   A.   The following constitute curfew offenses:



   1.   It is unlawful for any minor under the age of sixteen years to
be in, about, or upon any place in the city away from the minor's residence
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day.



   2.   It is unlawful for any minor sixteen years of age or older and
under the age of eighteen years to be in, about, or upon any place in the
city away from the minor's residence between the hours of 12:00 midnight and
5:00 a.m. of the following day.



   3.   It is unlawful for a parent or guardian of a minor to knowingly
permit or, by insufficient control, allow a minor to violate subsections A(1)
or A(2) above.



   4.   It is unlawful for a parent, guardian or other person having
the care, custody or supervision of the minor to fail or refuse to take
custody of the minor after such demand is made upon him by a law enforcement
officer who arrests or cites the minor for violation of subsections A(1) or
A(2) above.



   B.   Each violation of the provisions of subsection A above shall
constitute a separate offense.



   C.   An adult convicted of a violation of any provision of this
subsection shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. A violation of any
provision of this subsection is designated an incorrigible offense for minors
under the jurisdiction of the juvenile court.



(Ord. 1397.09.03 § 3 (part), 1997)



9.16.030.  Curfew defenses and exceptions.



   It is a defense to prosecution under Sections 9.16.020(A)(1), (A)(2),
and (A)(3) of this article that the minor was:



   1.   Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian.



   2.   With prior permission of the parent or guardian, in a motor
vehicle involved in interstate travel.



   3.   With prior permission of the parent or guardian, in an
employment activity or going to or returning home from an employment activity
by the most direct route without any detour or stop.



   4.   Involved in an emergency.



   5.   With prior permission of the parent or guardian, was engaged in
reasonable, legitimate, and specific business and/or activity.



   6.   With prior permission of the parent or guardian, engaged in a
reasonable and legitimate exercise of First Amendment rights protected by the
United States Constitution.



   7.   Married and 16 years of age or over, or in the military.



   8.   On the sidewalk abutting their residence or on the next door
neighbor's property with the consent of an adult member of the neighbor's
household.



(Ord. 1397.09.03 § 3 (part), 1997)



9.16.040.  Curfew enforcement.



   A.   Before taking any enforcement action under Section 9.16.020,
above, a police officer shall attempt to ascertain the apparent offender's
age and reason for being in the place. The officer shall not issue a citation
or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes
that an offense has occurred and that, based upon the circumstances, the
minor's responses and minor's conduct, no defense as provided in Section
9.16.030, above, is probably present.



   B.   In addition to other powers they may have, law enforcement
officers who arrest a minor for violating any of the provisions of
subsections 9.16.020(A)(1) through 9.16.020(A)(2) are also hereby empowered
to demand of the parent, guardian or other person having the care, custody or
supervision of the minor, that such parent, guardian or other person come and
take custody of the minor. The law enforcement officers are also empowered to
take the minor to a designated location where arrangements can be made for a
parent, guardian or other appropriate party to take the minor into custody.
Should there be a failure of the parent, guardian or other person to take
custody of such minor, the officers may then be empowered to take the minor
home.



(Ord. 1397.09.03 § 3 (part), 1997)



9.16.050  Permitting or encouraging underage drinking.



   A.   No person eighteen years or older who owns or occupies any
premises shall knowingly permit or fail to take reasonable action to prevent
illegal consumption of spirituous liquor or drugs by any person.



   B.   A person who violates this section is guilty of a Class I
misdemeanor.



(Ord. 1397.09.05 § 1, 2009)



9.16.060  Possession of graffiti implements by minors prohibited.



   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person less than 18 years of age
to possess any graffiti implement or aerosol spray paint container, as
defined by Section 8.32.010, unless accompanied by their parent or legal
guardian. 



   B.   It shall be an affirmative defense to charges under this
section that the person possessing the materials was:



   1.   Within their home;



   2.   At their place of employment;



   3.   Traveling to or from school, employment or a civic duty that
formally requires the possession of such graffiti implements or aerosol spray
paint containers; or



   4.   Upon real property with permission from the owner, occupant or
person having lawful control of such property, to possess such graffiti
implements or aerosol spray paint containers.



   C.   It shall be unlawful of any person to possess any graffiti
implement or aerosol spray paint container while in or upon any public
facility, park, playground, swimming pool, recreation facility, or other
public building or structure owned or operated by the City, or while in or
within fifty feet of an underpass, bridge abutment, storm drain, or similar
types of infrastructure, or anywhere within any public area of the city
limits, unless otherwise authorized by the City. 



   D.   Penalty.  Any person who commits a violation of this section
shall be punished by a civil fine of not more than $1,000 for each offense.



   E.   Parental civil liability.  Any act in violation of this
section committed by a minor less than eighteen years of age shall be imputed
to that minor's parent or legal guardian. A parent or legal guardian of a
minor who violates this section shall be liable for the payment of any civil
fine.



   F.   Notwithstanding any other civil penalty provided for by this
chapter, any violation of any prohibition or requirement imposed by this
chapter is a Class One misdemeanor.



(Ord. 1397.08.24 § 3, 2012)



Chapter 9.20
WEAPONS AND EXPLOSIVES



Sections:



9.20.010   Use of explosives within city unlawful.



9.20.020   Discharge of firearms within city unlawful.



9.20.030   Exceptions.



9.20.050   Reckless handling of weapon prohibited.



9.20.060   Carrying weapon at public event.



9.20.070   Sale of weapons to minors unlawful when.



9.20.080   Forfeiture of weapon used in commission of a misdemeanor.



9.20.090   Minors prohibited from carrying or possessing firearms;
exceptions; seizure and forfeiture; penalties.



9.20.010  Use of explosives within city unlawful.



   It is unlawful for any person within the limits of the city to blast or
use powder, fireworks, nitroglycerine or other explosives without a permit
from the chief of police in writing; provided, that such permit shall specify
the place and manner of such use.



(Prior code § 12-1-5)



9.20.020  Discharge of firearms within city unlawful.



   It is unlawful for any person within the limits of the city to fire or
discharge any firearm, BB gun, air gun, pellet gun, dart gun, slingshot,
gas-operated gun or other      similar gun or instrument.



(Prior code § 12-1-26(A))



9.20.030  Exceptions.



   The prohibitions of Section 9.20.020 shall not apply to the use of any
gun or instrument by:



   A.   A law enforcement officer or other duly authorized public
official or employee in the performance of any official duty;



   B.   Any person to whom a license, permit or authority is issued by
the chief of police of the city for the use of such gun or instrument for a
valid and proper purpose and for use in a manner not likely to harm any
person, animal or property;



   C.   Any person when used only for the necessary protection of
property, habitation or person in a manner authorized by the laws of the
state under or within rights guaranteed by the constitution of the state or
the United States of America.



(Prior code § 12-1-26(B))



9.20.050  Reckless handling of weapon prohibited.



   It is a misdemeanor for any person to recklessly or carelessly handle a
weapon.



(Prior code § 12- 1-26(D))



9.20.060  Carrying weapon at public event.



   Any person other than a peace officer on duty carrying a weapon, upon
entering any public place or attending a public event, may be required by the
operator of the establishment or the sponsor of the event to remove his
weapon and place it in the custody of the operator of the establishment or
the sponsor of the event.



(Prior code § 12-1-26(E))



9.20.070  Sale of weapons to minors unlawful when.



   A person who sells or gives to a minor under the age of eighteen years,
without written consent of the minor's parent or legal guardian, a weapon,
ammunition or toy pistol by which dangerous and explosive substances may be
discharged, is guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Prior code § 12-1-26(F))



9.20.080  Forfeiture of weapon used in commission of a misdemeanor.



   Every person who uses or displays in any manner a weapon in the course
of the commission of a misdemeanor which results in a conviction shall
forfeit to the city such weapon.



(Prior code § 12-1- 26(G))



9.20.090  Minors prohibited from carrying or possessing firearms;
exceptions; seizure and forfeiture; penalties.



   A.   Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, an
unemancipated person who is under eighteen years of age and who is
unaccompanied by a parent, grandparent or guardian, or a certified hunter
safety instructor or certified firearms safety instructor acting with the
consent of the unemancipated person's parent or guardian, shall not knowingly
carry or possess on his person, within his immediate control, or in or on a
means of transportation a firearm in any place that is open to the public or
on any street or highway or on any private property except private property
owned or leased by the minor or the minor's parent, grandparent or guardian.



   B.   This section does not apply to a person who is fourteen,
fifteen, sixteen or seventeen years of age and is any of the following:



   1.   Engaged in lawful hunting or shooting events or marksmanship
practice at established ranges or other areas where the discharge of a
firearm is not prohibited;



   2.   Engaged in lawful transportation of an unloaded firearm for the
purpose of lawful hunting;



   3.   Engaged in lawful transportation of an unloaded firearm between
the hours of five a.m. and ten p.m. for the purpose of shooting events or
marksmanship practice at established ranges or other areas where the
discharge of a firearm is not prohibited.



   C.   If the minor is not exempt under subsection (B) of this section
and is in possession of a firearm, a peace officer shall seize the firearm at
the time the violation occurs.



   D.   A person who violates subsection (A) of this section is a
delinquent child and shall be subject to the following penalties:



   1.   For an offense involving an unloaded firearm, a fine of not
more than two hundred fifty dollars, and the court may order the suspension
or revocation of the person's driver's license until the person reached
eighteen years of age. If the person does not have a driver's license at the
time of the adjudication, the court may direct that the department of
transportation not issue a driver's license to the person until the person
reaches eighteen years of age.



   2.   For an offense involving a loaded firearm, a fine of not more
than five hundred dollars, and the court may order the suspension or
revocation of the person's driver's license until the person reaches eighteen
years of age. If the person does not have a driver's license at the time of
the adjudication, the court may direct that the department of transportation
not issue a driver's license to the person until the person reaches eighteen
years of age.



   3.   For an offense involving a loaded or unloaded firearm, if the
person possessed the firearm while the person was the driver or an occupant
of a motor vehicle, a fine of not more than five hundred dollars and the
court shall order the suspension or revocation of the person's driver's
license until the person reaches eighteen years of age. If the person does
not have a driver's license at the time of adjudication, the court shall
direct that the department of transportation not issue a driver's license to
the person until the person reaches eighteen years of age. If the court finds
that no other means of transportation is available, the driving privileges of
the child may be restricted to travel between the child's home, school and
place of employment during specified periods of time according to the child's
school and employment schedule.



   E.   A violation of this section shall be charged, heard and
disposed of pursuant to A.R.S. Section 8-232.



   F.   Firearms seized pursuant to subsection (C) of this section
shall be held by the law enforcement agency responsible for the seizure until
the charges have been adjudicated or disposed of otherwise. Upon adjudication
of a person for a violation of this section, the court shall order the
firearm forfeited. However, the law enforcement agency shall return the
firearm to the lawful owner if the identity of that person is known.



   G.   If the court finds that the parent or guardian of a minor found
responsible for violating this section knew or reasonably should have known
of the minor's unlawful conduct and made no effort to prohibit it, the parent
or guardian is jointly and severally responsible for any fine imposed
pursuant to this section or for any civil actual damages resulting from the
unlawful use of the firearm by the minor.



   H.   This section is supplemental to any other law imposing a
criminal penalty for the use or exhibition of a deadly weapon. A minor who
violates this section may be prosecuted and convicted for any other criminal
conduct involving the use or exhibition of the deadly weapon.



(Ord. 1397.02.2, 1995)



Chapter 9.22
FIREWORKS



Sections:



9.22.010   Definitions.



9.22.020   Fireworks prohibited; exceptions.



9.22.030   Sale of fireworks.



9.22.040   Posting of signs by persons engaged in the sale of fireworks.



9.22.050   Authority to enforce violations of this article; means of
enforcement.



9.22.060   Penalties



9.22.010   Definitions.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:



   “Consumer firework” means those fireworks defined by ARS 36-1601,
as amended from time to time.



   “Display firework” means those fireworks defined by ARS 36-1601, as
amended from time to time.



   “Fire chief” means the chief of the Casa Grande Fire Department or
his/her designee.



   “Fireworks” means any combustible or explosive composition,
substance or combination of substances, or any article prepared for the
purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion,
deflagration or detonation, that is a consumer firework, display firework or
permissible consumer firework as defined by ARS 36-1601, as amended from time
to time.



   “Novelty items” means federally deregulated novelty items that are
known as snappers, snap caps, party poppers, glow worms, snakes, toy smoke
devices, sparklers, and certain toys as defined in ARS 36-1601, as amended
from time to time.



   “Permissible consumer fireworks” means those fireworks as defined
by ARS 36-1601, as amended from time to time.



   “Person” means a corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, society or other legal entity, as well as a natural person



   “Supervised public display” means a monitored performance of
display fireworks open to the public. (Ord. 1397.09.06 § 2 (part), 2010)



9.22.020   Fireworks prohibited; exceptions.



   A.   The use, discharge or ignition of fireworks within the city is
prohibited, except as otherwise specifically provided for in this section;
provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
prohibit the use, discharge or ignition of novelty items, or the occurrence
of a properly permitted supervised public display of fireworks.



   B.   Except as set forth in this subsection, the use, discharge or
ignition of permissible consumer fireworks within the city is permitted on
and only on the dates of December 31, January 1 and July 4; provided, however
that:



   1.   The use, discharge or ignition of fireworks is prohibited on
all public property, including in all public parks and public rights-of-way;
and



   2.    The use, discharge or ignition of fireworks is prohibited on
any day specified by the fire chief as presenting a high fire danger, as
identified by posting such designation on the city website.



   C.   Permits may be granted by the fire chief for conducting a
properly supervised public display of fireworks. Every such public display of
fireworks shall be of such character and so located, discharged or fired,
only after proper inspection and in a manner that does not endanger persons,
animals or property.  A permit shall not be issued, and may be revoked,
during time periods of high fire danger, as designated by the fire chief and
posted on the city's website. The fire chief has authority to impose
reasonable conditions on any permits granted pursuant to this section.



(Ord. 1397.09.06 § 2 (part), 2010)



9.22.030   Sale of fireworks.



   A.    No person shall sell, or permit or authorize the sale of, any
fireworks to a person who is under sixteen years of age.



   B.   No person shall sell, or permit or authorize the sale of,
permissible consumer fireworks in conflict with state law. (Ord. 1397.09.06
§ 2 (part), 2010)



9.22.040    Posting of signs by persons engaged in the sale of fireworks.



   A.   Prior to the sale of permissible consumer fireworks, every
person engaged in such sales shall prominently display signs indicating the
following:



   1.   The use of fireworks, except novelty items as defined by
Section 9.22.010, is prohibited on public property, and the use of
permissible consumer fireworks is only permitted within the city on the dates
of December 31, January 1 and July 4.



   2.   Fireworks authorized for sale under state law shall not be sold
to persons less than sixteen years of age.



   B.   Signs required under this section shall be placed at each cash
register and in each area where fireworks are displayed for sale.



   C.   The fire chief shall develop regulations concerning the size
and color of the required signs, and shall develop a model sign.  The
required sign regulations and model sign shall be posted on the city's
website and filed with the clerk's office. (Ord. 1397.09.06 § 2 (part), 2010)



9.22.050    Authority to enforce violations of this article; means of
enforcement.



   A.   The fire chief, fire marshal, a city police officer, a city
code enforcement officer, or the city attorney may issue civil complaints to
enforce violations of this article designated as civil offenses.



   B.   Any person authorized pursuant to this section to issue a civil
complaint may also issue a notice of violation specifying actions to be taken
and the time in which they are to be taken to avoid issuance of a civil or
criminal complaint.



   C.   A city police officer or the city attorney may issue criminal
complaints to enforce this article. (Ord. 1397.09.06 § 2 (part), 2010)



9.22.060   Penalties.



   A.   Discharge of permissible consumer fireworks in violation of
Section 9.22.020, or failure to comply with the requirements of Section
9.22.040.A. or B., is punishable as a civil offense and punishable by a civil
fine as follows:



   1.   First offense: not less than $50 but not more $250.



   2.   Second offense within one calendar year: not less than $250,
but not more than $500.



   3.   Third and subsequent offenses within one calendar year: not
less than $500, but not more than $1,000.



   For purposes of this subsection, the date of commission of an offense
shall be used to determine whether additional offenses occurred within a
given calendar year.



   B.    A person who sells, or permits or authorizes the sale of, any
fireworks in violation of Section 9.22.030, a person who discharges display
fireworks without a permit in violation of Section 9.22.020, or a person
fails to comply with any permit requirements issued by the fire chief in
violation of Section 9.22.030, shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor
punishable by the maximum punishment allowed by law. (Ord. 1397.09.06 § 2
(part), 2010)



Chapter 9.24
PROHIBITIONS AGAINST UNREASONABLE OR EXCESSIVE NOISE



Sections:



  9.24.010   Unreasonable noise generally prohibited.



  9.24.020   Loud radios, sound sets, and the like.



  9.24.030   Vehicular noise.



  9.24.040   Construction of buildings or other projects.



  9.24.050   Exemptions.



  9.24.060   Penalty for violations.



9.24.010  Unreasonable noise generally prohibited.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be
made or continued, within the limits of the city, any disturbing, excessive
or offensive noise that causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable
person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area.  The characteristics
that should be considered in determining whether a violation of the
provisions of this section should include, but not be limited to, the
following:



   1.   The level of the noise;



   2.   Whether the noise is usual or unusual;



   3.   Whether the noise is natural or unnatural;



   4.   The level of the ambient noise in the area;



   5.   The proximity of the noise to sleeping facilities;



   6.   The nature and zoning of the area from which the noise
emanates, and the area where it is received;



   7.   The time of day or night the noise occurs;



   8.   The duration of the noise; and



   9.   Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant.



(Ord. 1397.09.04 § 1 (part), 2006)



9.24.020  Loud radios, sound sets, and the like.



   A.   The use or operation of any sound production or reproduction
device, radio receiving set, musical instrument, drums, phonograph,
television set, loud speakers and sound amplifier, or other similar machine
or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to
disturb the peace, quiet or comfort of any reasonable person of normal
sensitivity in any area of is prohibited; provided, however, this provision
shall not apply to any participant in a parade, gathering or similar activity
who has been authorized by the city to engage in such conduct.



   B.   Any of the following shall constitute prima facie violations of
this section:



   1.   The operation of any device set forth in subsection A. hereof
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be
plainly audible at a distance of fifty feet or more from the building,
structure, vehicle or area where the source is located.



   2.   The operation of any sound amplifier, which is part of, or
connected to, any radio, stereo receiver, compact disc player or other
similar device, when operated in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a
distance of fifty feet or more from the source, or when operated in such a
manner as to cause a person to be aware of vibration accompanying the sound
at a distance of fifty feet or more from the source.



(Ord. 1397.09.04 § 1 (part), 2006)



9.24.030  Vehicular noise.



   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person within any residential area
of the city to repair, rebuild or test any motor vehicle between the hours of
9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.  in such a manner as to create any excessive,
unnecessary or offensive noise, such that a reasonable person or normal
sensitivity residing in the area is caused discomfort or annoyance.



   B.   No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, any motor
vehicle within the city unless the exhaust system of such vehicle:



   1.   Is free from defects which may cause sound level magnification;



   2.   Is equipped with a functioning muffler;



   3.   Has not been modified in such a manner which will amplify or
increase the sound level emitted by the motor vehicle above that emitted by a
muffler originally installed on the vehicle as manufactured for initial sale.



   C.   The use of any and all exhaust brakes, engine brakes, engine
retarders, or similar devices shall be prohibited within the city; provided,
however, that it shall be an affirmative defense to a violation of this
paragraph that such device was used by the operator as a result of a bona
fide emergency, and was reasonably necessary for the protection of persons
and/or property.



(Ord. 1397.09.04 § 1 (part), 2006)



9.24.040  Construction of buildings or other projects.



   A.   General Prohibition.  It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate equipment or perform any outside construction or repair work on
buildings, structures or projects, or to operate any pile driver, power
shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, power hoist or any other construction-type
device, except within the time periods specified in this section, unless an
appropriate permit authorizing different times has been obtained beforehand
from the city.



   B.   Construction Start/Stop Times.



   1.   Construction in Residential Zones.  From April 15 to October
15, inclusive, all construction or repair work conducted within five hundred
feet of a residential property zone shall not begin prior to 5:00 a.m. and
must stop by 9:00 p.m. each day.  From October 16 to April 14, inclusive,
such work may only be conducted between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.



   2.   Other Construction in Commercial or Industrial Zones. 
Construction and repair work in commercial or industrial zones (not located
within five hundred feet of a residential property zone) shall not begin
prior to 5:00 a.m. and must stop by 9:00 p.m.



   3.   Weekends and Holidays.  Notwithstanding any other provision of
this section, construction or repair work shall not begin prior to 6:00 a.m.
on any Saturday, and 7:00 a.m. on any Sunday or state or federal holiday.



   C.   Permits.  Construction and repair work may be conducted at
different times than otherwise permitted, if upon written application, a
permit is obtained beforehand from the city manager or his designee.  The
permit shall be kept on the work site and shown to building or law
enforcement officials on request.  In granting such permit, the city manager
or his designee shall consider if construction noise in the vicinity of the
proposed work site would be less objectionable at night than during the
daytime because of different population levels or different neighboring
activities; if obstruction and interference with traffic, particularly on
streets of major importance, would be less objectionable at night than during
the daytime; if the kind of work to be performed emits noises at such a low
level as not to cause significant disturbance in the vicinity of the work
site; if the neighborhood of the proposed work site is of such a character
wherein sleep could be disturbed; if great economic hardship would occur if
the work was spread over a longer time; if the work will abate or prevent
hazards to life or property; if proposed early morning or night work is in
the general public interest; and, he shall prescribe such conditions, working
times, types of construction equipment to be used, and permissible noise
emissions as he deems to be required in the public interest.  No permit
shall be required to perform work performed to prevent or alleviate physical
trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency, which has or
may result in a disruption of service, and which is necessary to protect the
health, safety and welfare of persons or property.



   D.   Revocation of Permits.  The city manager or his designee may
revoke any permit granted hereunder, upon complaint based upon evidence that
the construction activity caused significant disturbance in the vicinity of
the work site.



   E.   Notice to Stop Work.  Whenever any work on a construction
project is in violation of any provision of this section, the city may, in
addition to other remedies for the violation, order the construction project
stopped by notice in writing served on any persons responsible for the
project, and all persons thereafter shall stop work on the project until
authorized by the city to once again proceed with such work.



(Ord. 1397.09.04 § 1 (part), 2006)



9.24.050  Exemptions.



   The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the provisions
of this chapter:



   1.   Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle when
responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency;



   2.   Noises created by any city vehicle, equipment or facility while
being operated for official use;



   3.   Operation of agricultural equipment in connection with farming
operations;



   4.   Any aircraft operated in conformity with, or pursuant to,
federal law, federal air regulations or air traffic control instructions
pursuant to, or within, duly adopted federal air regulations, together with
any noise created by aircraft operated under, or pursuant to, declaration of
an emergency under federal air regulations;



   5.   Noises resulting from “emergency work,” which, for purposes
of this section, shall mean work performed to prevent or alleviate physical
trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency, which has or
may result in the disruption of utility or other vital service, and which is
reasonably necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of persons or
property.



(Ord. 1397.09.04 § 1 (part), 2006)



9.24.060  Penalty for violations.



   A.   Treatment as Civil Violation.  A violation of any provision of
this chapter shall be prosecuted as a civil offense, and the hearing officer
shall impose a civil sanction of not less than one hundred dollars, nor more
than three hundred dollars, for each violation.



   B.   Habitual Offender.  An “habitual offender” is a person who
commits a violation of any provision of this chapter, after having previously
been found responsible for two or more violations within a twenty-four-month
period, whether by admission, by payment of the fine, by default or judgment
after hearing.  For purposes of this section, the dates of calculating the
twenty-four-month period shall be the dates of commission of the offenses. 
Offenses committed by habitual offenders, as defined herein, shall be treated
as a Class 1 misdemeanor, punishable by a sentence of incarceration not to
exceed six months, a fine not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars
(exclusive of penalty assessments prescribed by law), or both.



   C.   Separate Offenses.  Each day a violation continues or exists
shall be considered a separate offense.



(Ord. 1397.09.04 § 1 (part), 2006)



Title 10
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC



Chapters:



10.04   Administrative Provisions



10.08   Traffic Control Regulations



10.12   Stopping, Standing and Parking



10.16   Bicycles



10.20   Operation of Vehicles on Private Property



Chapter 10.04
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS



Sections:



10.04.010   Police chief—Enforcement authority.



10.04.020   Police chief to keep records of traffic violations.



10.04.030   Police chief to investigate accidents.



10.04.040   Police chief to conduct accident studies when.



10.04.050   Police chief to file accident reports.



10.04.060   Police chief to submit annual traffic safety report.



10.04.070   Violation—Penalty.



10.04.075   Registered owners presumed responsible for parking and
standing of motor vehicles.



10.04.080   Procedure for civil traffic cases.



10.04.010  Police chief—Enforcement authority.



   A.   It shall be the duty of the police chief to provide for the
enforcement of the street traffic regulations of the city and all of the
state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city to make arrests
for traffic violations, to investigate accidents and to assist in developing
ways and means to improve traffic conditions and to carry out all duties
specially imposed upon the police chief by this chapter.



   B.   Any peace officer of the city may be authorized by the police
chief to perform any of the duties of the police chief included in this
chapter.



   C.   The police chief may appoint volunteers for the establishment
of a parking enforcement specialist program for parking for persons with
physical disabilities. Under this program, duly selected volunteers are
authorized to issue citations only to persons who violate A.R.S. § 28-884 or
an ordinance regulating parking in parking spaces designated for persons with
physical disabilities.



(Ord. 1397.10.3 § 1, 2004; prior code § 15-1-1)



10.04.020  Police chief to keep records of traffic violations.



   A.   The police chief shall keep a record of all violations of the
traffic laws of the city or of the state vehicle laws of which any person has
been charged, together with a record of the final disposition of all alleged
offenses. The record shall accumulate during at least a five-year period and
from that time on the record shall be maintained complete for at least the
most recent five-year period.



   B.   All forms for records of violations and notices shall be
serially numbered. For each month and year a written record shall be kept
available to the public showing the disposal of all such forms.



   C.   All records and reports shall be public record.



(Prior code § 15-1-2)



10.04.030  Police chief to investigate accidents.



   It shall be the duty of the police chief to investigate traffic
accidents and to arrest and assist in the prosecution of those persons
charged with violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents.



(Prior code § 15-1-3)



10.04.040  Police chief to conduct accident studies when.



   Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous the
police chief shall conduct studies of the accidents and determine remedial
measures.



(Prior code § 15-1-4)



10.04.050  Police chief to file accident reports.



   A.   The police chief shall maintain a suitable system of filing
traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall
be filed alphabetically by location.



   B.   The police chief shall receive and properly file all accident
reports made to him under state law or any law of the city, but all the
accident reports made by drivers shall be for the confidential use of the
city and no report shall be admissible in any civil or criminal proceeding
other than upon request of any person making the report or upon request of
the court having jurisdiction, to prove a compliance with the laws requiring
the making of any report.



(Prior code § 15-1-5)



10.04.060  Police chief to submit annual traffic safety report.



   The police chief shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be
filed with the clerk. The report shall contain information on traffic matters
in the city as follows:



   A.   The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed,
the number of persons injured and other pertinent traffic accident data;



   B.   The number of traffic accidents investigated and other
pertinent data on the safety activities of the police chief;



   C.   The plans and recommendations of the police chief for future
traffic safety activities.



(Prior code § 15-1-6)



10.04.070  Violation—Penalty.



   A.   "Civil Traffic laws" are those laws adopted by ordinance or
regulation relating to movement and control of traffic, including the
parking, standing or stopping of a vehicle, which provides for imposition of
civil sanctions upon violation of such ordinance or regulation. Violation of
any civil traffic ordinance or regulation in this Title shall constitute a
civil traffic violation unless an ordinance or regulation otherwise
prescribes.



   B.   In addition to any other penalty assessment provided in this
title, the court shall levy the penalty assessment as required by A.R.S. §§
12-116.01 and 12-116.02.



   C.   Each day any violation of this Title continues shall constitute
a separate offense.



(Ord. 1397.10.1 § 1, 1998: Ord. 1368 § 2 (part), 1990: prior code § 15-1-7)



10.04.075  Registered Owners Presumed Responsible for Parking and Standing
of Motor Vehicles.



   A.   In any prosecution charging a violation of any provision of
this Title governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, the person in
whose name such vehicle is registered shall be prima facie responsible for
such violation and subject to the penalty therefor.



   B.   The provisions of subsection A of this section shall apply to
those persons in whose names such vehicle is jointly registered. The person
shall be prima facie jointly and severally responsible for such violation and
subject to penalty therefor.



(Ord. 1397.10.1 § 2 (part), 1998)



10.04.080  Procedure for Civil Traffic Cases.



   A.   The rules of procedure to be employed in determinations of
whether or not a person is responsible for an offense under this Title shall
be the Rules of Procedure in Civil Traffic Violation Cases, as enacted by the
Arizona Supreme Court, Volume 17B Arizona Revised Statutes.



   B.   The citation or civil complaint and summons may be served by
any method authorized by the Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure. If service is
made by certified mail, the return receipt shall be prima facie evidence of
service.



(Ord. 1397.10.1 § 2 (part), 1998)



Chapter 10.08
TRAFFIC CONTROL REGULATIONS



Sections:



10.08.010   Authority to direct traffic.



10.08.020   Failure to comply with regulations unlawful.



10.08.030   Use of recreational devices restricted.



10.08.040   Placement and maintenance of traffic control
devices—Compliance required.



10.08.050   Authority to designate crosswalks, establish safety zones and
mark traffic lanes.



10.08.060   Authority to place turning markers—Compliance required.



10.08.070   Authority to place restricted turn signs—Compliance required.



10.08.080   Turning around restricted.



10.08.090   Authority to designate one-way streets and alleys.



10.08.100   Authority to regulate traffic at intersections.



10.08.110   Drivers to comply with all signs.



10.08.120   Processions—Permits and procedures.



10.08.130   Vehicle door obstructing traffic prohibited.



10.08.140   Boarding, alighting from vehicles in motion prohibited.



10.08.150   Reckless riding upon vehicles prohibited.



10.08.160   Truck and trailer parking on residential streets restricted.



10.08.170   Driving trucks on residential streets restricted.



10.08.180   Jaywalking on certain street prohibited.



10.08.190   Method of parking required.



10.08.200   Blocking traffic unlawful.



10.08.210   Parking adjacent to schools restricted.



10.08.220   Authority to erect signs restricting parking.



10.08.230   Parking vehicles on sidewalks unlawful.



10.08.240   Abandoned vehicles.



10.08.010  Authority to direct traffic.



   A.   The police chief is authorized to direct traffic by voice, hand
or signal.



   B.   Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire,
may direct or assist the police chief in directing traffic thereat or in the
immediate vicinity.



(Prior code § 15-2-1)



10.08.020  Failure to comply with regulations unlawful.



   It is unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to
perform any act required by this chapter. It is unlawful for any person to
wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of the
police chief or of any fire department official.



(Prior code § 15-2-2)



10.08.030  Use of recreational devices restricted.



   It is unlawful for any person upon roller skates or riding any coaster,
toy vehicle or similar device to go upon any roadway except while crossing a
street or a crosswalk, and when crossing, the person shall be granted all of
the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to
pedestrians.



(Prior code § 15-2-3)



10.08.040  Placement and maintenance of traffic control devices—Compliance
required.



   A.   The police chief, with the approval of the council, shall place
and maintain traffic-control devices, signs and signals when and as required
under the traffic regulations of the city to make effective the provisions of
the regulations, and may place and maintain additional traffic-control
devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic laws
of the city, or under state law or to guide or warn traffic.



   B.   The driver of any vehicle shall obey instructions of any
official traffic-control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with
the traffic regulations of the city unless otherwise directed by the police
chief, subject to the exceptions granted in this chapter or by state law.



(Prior code § 15-2-4)



10.08.050  Authority to designate crosswalks, establish safety zones and
mark traffic lanes.



   The police chief is authorized, on approval by the council:



   A.   To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or
lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks or intersections where in
his opinion there is a particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway,
and at such other places as he may deem necessary;



   B.   To establish safety zones of the kind and character and at
places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians;



   C.   To mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as
he may deem advisable, consistent with the traffic laws of the city.



(Prior code § 15-2-5)



10.08.060  Authority to place turning markers—Compliance required.



   A.   The police chief is authorized to place markers, buttons or
signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be
traveled by vehicles turning at the intersections, and such course to be
traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law.



   B.   When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are
placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by
vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions
of such indications.



(Prior code § 15-2-6)



10.08.070  Authority to place restricted turn signs—Compliance required.



   A.   The police chief, on approval by the council, is authorized to
determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a
right, left or u-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections.
The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day
and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly
indicated on the signs or such signs may be removed when such turns are
permitted.



   B.   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right
or left or u-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
directions of any such sign.



(Prior code § 15-2-7)



10.08.080  Turning around restricted.



   The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed
in the opposite direction upon any street in a business district and shall
not upon any other street so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made
in safety and without interfering with other traffic.



(Prior code § 15-2-8)



10.08.090  Authority to designate one-way streets and alleys.



   A.   The council shall by resolution designate any streets or alleys
which are to be limited to one-way traffic;



   B.   When any resolution of the council designates any one-way
street or alley, the police chief shall place and maintain signs giving
notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless the signs
are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall
be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite
direction is prohibited.



(Prior code § 15-2-9)



10.08.100  Authority to regulate traffic at intersections.



   A.   The council shall by resolution designate through streets,
intersections where stops are required, and intersections where vehicles
shall yield the right-of-way.



   B.   When any resolution of the council shall designate any through
street or intersection where vehicles are to stop or yield the right-of-way,
the police chief shall erect and maintain the appropriate signs at every
location where a vehicle must stop or yield right-of-way.



(Prior code § 15-2-10)



10.08.110  Drivers to comply with all signs.



   Whenever traffic signs are erected as provided in this chapter, every
driver of a vehicle shall obey the signs unless directed to proceed by the
police chief or a traffic control signal. No driver shall drive upon or
through any private property such as an oil station, vacant lot, or similar
property to avoid disobedience to any regulation included in this chapter.



(Prior code § 15-2-11)



10.08.120  Processions—Permits and procedures.



   A.   No procession or parade, except funeral processions, shall be
held without first securing a permit from the police chief, and all such
requests for permits shall state the time, place of formation, proposed line
of march, destination and the other regulations as the police chief may set
forth therein.



   B.   A funeral procession composed of a procession of vehicles shall
be identified by the methods as may be determined and designated by the
police chief.



   C.   No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles
comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion
and when the vehicles are conspicuously designated. This provision shall not
apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals
or the police chief.



   D.   Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as
near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the
vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe.



(Prior code § 15-2-12)



10.08.130  Vehicle door obstructing traffic prohibited.



   No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side adjacent
to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, nor shall
any person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle adjacent to
moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload
passengers.



(Prior code § 15-2-13)



10.08.140  Boarding, alighting from vehicles in motion prohibited.



   No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is
in motion.



(Prior code § 15-2-14)



10.08.150  Reckless riding upon vehicles prohibited.



   No person shall ride upon any portion of a vehicle not designed or
intended, or reasonably suited for the safe use of passengers.



(Prior code § 15-2-15)



10.08.160  Truck and trailer parking on residential streets prohibited.



   No person shall stand or park a vehicle with a gross vehicle weight
rating in excess of 12,000 pounds, or a tractor, semi-trailer, recreational
vehicle or bus on a local or collector street in a residential zone, with the
following exceptions for such vehicles:



   A.   Vehicles providing delivery or services within a residential
area may park or stop for the limited purpose of loading or unloading; and



   B.   Vehicles owned by a person residing in the residential area may
park or stop the vehicle for the purpose of loading or unloading or for a
period of up to two hours for any other purpose not otherwise prohibited by
law.



(Ord. 1397.10.02 § 1, 2000; prior code § 15-2-16)



10.08.170  Driving trucks on residential streets restricted.



   A.   No person shall drive a truck over seven thousand pounds empty
weight on a street where the council has by ordinance designated such traffic
is prohibited.



   B.   When by ordinance the council shall designate a street on which
they wish to prohibit the operation of trucks over seven thousand pounds
empty weight, the director of public works shall erect and maintain the
appropriate signs on the street.



   C.   This section shall not prohibit trucks over seven thousand
pounds empty weight from making deliveries, loading, or unloading on any city
street.



   D.   Any person violating subsection A of this section, unless
excepted by subsection C, shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor.



(Prior code § 15-2-17)



10.08.180  Jaywalking on certain street prohibited.



   A.   In addition to the actions prohibited by Arizona law, it is
unlawful for a pedestrian to cross Florence Boulevard between Marshall Street
and Kadota Avenue at any location other than a marked crosswalk.



   B.   A pedestrian who violates the provisions of subsection A shall
be guilty of a petty offense punishable by a fine not to exceed three hundred
dollars.



(Ord. 1252 § 1, 1989: prior code § 12-1-29)



10.08.190  Method of parking required.



   Except as otherwise provided by resolution of the council, every
vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall
be so stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle parallel to
and within eighteen inches of the right-hand curb.



(Prior code § 15-3-1)



10.08.200  Blocking traffic unlawful.



   A.   It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park any motor
vehicle, or other vehicle, upon a street in the city in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than twenty feet of the
width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, except that
a person may stop temporarily, in the actual loading or unloading of
passengers, or, when necessary, in the observance of traffic signs or signals
of the police chief.



   B.   It is unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle or other
vehicle, within an alley or entrance to a private driveway except for the
loading or unloading of materials, and not then unless the loading or
unloading can be accomplished without blocking the alley to the free movement
of vehicular traffic.



(Prior code § 15-3-2)



10.08.210  Parking adjacent to schools restricted.



   When signs are erected indicating no parking on that side of the street
adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such
designated place for one hour before school opens until one hour after school
closes on any school day.



(Prior code § 15-3-3)



10.08.220  Authority to erect signs restricting parking.



   The police chief, upon approval by the council, may erect signs
requiring parking at an angle to the curb, allowing parking on the left-hand
curb on one-way streets, notifying drivers that parking is prohibited by
ordinance, and restricting parking in any way that may be necessary. When
such signs are erected, no person shall stop or stand a vehicle in
disobedience to such signs.



(Prior code § 15-3-4)



10.08.230  Parking vehicles on sidewalks unlawful.



   It is unlawful for any person to park any vehicle, whether in usable
condition or not, or for an owner to permit his vehicle to be parked upon any
sidewalk in the city.



(Prior code § 15-3-5)



10.08.240  Abandoned vehicles.



   Any vehicle remaining parked upon any sidewalk of the city for more
than three days, or any disabled vehicle remaining parked upon any street of
the city for more than seven days, is declared to be an abandoned vehicle and
the police shall forthwith remove the same from the sidewalks or streets of
the city at the expense of the owner of the vehicle.



(Prior code § 15-3-6)



Chapter 10.12
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING



Sections:



Article I. General Provisions



10.12.010   Impounding of vehicles when.



10.12.020   Release of impounded vehicle when.



10.12.025   Parking vehicles for sale prohibited.



Article II. Pedestrian Safety



  10.12.100   Stopping in a roadway or median.



Article I. General Provisions



10.12.010  Impounding of vehicles when.



   A.   The police department may take in charge, remove and keep in
custody, under the direction of the chief of police, any unoccupied vehicle
of any kind or description found violating any of the provisions of this
code, or of any of the ordinances of the city or the laws of the state of
Arizona regulating the standing or parking of vehicles.



   B.   If the vehicle has been issued five unpaid parking tickets, the
vehicle shall be towed and impounded.



(Ord. 526.5 (part), 1988: prior code § 15-3-8)



10.12.020  Release of impounded vehicle when.



   The police department shall return to the owner of the impounded
vehicle when the owner has furnished evidence of his identity and ownership
and signed a receipt. The owner shall be requested to pay any towing and
storage fee when the payment from the owner is legally permissible. The
towing and storage fee shall be that fee set forth in the applicable current
tow service contract between the city and the towing contractor providing the
tow service. The payment of the towing and storage fee shall not release the
owner or driver of the vehicle from any other penalty imposed for the
violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 526.5 (part), 1988: prior code § 15-3-9)



10.12.025  Parking vehicles for sale prohibited.



   A.   No person shall park, or permit to be parked, any motor vehicle
for the purpose of displaying such vehicle for sale upon any right of way,
lot or area within the city, whether publicly or privately owned. This
section shall not apply to:



   1.   The display of one motor vehicle for sale when the motor
vehicle is owned by the owner or resident of the property and the vehicle is
not being sold in connection with an automobile sales business; or



   2.   The display of motor vehicles for sale on the property of a
state licensed automobile sales business which is operating in conformance
with all local zoning and business permit requirements.



   B.   The display of any signs or other markings indicating that a
motor vehicle is for sale shall be prima facie evidence that the motor
vehicle has been parked, or permitted to be parked, for the purpose of
displaying such vehicle for sale.



   C.   Violation of this section shall constitute a civil traffic
violation punishable by a fine of not less than $50 or more than $250.



(Ord. 1397.10.1 § 3, 1998)



Article II. Pedestrian Safety



10.12.100   Stopping in a roadway or median.



   A.   No pedestrian may stop or remain in the portion of any roadway
designed for vehicular use or in a painted or raised traffic island or median
not specifically designated for use by pedestrians except to wait to cross
the roadway at the next pedestrian signal or, in the absence of a pedestrian
signal, when traffic has cleared or yielded.



   B.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons
occupying a median or roadway while conducting activities related to
maintenance, surveying, construction, landscape maintenance, landscape
improvements, or other similar activity necessary for the safe and efficient
operation of the city streets; provided that all such operations must be
conducted only upon approval of the director of public works, or his or her
designee, and upon such conditions, such as adjacent lane closures, use of
appropriate safety vests or gear, and/or other safety precautions designed to
ensure the safety of motorists and those temporarily occupying the median for
these purposes.



   C.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to emergency
personnel occupying a median or roadway in response to an accident, safety
hazard, or other emergency situation.  Emergency personnel temporarily
occupying a median or roadway for these purposes should take adequate
precautions to help ensure proper notification of the emergency situation if
feasible and to provide such safety measures as are appropriate and
reasonably available in light of the emergency situation presented.



   D.   A first alleged violation of subsection A of this section shall
result in a warning to the violator by law enforcement personnel. 
Violations of subsection A of this section by any person previously warned by
law enforcement personnel, either verbally or in writing, shall be a Class 3
misdemeanor. (Ord. 1397.10.4 § 1, 2015)



Chapter 10.16
BICYCLES



Sections:



10.16.010   License required.



10.16.020   Registration and issuance of license.



10.16.030   Transfer of ownership—Reregistration required.



10.16.040   License plate to remain attached for identification
purposes—Tampering with unlawful.



10.16.050   Safety requirements.



10.16.010  License required.



   It is unlawful for any person to operate or use a bicycle propelled
wholly or in part by muscular power upon any of the streets, alleys, or
public thoroughfares of the city without first obtaining from the police
department a license therefor.



(Prior code § 15-4-1)



10.16.020  Registration and issuance of license.



   A.   The police department shall issue, upon written application,
bicycle license which shall be effective upon issuance and as long as such
bicycle remains the property of the owner to whom the license is issued.



   B.   The police department shall register each bicycle before a
license is issued showing the make and model, serial number, owner and other
pertinent information. The registration shall be in effect until the owner
sells or otherwise transfers ownership of the bicycle.



(Prior code § 15-4-2)



10.16.030  Transfer of ownership—Reregistration required.



   It shall be the duty of every person who sells or transfers ownership
of any bicycle to report the sale or transfer by returning to the police
department the registration card issued to the person or license thereof,
together with the name and address of the person to whom the bicycle was sold
or transferred, and the report shall be made within five days of the date of
the sale or transfer. It shall be the duty of the purchaser or transferee of
the bicycle to apply for a transfer of registration within five days of the
sale or transfer.



(Prior code § 15-4-3)



10.16.040  License plate to remain attached for identification
purposes—Tampering with unlawful.



   The license plate shall be attached and shall remain attached to the
licensed bicycle during the existence of the license. It shall be unlawful
for any person to remove, destroy, mutilate, or alter any license plate, seal
or serial number from any bicycle during the effective time of the license.
The police department shall have authority to stamp numbers on the frames of
bicycles on which no serial number can be found, or on which the serial
number is illegible, or insufficient for identification purposes.



(Prior code § 15-4-4)



10.16.050  Safety requirements.



   It shall be the duty of every person operating a bicycle to maintain
such in a mechanically safe condition at all times. It is unlawful to ride a
bicycle at night unless it is equipped with a headlight that can be seen for
three hundred feet and a taillightreflector that can be seen for two hundred
feet.



(Prior code § 15-4-5)



Chapter 10.20
OPERATION OF VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY



Sections:



10.20.010   Intent.



10.20.020   Permit required for use on private land—Specifications.



10.20.030   Display of permit upon request required.



10.20.040   Violation—Penalty.



10.20.010  Intent.



   It is the intent of this chapter to prevent the unauthorized use of
vacant lots or other privately- owned areas by motor vehicles which
unauthorized use results in the creation of excessive dust, noise, or other
annoyances to such an extent as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment
of life or property by the surrounding property owners.



(Prior code § 15-5-4)



10.20.020  Permit required for use on private land—Specifications.



   A.   It is unlawful for any person to operate, drive or leave any
motor vehicle, motorcycle, motor scooter, minibike, trail-bike, dune buggy,
jeep or other form of transportation propelled by an internal combustion
engine, upon the private property of another without a written permit issued
by the owner of the property or the person entitled to immediate possession
thereof, or the authorized agent of either.



   B.   The permit shall specify the period for which permission is
granted, and shall set forth the name of the grantee, shall be signed by the
grantor, shall state the grantor's interest in the property and, if the
grantor is not the owner thereof, the owner's name.



(Prior code § 15-5-1)



10.20.030  Display of permit upon request required.



   Any person operating, driving or leaving a vehicle described in Section
10.20.020 on private property shall, upon request of any peace officer,
display the permit issued under terms of this article.



(Prior code § 15-5-2)



10.20.040  Violation—Penalty.



   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter
is guilty of a misdemeanor and each person shall be deemed guilty of a
separate offense for each day or portion thereof during which any violation
of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted, and
upon conviction, the person shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed
three hundred dollars, imprisonment for not to exceed ninety days, or both
such fine and imprisonment.



(Prior code § 15-5-3)



Title 11
(RESERVED)

Title 12
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES



Chapters:



12.04   Park Use Regulations



Chapter 12.04
PARK USE REGULATIONS



Sections:



Article I. Park Operating Policy



12.04.010   Definitions.



12.04.020   Hours open.



12.04.030   Authority to close certain areas.



12.04.040   Permit required for certain activities.



12.04.050   Application for permit—Information required.



12.04.060   Standards for permit issuance.



12.04.070   Appeal procedure.



12.04.080   Permit revocation when.



Article II. Sanitation



12.04.090   Pollution of waters prohibited.



12.04.100   Dumping of refuse and trash prohibited.



12.04.110   Possession or breaking of glass alcoholic container prohibited.



12.04.120   Damaging restrooms prohibited.



Article III. Recreational Activities



12.04.130   Bathing and swimming in designated areas only.



12.04.140   Boating in designated areas only.



12.04.150   Golfing in designated areas only.



12.04.160   Motorcycles, etc. in designated areas only.



12.04.170   Horseback riding in designated areas only.



12.04.180   Model airplanes in designated areas only.



12.04.190   Model boats in designated areas only.



12.04.200   Skateboarding, roller skating in designated areas only.



Article IV. Enforcement Authority



12.04.210   Enforcement authority.



12.04.220   Authority to eject.



12.04.230   Violation—Penalty.



Article I. Park Operating Policy



12.04.010  Definitions.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section.



   “City” means the city of Casa Grande.



   “Director” means the person immediately in charge of any park area
and its activities, and to whom all park employees of such area are
responsible.



   “Park” means a park, reservation, playground, recreation center, or
any other area in the city owned or used by the city and devoted to active or
passive recreation.



(Prior code Art. 18-1)



12.04.020  Hours open.



   A.   North Mountain Park and Casa Grande Mountain Park shall be open
twenty-four hours each day.



   B.   Dave White Regional Park shall be open from dawn to eleven p.m.
each day.



   C.   All other parks shall be open from five a.m. to eleven p.m.
each day.



   D.   All parks shall be closed at all times not specifically
described in subsections A, B and C of this section.



   E.   No person shall be present in any park when it is closed
without the permission of the director.



(Ord. 854.2 § 2, 1989; prior code § 18-4-1)



12.04.030  Authority to close certain areas.



   Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public by
the director or chief of police at any time and for any interval of time,
either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals (daily or otherwise)
and either entirely or merely to certain uses, as the director or chief of
police shall find reasonable and necessary to protect the public health or
safety.



(Prior code § 18-4-2)



12.04.040  Permit required for certain activities.



   A.   A permit shall be obtained from the department director before
participating in the following activities:



   1.   The sale of food, beverages, or other items;



   2.   The amplification of music, voices, or other sounds;



   3.   The reservation of a park or a portion of a park by a group
numbering more than one hundred fifty;



   4.   Any stay in Casa Grande Mountain Park for a period in excess of
twenty-four hours;



   5.   Any stay in North Mountain Park after eleven p.m.



   6.   The possession or consumption of an alcoholic beverage in any
of the following parks: Peart, O'Neil, Elliott, Eastland, and Nutt.



   B.   A reservation may be obtained from the department director by
any group of people wishing to use a portion of the park.



(Ord. 854.4 § 2, 1991; Ord. 854.3, 1989; Ord. 854.1 § 1, 1989; prior code
§ 18-4-3)



12.04.050  Application for permit—Information required.



   A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall file an
application with the department director. The application shall state:



   A.   The name and address of the applicant;



   B.   The name and address of the person, persons, corporation, or
association sponsoring the activity, if any;



   C.   The day and hours for which the permit is desired;



   D.   The portion of the park for which the permit is desired;



   E.   An estimate of the anticipated attendance;



   F.   A description of the activity;



   G.   Any other information which the department director shall find
reasonable or necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should
be issued hereunder.



(Prior code § 18-4-4)



12.04.060  Standards for permit issuance.



   The department director shall issue guidelines which shall govern the
issuance of permits, the guidelines to be in accordance with the following
general policy:



   A.   Whether the proposed activity or use of the park will
unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of
the park;



   B.   Whether the proposed activity will unreasonably interfere with
or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and
recreation;



   C.   Whether the proposed activity will unreasonably interfere with
or detract from the use and enjoyment of property in the general vicinity of
the park.



(Prior code § 18-4-5)



12.04.070  Appeal procedure.



   Within three working days after receipt of an application, the
department director shall grant the permit or shall apprise the applicant in
writing of the reasons for refusing a permit. Any aggrieved person shall have
the right to appeal in writing within five working days to the city council,
which shall consider the application at its next regular meeting. The council
shall sustain or overrule the department director's decision within fifteen
days.



(Prior code § 18-4-6)



12.04.080  Permit revocation when.



   The director shall have the authority to revoke a permit upon a finding
of violation of any rule or ordinance, violation of any of the conditions
pursuant to which the permit was issued, or upon good cause shown.



(Prior code § 18-4-7)



Article II. Sanitation



12.04.090  Pollution of waters prohibited.



    No person in a park shall throw, discharge, or otherwise place or
cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, or
other body of water in or adjacent to any park, or any stream, storm sewer,
or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter, or thing, liquid or
solid, which will or may result in the pollution of the waters.



(Prior code § 18-2-1)



12.04.100  Dumping of refuse and trash prohibited.



   No person in a park shall bring in trash from other areas for the
purpose of deposit in the park and no person shall dump, deposit, or leave
any beverage containers, broken beverage containers, ashes, paper, boxes,
cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage or refuse, or other trash. No such refuse
or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park, or left
anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper
receptacles where these are provided; where receptacles are not so provided,
all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person
responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.



(Prior code § 18-2-2)



12.04.110  Possession or breaking of glass alcoholic container prohibited.



   It is unlawful for any person to possess a glass alcoholic beverage
container in any park. It is unlawful for any person to throw, toss or
otherwise propel, or break any glass object in a park or any street or alley
adjacent to any park.



(Prior code § 18-2-3)



12.04.120  Damaging restrooms prohibited.



   No person shall damage or wastefully or improperly use any toilet,
water or sewer facility in any park.



(Prior code § 18-2-4)



Article III. Recreational Activities



12.04.130  Bathing and swimming in designated areas only.



   No person in a park shall swim, bathe, or wade in any waters or
waterway in or adjacent to any park, except in the waters and at the places
as are provided therefor, and in compliance with such regulations as are
herein set forth or may be hereafter adopted. Nor shall any person frequent
any waters or places customarily designated for the purpose of swimming or
bathing or congregate thereat when such activity is prohibited by the
department director upon a finding that such use of the water would be
dangerous to public health or safety.



(Prior code § 18-3-1)



12.04.140  Boating in designated areas only.



   No person in a park shall bring into or operate any boat, raft, or
other water craft, whether motor- powered or not, upon any waters, except at
places designated for boating by the department director. Such activity shall
be in accordance with applicable regulations as are now or may hereafter be
adopted.



(Prior code § 18-3-2)



12.04.150  Golfing in designated areas only.



   No person in a park shall use any portion of a park for golfing
purposes, or make use of any golf club or golf ball in any park, except at
places designated for golfing by the department director.



(Prior code § 18-3-3)



12.04.160  Motorcycles, etc. in designated areas only.



   No person in a park shall bring into or operate any motorcycle, car,
truck, motorbike, any terrain vehicle, or bicycle, whether motor-powered or
not, except in areas and on roads or paths designated for that purpose by the
department director.



(Prior code § 18-3-4)



12.04.170  Horseback riding in designated areas only.



   No person shall bring a horse into a park, or ride a horse in any
location in a park, except on designated bridle trails. Horses shall be
thoroughly broken and properly restrained, and ridden with due care, and
shall not be allowed to graze or go unattended, nor shall they be hitched to
any rock, tree, shrub, fence, or playground equipment.



(Prior code § 18-3-5)



12.04.180  Model airplanes in designated areas only.



   No person in a park shall bring into or use any model airplane except
in areas set apart for such purposes and designated by the department
director.



(Prior code § 18-3-6)



12.04.190  Model boats in designated areas only.



   No person shall operate any model boats or other miniature water craft,
whether remote controlled, motor-powered or not, upon any waters, except at
places designated for such use by the department director.



(Prior code § 18-3-7)



12.04.200  Skateboarding, roller skating in designated areas only.



   No person in a park shall bring into or use any skateboard or roller
skates except in areas set apart for such purposes and designated by the
department director.



(Prior code § 18-3-8)



Article IV. Enforcement Authority



12.04.210  Enforcement authority.



   The director, any park employee, or police shall, in connection with
their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this
chapter.



(Prior code § 18-5-1)



12.04.220  Authority to eject.



   The director, any park employee, or police shall have the authority to
eject from the park any person acting in violation of this chapter.



(Prior code § 18-5-2)



12.04.230  Violation—Penalty.



   Any violation of this chapter is a Class 1 misdemeanor.



(Prior code Art. 18-6)


Title 13
PUBLIC SERVICES



Chapters:



13.04   City Airports



13.08   Sewer Service System



13.12   Pretreatment Standards



13.16   Irrigation Fees and Assessments



Chapter 13.04
CITY AIRPORTS



Sections:



Article I. General Provision



13.04.010   Definitions.



13.04.020   Administration authority—Operation—City held harmless.



Article II. Property Regulations



13.04.030   City not liable.



13.04.040   Damage to airport property—Responsible party to comply with
rules for compensation.



13.04.050   Damage, injurious activities and abandonment prohibited.



13.04.060   Explosives prohibited.



13.04.070   Unauthorized aircraft or vehicles removed.



13.04.080   Authority to eject.



Article III. Aircraft Operations



13.04.090   Aircraft operations regulations.



13.04.100   Accident procedures.



Article IV. Motor Vehicles



13.04.110   General regulations.



Article V. Roads and Walks



13.04.120   Unauthorized travel unlawful.



13.04.130   Obstructions unlawful.



Article VI. Fire Hazards and Fueling Operations



13.04.140   Unauthorized fuel delivery and dispensing unlawful.



13.04.150   Flammable cleaning fluids unlawful.



13.04.160   Open flame operations unlawful.



13.04.170   Smoking prohibited.



13.04.180   Storage unlawful when fire hazard.



13.04.190   Surface areas to be kept clean.



13.04.200   Doping unlawful except under certain conditions.



13.04.210   Fueling unlawful when.



13.04.220   Compliance with International Fire Code required.



13.04.230   Authority to inspect—Compliance required.



Article VII. Tenants Regulated



13.04.240   Uses to be in conformance.



13.04.250   Trash requirements.



13.04.260   Hazardous storage unlawful.



13.04.270   Authority to inspect at any time.



13.04.280   Provisions incorporated into lease.



Article VIII. Commercial Operations



13.04.290   Definitions.



13.04.300   Operating policy.



13.04.310   Prohibited acts.



13.04.320   Appropriate allocation of ground space—Structures to comply
with building regulations.



13.04.330   Procedures for acquiring lease.



13.04.340   Fixed base operator's license issued subject to compliance.



13.04.350   Agricultural chemical application—Requirements to engage in.



13.04.360   Insurance coverage required.



13.04.370   Rates and charges established by council.



Article IX. Offenses—Violation—Penalty.



13.04.380   Nuisances, littering, vandalism unlawful.



13.04.390   Unauthorized hunting prohibited.



13.04.400   Unauthorized solicitation and advertising unlawful.



13.04.410   Animals to be restrained.



13.04.420   Unauthorized flying of model aircraft prohibited.



Article X. Miscellaneous



13.04.430   Council authority to establish additional standards.



13.04.440   Federal authority.



13.04.450   Violation—Penalty.



13.04.460   Conflicting regulations.



Article I. General Provisions



13.04.010  Definitions.



   All words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meaning, unless its context requires otherwise. All definitions contained
within the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 and all amendments thereto are
incorporated herein. All definitions shall be interpreted consistently with
the Federal Aviation Act and amendments thereto.



   “Aircraft” means a device that is used or intended to be used for
flight in the air, including helicopters and ultralight vehicles.



   “Airport” means all of the areas comprising the Casa Grande
Municipal Airport, as now existing or as the same may hereafter be expanded
and developed and shall include all of its facilities. “Airport” includes
all airports owned or operated by the city.



   “Airport advisory board” means the duly appointed five-member
airport advisory board of the city.



   “Airport director” or “director” means the city manager of Casa
Grande or his/her designee.



   “Commercial activity” means the conduct of any aspect of a business
or concession on the airport for revenue.



   “City” means the city of Casa Grande.



   “Council” means the mayor and city council.



   “Field area” means that area used for aircraft taxiing, run up,
take off, landing, tie downs, loading and unloading of passengers and
baggage. Field area shall include all areas used by vehicles or pedestrians
to gain access to any of the above, and shall include all additional areas
designated by the director as a field area.



   “General fixed based operator” means a person, firm or corporation
subject to the provisions of a lease and nonexclusive license engaging in the
following: the sales, service, renting, or leasing of new or used aircraft,
parts, aircraft accessories and hardware, custom repair, overhauling, and
modification of general aviation aircraft and/or aircraft equipment,
including the conduct of charter flight service, aerial photography and
flight schools.



   “Operator” means the person, firm or corporation in possession of
an aircraft or vehicle or any person who has rented such for the purpose of
operation by him/herself or an agent.



   “Owner” means a person who holds the legal title of an aircraft or
a vehicle, or in the event that the aircraft or vehicle is the subject of a
conditional sale or lease thereof within the right of purchase upon
performance of the conditions stated in the agreement, and with the immediate
right of possession vested in the conditional vendee or lessee or anyone in
possession of an aircraft or vehicle on the airport or in the event of a
mortgagor of an aircraft or vehicle is entitled to the possession, then the
conditional vendee, lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed the owner for the
purpose of these rules and regulations.



   “Public area” means all other airport areas not field areas, except
those areas designated by a tenant or the director as nonpublic areas. The
director shall have the power to overrule a tenant's designation of an area
as a nonpublic area and may designate the area to be public.



   “Park” or “parking” means the standing of an aircraft or
vehicle whether occupied or not.



   “Pedestrian” means any person afoot.



   “Permission” or “permit” means permission granted by the
airport director unless otherwise specifically provided herein.



   “Special fixed base operator” means a person, firm, or corporation
subject to the provisions of a lease and nonexclusive license engaging in
some but not all of the activities of a general fixed base operator.



   “Vehicle” means a device in, upon or by which a person or property
is or may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway excepting a device
moved by human power.



(Prior code § 22-1-1)  (Ord. 1397.02.07 § 3 (part), 2001)



13.04.020  Administration authority—Operation— City held harmless.



   A.   In addition to the requirements of the Federal Aviation
Administration, the Civil Aeronautics Board, and the Arizona State Department
of Aeronautics, the director may promulgate such rules and regulations,
orders and instructions as are necessary in the administration of this
chapter. The director may post signs at the airport which state or apply the
rules, regulations, orders or instructions. Each person on the airport shall
comply with all rules, regulations and signs posted by the director pursuant
to this chapter. Each member of the staff of the director, as a
representative of the director, is empowered to require compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and all rules and regulations issued by the
director.



   B.   The airport shall be conducted as a public air facility for the
promotion and accommodation of civil aviation and associated activities.



   C.   The privilege of using the airport and its facilities shall be
conditioned on the assumption by the user thereof of full responsibility and
risk for such use, and the user thereof releases and agrees to hold the city
and its officers and employees harmless, and to indemnify them from any
liability or loss resulting from the use. The owners and operators of all
aircraft based on or operating from the airport shall comply with all of the
applicable provisions of Title 28, Chapter 25, Arizona Revised Statutes. The
city reserves the right to deny use of the airport to any person who is
judged by the director to be endangering the public's safety, health or
welfare.



(Prior code § 22-1-2) (Ord. 1397.02.05 § 3, 1998)



Article II. Property Regulations



13.04.030  City not liable.



   The city assumes no responsibility or liability for loss, injury or
damage to persons or property on the airport or using airport facilities,
including but not limited to fire, vandalism, wind, flood, earthquake, or
collision damage, nor does it assume any liability by reason of injury to
person or property while using the facilities of same.



(Prior code § 22-3-1)



13.04.040  Damage to airport property—Responsible party to comply with
rules for compensation.



   Any person causing, or liable for, any damage to airport property,
shall be required to pay the city on demand the full cost of repairs to the
damaged property. Any person failing to comply with these rules may be
refused the use of the airport.



(Prior code § 22-3-2)



13.04.050  Damage, injurious activities and abandonment prohibited.



   A.   No person shall destroy, injure, deface or disturb in any way
any building, sign, equipment, marker or other structure, tree, shrub,
flower, lawn or seeded area on the airport, except as authorized by the
director.



   B.   No person shall conduct on or at the airport, activities that
are injurious, detrimental or damaging to the airport property business of
the airport or persons.



   C.   No person shall abandon any personal property at the airport.



(Prior code § 22-3-3)



13.04.060  Explosives prohibited.



   No person shall carry any unauthorized explosives on the airport.



(Prior code § 22-3-4)



13.04.070  Unauthorized aircraft or vehicles removed.



   Any unauthorized aircraft or vehicle which has been parked in any
unauthorized space may be removed or caused to be removed by the airport
director.



(Prior code § 22-3-5)



13.04.080  Authority to eject.



   The airport director shall have the right to cause to be ejected from
the airport premises, any vehicle or aircraft operator guilty of violation of
any provisions of this chapter. Such persons shall have the right to appeal
the ejection to the airport authority board.



(Prior code § 22-3-6) (Ord. 1397.02.07 § 3 (part), 2001)



Article III. Aircraft Operations



13.04.090  Aircraft operations regulations.



   A.   No person shall conduct any aircraft operation to, or from or
over the airport except in conformity with all Federal Aviation
Administration regulations, the applicable provisions of Arizona Revised
Statutes, this chapter, and the rules and regulations promulgated by the
director.



   B.   No person shall park an aircraft on any runway or taxiway at
the airport.



   C.   No person shall park or store an aircraft at the airport except
in areas designated by the director.



   D.   Preventive maintenance work, as defined in Title 14, Part 43,
Appendix A(c), Code of Federal Regulations, may be performed at the airport
tie down areas by the owner or operator of the aircraft. Aircraft owners who
possess current mechanic ratings such as A&P and A&I may do additional work
in the tie down areas subject to the approval of the director. All other
aircraft maintenance, rebuilding, and alterations shall be performed only in
those areas designated by the director.



   E.   No person shall take any aircraft from the landing area or
hangers or operate such aircraft while under the influence of intoxicating
liquor or dangerous drug.



   F.   Persons parking transient aircraft overnight on terminal
transient areas shall register their aircraft with the director or his/her
representative as soon as possible after landing at the airport, and pay
appropriate tie down fees.



   G.   All owners and operators who desire to base their aircraft at
the airport shall register their aircraft with the director or his/her
representative prior to beginning operations. Any change in ownership of the
aircraft shall be reported as soon as possible.



   H.   If the director believes the conditions at the airport, or any
portion thereof, are unfavorable for aircraft operations, he/she may close
the airport, or portions thereof, using applicable Federal Aviation
Administration procedures, as appropriate.



   I.   No aircraft shall be permitted to remain on any part of the
landing or take off areas for the purpose of repairs.



   J.   No person shall, without the owner's permission, interfere or
tamper with an aircraft parked or stored at the airport.



   K.   No person shall move an aircraft on the airport in a negligent
or reckless manner.



   L.   No person shall start or taxi any aircraft in a place where the
air or exhaust blast is likely to cause injuries to persons or property. If
the aircraft cannot be taxied without violating this paragraph, the operator
must have it towed to the desirable destination.



   M.   No agricultural flying may take place at the airport and no
storage of any chemicals, pesticides or herbicides will be allowed except as
may otherwise be provided in this chapter. Agricultural aircraft must be
washed of all chemicals before tying down at the airport, at a wash area
approved by the director. All such aircraft may be restricted to a specific
tie down area as designated by the director.



   N.   All air traffic should avoid flight over populated or noise
sensitive areas whenever possible, consistent with safety.



(Prior code § 22-4-1)  (Ord. 1397.02.07 § 3 (part), 2001)



13.04.100  Accident procedures.



   A.   Persons involved in aircraft accidents occurring at the airport
shall make a full report thereof to the director or his/her representative as
soon as is possible after the accident. The report must include all pertinent
information. For the purposes of this section, an aircraft accident shall
include any event involving an aircraft and a motor vehicle, other aircraft,
person or stationary object with results in property damage, personal injury
or death.



   B.   Any person damaging property on the airport by means of contact
with aircraft shall report the damages to the airport office immediately and
shall be fully responsible to the city for the cost of repairs.



   C.   Every pilot and aircraft owner shall be responsible for the
prompt removal of any disabled aircraft or parts hereof, as directed by the
director or his/her representative, subject to accident investigation
requirements.



(Prior code § 22-4-2)



Article IV. Motor Vehicles



13.04.110  General regulations.



   A.   No motor vehicle shall be operated on the airport if it is so
constructed, equipped or loaded as to endanger persons or property.



   B.   Each operator of a motor vehicle involved in any accident on
the airport that results in personal injury or property damage, shall make a
full report to the director or his/her representative as soon as possible
after the accident.



   C.   No person shall operate any motor vehicle on the airport in
violation of this chapter, or rules and regulations promulgated by the
director or the laws of the state.



   D.   No person shall operate a motor vehicle on the airport in a
negligent or reckless manner, or in excess of posted speed limits.



   E.   No person shall park or stand a motor vehicle at any place on
the airport in violation of any sign posted by the director, or within
fifteen feet of a fire hydrant, or in a manner as to block any fire gate or
entrance, road or taxiway.



   F.   The director or his/her agent, may remove, at the owner's
expense, any motor vehicle which is parked on the airport in violation of
this chapter. The vehicle shall be subject to a lien for the cost of removal.



(Prior code § 22-5-1)



Article V. Roads and Walks



13.04.120  Unauthorized travel unlawful.



   It is unlawful for any person to travel on the airport except on a
road, walk or other place provided for the kind of travel the person is doing.



(Prior code § 22-7-1)



13.04.130  Obstructions unlawful.



   It is unlawful for any person to occupy or place an object on a road or
walk on the airport in a manner that hinders or obstructs its proper use.



(Prior code § 22-7-2)



Article VI. Fire Hazards and Fueling Operations



13.04.140  Unauthorized fuel delivery and dispensing unlawful.



   It is unlawful for any person to transport or deliver aviation fuels on
the airport or dispense fuels into aircraft unless authorized to conduct such
activity, except if a person is providing fuel for his/her own aircraft.



(Prior code § 22-8-1)



13.04.150  Flammable cleaning fluids unlawful.



   It is unlawful for any person to use a flammable or volatile liquid
having a flash point of less than ninety-six degrees Fahrenheit to clean an
aircraft, aircraft engine, propeller or appliance in an aircraft hangar or
similar type building, nor within fifty feet of another aircraft, building or
hangar.



(Prior code § 22-8-2)



13.04.160  Open flame operations unlawful.



   It is unlawful for any person to have in his possession an open flame,
flame-producing device or other source of ignition (except cigarette lighters
or matches for that purpose) in any hangar or similar type of building,
except in locations approved by the director.



(Prior code § 22-8-3)



13.04.170  Smoking prohibited.



   It is unlawful for any person to smoke in any areas during any times
when smoking may be a hazard.



(Prior code § 22-8-4)



13.04.180  Storage unlawful when fire hazard.



   A.   It is unlawful for any person to store or stock material or
equipment on the airport in a manner that constitutes a fire hazard.



   B.   It is unlawful for any person to store any combustible
materials, flammable liquids or other hazardous materials in an unsafe manner.



(Prior code § 22-8-5)



13.04.190  Surface areas to be kept clean.



   Each person to whom space on the airport is leased, assigned or made
available for use shall keep the space free and clear of oil, grease, or
other foreign materials that could cause a fire hazard or slippery or other
unsafe condition.



(Prior code § 22-8-6)



13.04.200  Doping unlawful except under certain conditions.



   It is unlawful for any person to conduct a doping process on the
airport except in a properly designed fire-resistive and ventilated room or
building in which all lights, wiring, heating, ventilating equipment,
switches, outlets and fixtures are approved for such use in hazardous areas,
and in which all exit facilities are approved and maintained for such use, or
except in an open area as designated by the director. No person shall enter
or work in a dope room while doping processes are being conducted unless
wearing sparkproof shoes.



(Prior code § 22-8-7)



13.04.210  Fueling unlawful when.



   A.   It is unlawful for any person to fuel or defuel an aircraft in
the airport while:



   1.   Its engine is running or is being warmed by applying external
heat;



   2.   It is in a hangar or enclosed space;



   3.   Passengers are in the aircraft unless a passenger loading ramp
is in place at the cabin door, and a “no smoking” sign is displayed and
the rule enforced.



   B.   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly start the engine of
an aircraft on the airport if there is any gasoline or other volatile
flammable liquid on the ground beneath it of sufficient quantity to cause a
hazard.



   C.   It is unlawful for any person to operate a radio transmitter or
receiver, or to switch electrical appliances on or off, in an aircraft on the
airport while it is being fueled or defueled.



   D.   During the fueling of an aircraft on the airport, the
dispensing apparatus and the aircraft shall both be grounded in accordance
with orders and instructions of the director.



   E.   Each person engaged in fueling or defueling on the airport
shall exercise care to prevent the overflow of fuel, and shall have readily
accessible and adequate fire extinguishers.



   F.   During the fueling or defueling of13. an aircraft on the
airport, no person shall, within fifty feet of that aircraft, smoke or use
any material that is likely to cause a spark or be a source of ignition.



   G.   Each hose, funnel or appurtenance used in fueling or defueling
an aircraft on the airport shall be maintained in safe, sound and non-leaking
condition and must be properly grounded to prevent ignition of volatile
liquids.



(Prior code § 22-8-8)



13.04.220  Compliance with International Fire Code required.



   All persons shall comply with the provisions of the edition of the
International Fire Code most recently adopted by the City.



(Prior code § 22-8-9)



13.04.230  Authority to inspect—Compliance required.



   The city fire chief or duly authorized representatives shall inspect as
often as necessary all buildings and premises for the purpose of ascertaining
and causing to be corrected any conditions which would reasonably tend to
cause fire or contribute to its spread or endanger life or property from
fire. All orders, notices or recommendations shall be complied with by all
persons without delay.



(Prior code § 22-8-10)



Article VII. Tenants Regulated



13.04.240  Uses to be in conformance.



   No lessee or sublessee of airport property shall knowingly allow that
property to be used or occupied for any purpose prohibited by this chapter.



(Prior code § 22-9-1)



13.04.250  Trash requirements.



   A.   It is unlawful for any tenant, lessee, sublessee,
concessionaires or agent of any of them, doing business on the airport, to
keep uncovered trash containers on the sidewalk or road or in a public area
of the airport.



   B.   It is unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle for hauling
trash, dirt or other material on the airport unless it is built to prevent
its contents from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping.



   C.   It is unlawful for any person to spill, pour or otherwise
discharge any pesticide, herbicide or any hazardous material on any airport
property.



(Prior code § 22-9-2)



13.04.260  Hazardous storage unlawful.



   It is unlawful for any person to store or stack equipment or material
in a manner to be a hazard to persons or property.



(Prior code § 22-9-3)



13.04.270  Authority to inspect at any time.



   The director or authorized representative shall have the right at all
reasonable times to inspect all areas under lease to or occupied by tenants.



(Prior code § 22-9-4)



13.04.280  Provisions incorporated into lease.



   The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed incorporated into every
lease and sublease and violations of the provisions of this chapter or any
rule or regulation pursuant to this chapter may result in termination of the
lease or sublease.



(Prior code § 22-9-5)



Article VIII. Commercial Operations



13.04.290  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this article, a “business or commercial
activity” means and includes the following types of activities when done
for hire, compensation or reward:



   A.   Retail sales of goods, wares, merchandise or services;



   B.   Pilot training and flight instruction;



   C.   Sale, rental or charter of aircraft;



   D.   Air carrier and air taxi operations;



   E.   Sale of aviation petroleum products;



   F.   Sale or service of aircraft parts, avionics, instruments or
other aircraft equipment;



   G.   Repair, maintenance, rebuilding, alteration or exchange of
aircraft engines, components or other parts;



   H.   Flying clubs.



(Prior code § 22-10-3)



13.04.300  Operating policy.



   As the operator and proprietor of the airport, on behalf of the
citizens of the city, it is the intent of the city council:



   A.   To operate the airport in a business-like manner with as little
cost as possible to the taxpayers through the imposition of fair and
reasonable rentals, fees and charges;



   B.   To provide for both private and commercial aviation at the
airport to the extent practicable within physical, economic and environmental
constraints;



   C.   To provide for the full range of on-base aeronautical support
consistent with the need for the service and the availability of space and
physical facilities;



   D.   To protect the airport patrons and users from unsafe and
inadequate aeronautical service and to maintain and preserve all airport
facilities in a safe, secure and orderly condition;



   E.   To promote fair competition and not expose those who have
lawfully undertaken to provide commodities and services at the airport to
irresponsible or unethical business or commercial activity on the airport;



   F.   To permit and provide adequate facilities for owners of general
aviation aircraft to work on and service their own aircraft within the limits
as may be imposed by this chapter or airport regulation for purposes of
safety, preservation of airport facilities, and protection of the public
interest;



   G.   To promote the utility, educational and recreational aspects of
general aviation.



(Prior code § 22-10-1)  (Ord. 1397.02.07 § 3 (part), 2001)



13.04.310  Prohibited acts.



   It is unlawful for any person to engage in any business or commercial
activity on the airport without a lease approved by the council, or a
sublease from a duly authorized master lessee which is approved by the city.
For the purposes of this article a “person” means an individual or group
of individuals, including a company, partnership, corporation or other
association. This prohibition shall also apply to persons who use the airport
as a base for conducting their activity but whose office or other place of
business is not situated at the airport. This prohibition does not apply to:



   A.   Aircraft operations in which the flight originates and
terminates elsewhere and the airport is utilized as a temporary stopping
place for such purposes as landings, refueling, or other aeronautical
service, or the embarking or debarking of passengers, except in the case of
charter or air taxi airlines;



   B.   Company or corporate-owned aircraft where personnel or products
are transported free of charge, the trip being merely incidental to the
company's principal business and not, in itself, a major enterprise for
profit;



   C.   Casual or isolated transactions such as sales by the owner, an
owner/pilot giving occasional flight instruction, or the like;



   D.   No lease or license for the exclusive right to provide an
aeronautical service, operation or activity on the airport shall be issued or
approved.



(Prior code §§ 22-10-2, 22-10-4)



13.04.320  Appropriate allocation of ground space—Structures to comply
with building regulations.



   Leases for aeronautical and commercial activities on the airport shall
be issued and approved contingent on the lessor constructing or providing a
structure or structures on the leased property appropriate to the type of
aeronautical or commercial activity to be conducted. Ground space allocations
under lease agreements shall be made in accordance with a master plan and
land use plan adopted by the city for development of the airport. All
structures erected on the airport shall comply with all building regulations.
Structural and architectural design of all structures shall be subject to
approval by the city. Termination of a ground lease without other
satisfactory arrangements having been made with the city shall automatically
revoke the permission to conduct an aeronautical or commercial activity on
the airport.



(Prior code § 22-10-5)



13.04.330  Procedures for acquiring lease.



   When a person, corporation or other entity desires to enter into a
lease with the city for land on the airport, the person must contact the
director and make the request known. The city shall negotiate with the
interested party to arrive at lease provisions and costs which reflect fair
market values and include provisions to increase lease amounts in future
years based on appropriate economic factors. Prior to entering into any lease
for property at the airport, the prospective lessee must present to the city
satisfactory evidence that it meets the minimum standards established herein
for engaging in business at the airport.



(Prior code § 22-10-6)



13.04.340  Fixed base operator's license issued subject to compliance.



   A.   A general fixed base operator's license will be issued subject
to the compliance with all conditions hereinafter imposed and upon proper
application, to a person or company providing the following services:



   1.   Fuel and oil sales;



   2.   Flight training services;



   3.   Aircraft charter and taxi services;



   4.   Aircraft rental and sales;



   5.   Sale of aircraft parts, accessories and hardware;



   6.   Repair, overhauling and modification of aircraft or equipment.



   B.   A special fixed base operator's license will be issued subject
to the compliance with all conditions hereinafter imposed and upon proper
application, to a person or company providing some but not all of the
services required of a general fixed base operator.



   C.   Aviation fuel will be sold on the airport only by the city or
by a duly licensed fixed base operator. Nothing in this section shall be
construed so as to limit the right of any person to provide fuel for his/her
own aircraft. However, such self-service fueling shall meet all applicable
city, state and federal safety regulations.



   D.   All fixed base operators shall individually or in cooperation
with other entities at the airport, maintain such hours and/or call-out
arrangements so as to adequately service the public demand for such
products/services as may be provided.



   E.   Nothing herein is intended to prevent persons from selling
goods or services during a special event on the airport approved by the
director.



(Prior code § 22-10-7)



13.04.350  Agricultural chemical application—Requirements to engage in.



   Except for those persons or firms authorized by lease agreement to
conduct agricultural spraying operations from the airport at the time the
ordinance codified in this chapter was approved no lease shall be approved
allowing the conduct of an agricultural spraying operation from the airport
unless the potential lessee agrees to construct a facility for the mixing,
loading and storing of chemicals and pesticides which would prevent chemicals
or contaminated water from entering the ground, septic or sewer system of the
facility. Approval may be given after reviewing facility plans with
appropriate agencies to determine the safety and effective working of the
facility. Those lessees authorized to conduct agricultural spraying
operations from the airport shall keep all leased property in a clean and
orderly condition at all times, and the area shall be free from chemical
odors, as much as possible. All chemicals shall be handled, loaded and stored
safely. Persons engaged in this activity shall be in compliance with all
city, state and federal rules and regulations regarding agricultural chemical
handling and application, and shall be correctly permitted and/or licensed to
conduct such activity.



(Prior code § 22-10-8)



13.04.360  Insurance coverage required.



   All lessees on the airport property shall obtain and maintain insurance
coverage for liability, with the city being named in the policies as an
additional insured. Amounts of coverage shall be set at appropriate levels by
the director, or as otherwise established in a lease agreement.



(Prior code § 22-10-9)



13.04.370  Rates and charges established by council.



   The rates and charges for use of the airport and its facilities,
including the rates and charges for tie-down spaces, T-hangars, shade
hangars, and storage units, shall be established in the City Consolidated Fee
Schedule pursuant to Section 1.04.170, and each person or organization
subject to the rates and charges therein shall promptly pay the amounts due. 



(Ord. 1397.02.10 § 6, 2008; Ord. 1397.13.15 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord.
1397.13.17 § 1 (part), 2003; prior code Art. 22-11)



Article IX. Offenses—Violation—Penalty



13.04.380  Nuisances, littering, vandalism unlawful.



   A.   It is unlawful to commit any act or to omit to act in such a
way as to create a nuisance on the airport.



   B.   It is unlawful for any person to dispose of garbage, papers,
refuse or other material on the airport except in receptacles provided for
that purpose.



   C.   It is unlawful for any person to vandalize any public property
on the airport.



   D.   It is unlawful for any person to alter, make additions to, or
erect any building or sign or make any excavations on the airport without the
permission of the director, subject to lease provisions.



   E.   It is unlawful for any person to wilfully abandon any personal
property on the airport. A person has abandoned personal property when it
remains unattended and without written permission of the director for a
period of thirty days or more.



(Prior code § 22-6-1)



13.04.390  Unauthorized hunting prohibited.



   No person shall hunt, pursue, trap, catch injure or kill any bird or
animal on the airport without authorization of the director.



(Prior code § 22-6-2)



13.04.400  Unauthorized solicitation and advertising unlawful.



   A.   It is unlawful for any person to solicit fares, alms or funds
for any purpose on the airport without permission of the director.



   B.   It is unlawful for any person to post, distribute or display
signs, advertisements, circulars or other printed or written matter in a
public area of the airport except in locations designated by the director.



(Prior code § 22-6-3)



13.04.410  Animals to be restrained.



   It is unlawful for any person to enter the airport with a dog or other
domestic animal unless that animal is kept restrained by a leash or is
confined so as to be completely under control.



(Prior code § 22-6-4)



13.04.420  Unauthorized flying of model aircraft prohibited.



   The flying of model aircraft within the airport is prohibited unless
authorized by the director.



(Prior code § 22-6-6)



Article X. Miscellaneous



13.04.430  Council authority to establish additional standards.



   The city council reserves the right to establish additional standards
for any and all categories of aeronautical related businesses or specialized
services operating on the airport property.



(Prior code § 22-13-1)



13.04.440  Federal authority.



   All lease agreements and permits shall be subordinate to the provisions
of any existing or future agreement between the city and the United States
relative to the operation and maintenance of the airport, execution of which
has been or may be required as a condition precedent to the expenditure of
federal funds for the development of the airport.



(Prior code § 22-13-2)



13.04.450  Violation—Penalty.



   It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this
chapter or any lawful rule or regulations promulgated by the city under the
authority of this chapter. Penalties for violations shall be determined under
the provisions of this code.



(Prior code Art. 22-12)



13.04.460  Conflicting regulations.



   Where there exists a conflict between any regulation or limitation
prescribed in this regulation and any other regulations applicable to the
same area, the more stringent limitations or requirements shall govern and
prevail.



(Prior code § 22-13-3)



Chapter 13.08
SEWER SERVICE SYSTEM



Sections:



Article I. Definitions



13.08.010   Applicability.



13.08.020   Branch sewer.



13.08.030   Building sewer or house sewer.



13.08.040   Reserved



13.08.050   Capacity charge.



13.08.060   Combined sewer.



13.08.070   Commercial and industrial capacity charge.



13.08.080   Developer.



13.08.090   Direct sewer connection.



13.08.100   Garbage.



13.08.110   Indirect sewer connection.



13.08.120   Reserved



13.08.130   Lateral sewer.



13.08.140   Main sewer.



13.08.150   Natural outlet.



13.08.160   Reserved



13.08.170   Properly shredded garbage.



13.08.180   Public sewer.



13.08.190   Reserved.



13.08.200   Sanitary sewer.



13.08.210   Sewage.



13.08.220   Sewer connection fee.



13.08.230   Sewer department.



13.08.240   Storm sewer or storm drain.



13.08.250   Trunk sewer.



13.08.260   Unit, residential.



13.08.270   Unit, commercial.



13.08.280   Wastewater treatment plant.



13.08.290   Wastewater works.



13.08.300   Watercourse.



Article II. Sewer Service



13.08.310   Application for service required.



13.08.320   Charges, rates and payments.



13.08.330   Colorado Street trunk sewer fee.



13.08.340   Westside industrial lift- station fee.



13.08.350   Airport industrial park trunk sewer fee.



13.08.351   Mercado Outlet Mall trunk sewer fee.



13.08.352   Tanger Outlet Mall trunk sewer fee.



13.08.353   Coyote Ranch truck sewer fee.



Article III. Extension Policy



13.08.360   Construction to meet city specifications.



13.08.370   Service area.



13.08.380   Extension costs.



13.08.390   Connection charges.



13.08.400   City to have exclusive control of connections.



Article IV. Department and Consumer Responsibilities



13.08.410   Sewer department responsibilities and liabilities.



13.08.420   Consumer responsibility.



13.08.430   Unlawful interference.



13.08.440   Unsanitary disposal of excrement prohibited.



13.08.450   Private sewage systems allowed when—Compliance required.



13.08.460   Tampering with equipment prohibited.



13.08.470   Unauthorized connections prohibited.



13.08.480   Application for building connection required.



13.08.490   Inspection and approval required prior to connection.



13.08.500   Reserved



13.08.510   Violation—Penalty.



Article I. Definitions



13.08.010  Applicability.



   The terms defined in Sections 13.08.020 through 13.08.300, wherever
used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them
by this article, unless from the context a different meaning is clearly
intended.



(Prior code Art. 13-1 (part))



13.08.020  Branch sewer.



   “Branch sewer” means a sewer which receives sewage from lateral
sewers from a relatively small area.



(Prior code Art. 13-1(G))



13.08.030  Building sewer or house sewer.



   “Building sewer” or “house sewer” means the extension from the
building drain to the building connection or other place of disposal.



(Prior code Art. 13-1(A))



13.08.040  Reserved



13.08.050  Capacity charge.



   “Capacity charge” means a charge related to the cost of
construction of wastewater treatment facilities needed to provide for new
facilities or the expansion of existing facilities. The funds collected shall
only be utilized to defray the cost of new treatment facilities or expansion
of existing treatment facilities. The capacity charge is normally a one-time
fee charged to a unit when it connects to the sewer system for the first
time; however, in the case of commercial and/or industrial, an expansion of
existing facilities which will increase the average daily discharge will be
charged an additional capacity charge based on the additional average daily
discharge. The “capacity charge” shall be that set forth in Section
13.08.320 of this chapter.



(Prior code Art. 13- 1(AA))



13.08.060  Combined sewer.



   “Combined sewer” means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and
sewage.



(Prior code Art. 13-1(L))



13.08.070  Commercial and industrial capacity charge.



   “Commercial and industrial capacity charge” means a charge related
to the cost of construction of wastewater treatment facilities needed to
provide for a proposed usage based on an average three hundred gallons per
day (gpd) flow discharge of wastewater per unit. Flows in excess of three
hundred gpd will be based on the minimum per unit (three hundred gpd) plus a
unit cost per gallon for the excess over 300 gpd.



(Prior code Art. 13-1(BB))



13.08.080  Developer.



   “Developer” means any person or persons engaged in the organizing
and financing of a sewage collecting system within the area tributing a trunk
sewer of the city sewer system. Such may be either a subdivider or a legally
constituted improvement district.



(Prior code Art. 13-1(W))



13.08.090  Direct sewer connection.



   “Direct sewer connection” means the service pipe connection
extending from the building drain to the collecting sewer in the street or in
the public right-of-way.



(Prior code Art. 13-1(B))



13.08.100  Garbage.



   “Garbage” means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.



(Prior code Art. 13-1(P))



13.08.110  Indirect sewer connection.



   “Indirect sewer connection” means each junction point of any number
of units with a private collection system to include the collection system
within a building which collects individual units.



(Prior code Art. 13-1(X))



13.08.120  Reserved



13.08.130  Lateral sewer.



   “Lateral sewer” means a sewer which discharges into a branch or
other sewer and has no other common sewer tributary to it.



(Prior code Art. 13-1(F))



13.08.140  Main sewer.



   “Main sewer” means a sewer which receives sewage from one or more
branch sewers as tributaries.



(Prior code Art. 13-1(H))



13.08.150  Natural outlet.



   “Natural outlet” means any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, or
other body of surface or groundwater.



(Prior code Art. 13-1(R))



13.08.160  Reserved



13.08.170  Properly shredded garbage.



   “Properly shredded garbage” means garbage that has been shredded to
such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater than
one-fourth inch in any dimension.



(Prior code Art. 13-1(Q))



13.08.180  Public sewer.



   “Public sewer” means a sewer controlled by public authority.



(Prior code Art. 13-1(K))



13.08.190  Reserved.



13.08.200  Sanitary sewer.



   “Sanitary sewer” is a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried
wastes from the residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and
institutions, together with minor quantities of groundwater, stormwater and
surface water that are not intentionally admitted. This definition shall also
include, but not be limited to, the terms “public sewer,” “sewer
system,” “sewer,” and “collection line.”



(Ord. 1397.08.26 § 2, 2017: prior code Art. 13-1(M))



13.08.210  Sewage.



   “Sewage” means a combination of the water carried wastes from
residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments
together with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.



(Prior code Art. 13-1(J))



13.08.220  Sewer connection fee.



   “Sewer connection fee” means the initial sewer connection charge as
set forth in Article II of this chapter and shall apply to all direct sewer
connections to the public sewer after the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this chapter.



(Prior code Art. 13-1(C))



13.08.230  Sewer department.



   “Sewer department” means those officers and agents of the city
supervising sewer operations for the city.



(Prior code Art. 13-1(V))



13.08.240  Storm sewer or storm drain.



   “Storm sewer” or “storm drain” includes every pipe, culvert,
flume, ditch, gutter, storm sewer, cistern, tank, drain, lake, pond, stream,
ravine, gully or other facility or natural feature, that contains, holds,
transports, diverts, channels, impounds, or drains water, into which any
naturally occurring stormwater runoff within the city may seep, percolate or
flow; and every street, sidewalk, alley, gutter, roof, parking lot, yard,
field, driveway, patio and other surface within the city across which any
naturally occurring stormwater runoff may seep, percolate or flow.



(Ord. 1397.08.26 § 3, 2017: prior code Art. 13-1(M))



13.08.250  Trunk sewer.



   “Trunk sewer” means a sewer which receives sewage from many
tributary main sewers, and serves as an outlet for a large territory.



(Prior code Art. 13-1(I))



13.08.260  Unit, residential.



   “Unit, residential” or “residential unit” means:



   A.   A single residential dwelling;



   B.   Each separate dwelling of a duplex;



   C.   Each separate dwelling of a triplex; or



   D.   Each separate condominium, townhome,  cooperative apartment or
other similar housing.



(Ord. 1397.13.20 § 1, 2009; prior code Art. 13-1(Y))



13.08.270  Unit, commercial.



   “Unit, commercial” or “commercial unit” means:



   A.   Each separate apartment in an apartment court or complex;



   B.   Each separate dwelling space used for transient occupancy in
hotels, motels, RV parks, or similar establishments; or



   C.   Each separate office space, shop space, or other space for
conducting commercial activity.



   Commercial units do not include any units that would otherwise fall
within the definition of a residential unit, nor do they include industrial
uses. For purposes of establishing rates and the Consolidated Fee Schedule,
the use of the term “Multi-Family” shall include those commercial units
set forth in subsections A and B above.



(Ord. 1397.13.20 § 2, 2009; prior code Art. 13-1(Z))



13.08.280  Wastewater treatment plant.



   “Wastewater treatment plant” means any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.



(Ord. 379.12 §§ 1 (part), 2 (part), 1987: prior code Art. 13-1(E))



13.08.290  Wastewater works.



   “Wastewater works” means all facilities for collecting, pumping,
treating and disposing of sewage.



(Ord. 379.12 §§ 1 (part), 2 (part), 1987: prior code Art. 13-1(D))



13.08.300  Watercourse.



   “Watercourse” means a channel in which a flow of water occurs
either continuously or intermittently.



(Prior code Art. 13-1(S))



Article II. Sewer Service



13.08.310  Application for service required.



   A.   No sewer connection connecting the city sanitary sewer system
to any consumer shall be made or used by any person or the city, except upon
written application furnished to the city by the owner, or his authorized
agent, of the premises to which sanitary sewer service is to be furnished.
Notwithstanding the requirement of an application to connect to the city's
sanitary sewer system, any person or entity connecting to the sanitary system
without first making application shall, in addition to being guilty of a
violation of this chapter, be responsible for all connection fees, capacity
fees, and monthly charges otherwise applicable, including late fees,
retroactive to the date of connection.



   B.   All persons, entities or other consumers connected to the
sanitary sewer system shall pay a monthly service fee, as set forth in the
City Consolidated Fee Schedule, until the service is disconnected and
discontinued by order of the sewer department or written order of the owner
or his authorized agent. In addition to the monthly charge, all consumers
shall pay the initial sewer connection fee, if any, set forth in the City
Consolidated Fee Schedule.



   C.   The initial sewer connection fee is nonrefundable.



   D.   Applications for city sanitary sewer service outside the city
corporate limits must be approved by resolution of the city council. The city
council shall have the right to consider each application presented to it
separately, with the privilege of approving only those areas that are
beneficial to the city, and that protect health, safety and welfare of its
citizens. No prior approval as herein set forth shall set a precedent for
subsequent approval(s).



(Ord. 1397.13.20 § 3, 2009; Ord. 1397.13.19 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord.
1397.13.13 § 1 (part), 1999; prior code § 13-2-1)



13.08.320  Charges, rates and payments.



   A.   At the time the building permit is issued, the person applying
for the building permit shall pay initial connection charges, capacity
charges, or other similar charges as set forth in the City Consolidated Fee
Schedule, as well as the applicable development impact fee, for each sanitary
sewer connection, regardless of location.



   B.   Each user connected to the sanitary sewer system or otherwise
using the city publicly owned treatment and collection works shall be charged
a monthly charge as set forth in the City Consolidated Fee Schedule.



   C.   A commercial user shall be charged a base charge and a unit
charge as established in City Consolidated Fee Schedule.  The unit charge
will be based upon the actual water consumption data from the water provider
for the month prior to the billing month, except:



   1.   Commercial customers can request a credit for irrigation usage
or for other non-sanitary sewer water consumption. A credit of up to 15% of
usage, based on the amount of usage required by landscaping, can be provided
by the finance director with appropriate proof of landscaping.  A credit for
alleged non-sanitary sewer water consumption or for landscaping credits
greater than 15% of usage must be accompanied by a separate meter reading
(with such meter to be installed at the customers expense) or an industry
standard report, specifying the amount of water not entering the sanitary
sewer system.



   2.   The city reserves the right to investigate any commercial user
suspected of adding more to the sanitary sewer system than the water
consumption shown in the water provider reports. If the commercial user has
exceeded this figure, it shall be charged a higher fee based on the increased
flow volumes.



   3.   In the event that monthly water consumption data set forth in
subsection C.1. above is not available for use by the city for billing
purposes, the finance director is authorized to use an appropriate average of
prior monthly uses to set the unit charge for commercial use for any user for
which such billing data is not available.



   D.   Customers located outside the city limits of the City of Casa
Grande will be charged at a rate equal to one and one-half (1-1/2) times the
rate established in the City Consolidated Fee Schedule for sewer service.



   E.   Connection Charges.  The connection charges, if any, set out
in the City Consolidated Fee Schedule shall be paid prior to any connection
being made to the public sewer system of the city.



   F.   The fees set forth in the City Consolidated Fee Schedule, where
applicable, shall apply to all sewer connections served by the city
(including those accounts on which the consumer has paid more than one month
in advance), and the City Consolidated Fee Schedule shall apply to all future
extensions, unless and until it is amended or changed by the city.



   1.   All fees for sewer service shall be collected by the finance
director and deposited in the city sewer revenue and reserve fund. Initial
sewer connection fees shall be paid on issuance of the sewer connection
permit. Monthly charges for each connection shall be due and payable at the
conclusion of each month of use. The finance director is authorized and
directed to use any legal means or procedures to ensure collection of sewer
service fees, and to compromise, settle or dispose of such fees in the normal
course of collection.



   2.   The finance director shall bill all known users monthly by
approximately the first day of the following month for which the sewer
collection is provided. Failure to receive an invoice shall not be a defense
to payment for any user; provided, however, that the finance director may
waive late fees or otherwise compromise amounts due and owing if the failure
to receive an invoice was due to an error on the part of the city.  Failure
on the part of a person or entity to notify the city that a connection to the
sanitary sewer and the city publicly owned collection and treatment works has
been made, or failure to notify the city that appropriate monthly billings
are not being received, constitute error on the part of the consumer, and not
the city, for purposes of this subsection.



   G.   Sewer service rental shall be due and payable at the office of
the financial director when the monthly statement is rendered, and shall be
delinquent twenty calendar days thereafter. If the total bill for any such
charge is not paid within five calendar days after the date of delinquency, a
late fee of one and one- half percent of the unpaid balance (including any
unpaid late fees or similar charges) shall be charged each month of
delinquency to be collected, in addition to the amount then due.



   H.   The sewer rental fees and connection fees collected shall be
used for the operation, maintenance and replacement of the treatment and
collection works.



   I.   New industrial users that propose to introduce a significant
industrial waste into the wastewater treatment facility shall be subject to
an additional industrial cost recovery charge, established by the finance
director and sewer department as necessary to recover the costs applicable to
the treatment of such waste; provided, however, that the introduction of
waste shall be subject to the approval of the regional administrator of the
Environmental Protection Agency.



   J.   The city shall review, not less often than every two years, the
wastewater contribution of users and user classes, the total costs of
operation and maintenance of the treatment and collection works, and its
approved user charge system.



   K.   The city shall notify each user, at least annually, in
conjunction with a regular bill, of the rent and that portion of the user
charges which are attributable to wastewater treatment services.



   L.   The user sewer rental fee shall take precedence over any terms
or conditions of agreements or contracts between the city and users which
address:



   1.   The reservation of capacity in the treatment works;



   2.   The charges to be collected by the city in providing wastewater
treatment services or reserving capacity.



   M.   The user charge system shall provide that each user which
discharges any toxic pollutants which cause an increase in cost of managing
the effluent or the sludge of the treatment works shall pay the increased
cost.



   N.   The finance director shall have the authority to waive the
late  fees charged on past due sewer bills  if a user establishes a good
payment record with the city, and if the application of the fee would create
an undue hardship on the user.



   O.   The finance director may revoke the business license of any
non-residential customer that is delinquent for two billing periods.



   P.   The finance director may, as an accommodation to and upon the
request of a property owner, bill a tenant or other party for sewer charges,
in which case the property owner, as well as the user, are jointly and
severally liable for such charges. All unpaid sewer charges for a property,
however, remain the responsibility of the property owner. If a tenant does
not pay a charge when rendered, the finance director may notify the property
owner of the tenant’s nonpayment, and the property owner shall pay the
amount due within seven calendar days of the notice to the property owner. 
If such payment is promptly made the finance director may waive applicable
late fees.



(Ord. 1397.13.20 §§ 4, 6 (part), 2009; Ord. 1397.13.19 § 1 (part), 2004;
Ord. 1397.13.13 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1086.2 § 1, 1988; Ord. 379.16 §§
1, 2, 1989; Ord. 379.15 §§ 1, 2 1989; Ord. 379.14 §§ 1, 2, 1989; Ord.
379.13 §§ 1, 2 1988; Ord. 379.12 §§ 1, 2, 1987; prior code § 13-2-2)



13.08.330  Colorado Street trunk sewer fee.



   A.   All connections to the Colorado Street trunk sewer, within the
area designated “Area A” on the map attached to the ordinance codified in
this section and on file in the office of the city clerk, whether direct or
indirect, will be subject to the Colorado Street trunk sewer charge.



   B.   The Colorado Street trunk sewer fee shall be paid at the time
the building permit is issued. No connection is permitted until payment has
been received by the city.



   C.   The fund collected will be placed in a restricted “major
sewer line account” and can only be used for future trunk or interceptor
sewer lines construction.



   D.   The charge will be based upon the following fee schedule which
is retroactive to August 15, 1988:



   1.   Single-family dwellings, duplexes, condominiums, townhouses:
each unit, one hundred forty-three dollars;



   2.   Multifamily apartments containing three or more units: each
family unit, ninety-eight dollars;



   3.   Motels, hotels, trailers, and/or auto courts and mobile homes:
each rental unit, trailer space or family unit, seventy-two dollars;



   4.   Business, industrial and commercial establishments, hospitals,
churches, public buildings, restaurants, bars, clubs and all other similar
buildings: each establishment, one hundred forty-three dollars;



   5.   Schools: each school, one thousand three hundred dollars;



   E.   The basic charge per unit is as established in subsection D of
this section and is based upon the Engineering News Record Construction Cost
Index of October, 1985. The Index in October, 1985, was four thousand one
hundred ninety-two dollars and eighty-two cents and will be used to calculate
the actual unit fee at the time the building permit is to be issued. The
calculation is as follows:




Base Unit Fee x (ENR Cost Index (Present)
                        $4192.82




   F.   The minimum charge per unit will be that established by
subsection D of this section. The “Area A” fee is in addition to any
other sewer charge which is already required by code or may be required in
the future.



(Ord. 379.10.2 §§ 1, 2, 1988; Ord. 379.10.1 § 1, 1988; Ord. 379.10 § 1,
1986: prior code § 13-2-3)



13.08.340  Westside industrial liftstation fee.



   A.   The developer of the 86.69 acres designated as “Area A” on
the Westside Industrial Liftstation Fee Map (attached to the ordinance
codified in this section and on file in the office of the city clerk) will
reimburse the city sewer fund for the westside industrial liftstation as
follows: Westside industrial liftstation fee: one thousand two hundred
twenty-six dollars and sixty-six cents per acre.



   B.   The base unit fee will be inflated automatically utilizing the
Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index at the time of development as
follows:



        Base Unit Cost Acre x
      ENR Cost Index (Present)
                $4,192.82



   C.   In no case will the unit fee per acre drop below the one
thousand two hundred twenty-six dollars and sixty-six cents per acre.



(Ord. 379.11 § 1, 1986: prior code § 13-2-4)



13.08.350  Airport industrial park trunk sewer fee.



   A.   All connections to the airport industrial park trunk sewer,
within the cross-hatched area on the map attached to the ordinance codified
in this section as Exhibit 1 and on file in the office of the city clerk,
whether direct or indirect, will be subject to the airport industrial park
sewer charge.



   B.   The airport industrial park trunk sewer fee shall be paid at
the time the building permit is issued. No connection is permitted until
payment has been received by the city.



   C.   The fund collected will be placed in a restricted “major
sewer line account” and can only be used for future trunk or interceptor
sewer lines construction.



   D.   The charge will be based upon the following fee schedule:



   1.   The city has constructed a sewer line to provide sewerage
service to the city airport industrial park. The line will also provide
sewerage service on either side of the line and around the industrial park.
This plan provides for reimbursement to the city for the city costs incurred
in building the line;



   2.   The city expended a total of six hundred eighty-three thousand
three hundred forty dollars to construct the airport industrial park sewer
line. The cost includes construction costs, engineering costs, inspection
costs, and incidental costs. The above cost does not include the grant
provided by the U.S. Department of Commerce, Economic Development
Administration or the cost provided by Bojer/Arizona Limited Partnership to
upsize the line from Rodeo Road to Centennial Boulevard;



   3.   The service area for the airport industrial park sewer line is
as shown in the cross- hatched area on the Airport Sewer Service Map
(“Exhibit 1”) referenced in subsection A of this section. The net area
comprises eleven thousand five hundred twenty-seven acres. Computation of the
net area for each section consisted of deducting half section line
rights-of-way of fifty feet and midsection line rights-of-way of eighty feet
from the gross acreage. The acreage for the airport flight area and city golf
course were also deducted. Any development within the service area that does
not receive sewerage service from the airport industrial park sewer line
shall not be charged this development fee and likewise any development
outside the service area that receives sewerage service from the airport
industrial park sewer line will be charged this development fee;



   4.   The base reimbursement rate shall be as follows:



   Total cost $683,340.00  =  $59.28/acre



    Net acreage: 11,527



   5.   Reimbursement due the city shall be adjusted to reflect the
current prevailing market rate of construction. The index rate of adjustment
shall increase according to the Engineering News Record Index using December
1989, as the base rate. The December 1989 Index value was four thousand six
hundred seventy-nine dollars and three cents. The calculation is as follows:



Base unit fee x ENR Cost Index (Present)
                              $4,679.03



(Ord. 379.17 § 1, 1990: prior code § 13-2-5)



13.08.351  Mercado Outlet Mall trunk sewer fee.



   A.   All connections to the Mercado Outlet Mall trunk sewer, within
the cross-hatched area on the Mercado Sewer Trunk Service Area Map
(“Attachment A”) attached to the ordinance codified in this section and
on file in the office of the city clerk, whether direct or indirect, will be
subject to the Mercado Outlet Mall trunk sewer charge.



   B.   The Mercado Outlet Mall trunk sewer charge shall be paid at the
time the building permit is issued.  No connection is permitted until
payment has been received by the city.



   C.   The funds collected will be placed in a restricted “major
sewer line account” and can only be used to install future major trunk,
interceptor, or relief services.



   D.   The charge will be based upon the following fee schedule:



   1.   The city has constructed a sewer line to provide sewerage
service to the Mercado Factory Stores Outlet Mall.  The line will also
provide sewerage service on either side of the line and around the mall. This
plan provides for reimbursement to the city for the costs incurred in
building the line.



   2.   A total of three hundred thirty thousand one hundred
thirty-three dollars and sixty-five cents was expended to construct the
Mercado sewer line.  The cost includes construction costs, engineering
costs, inspection costs, and incidental costs.



   3.   The service area for the Mercado sewer line is as shown in the
cross-hatched area on the map (“Attachment A”) referenced in subsection A
of this section. The net area comprises 2,513.21 acres. Computation of the
net area for each section consisted of deducting half section line
rights-of-way of fifty feet and midsection line rights-of-way of eighty feet
from the gross acreage.  Any development within the service area that does
not receive sewerage service from the Mercado sewer line shall not be charged
this development fee and likewise any development outside the service area
that receives sewerage service from the Mercado sewer line will be charged
this development fee.



   4.   The base reimbursement rate shall be as follows:



   Total cost $330,133.65  =  $131.36/acre



   Net acreage 2,513.21



   5.   Reimbursement due the city shall be adjusted to reflect the
current prevailing market rate of construction. The index rate of adjustment
shall increase according to the Engineering News Record index using August,
1991, as the base rate. The August, 1991, Index value was four thousand eight
hundred ninety-two dollars and nine cents. The calculation is as follows:



Base unit fee x ENR Cost Index (present)
                                $ 4,892.09



(Ord. 1397.13.2, 1991)



13.08.352  Tanger Outlet Mall trunk sewer fee.



   A.   All connections to the Tanger Outlet Mall Trunk Sewer, within
the cross hatched area on the map entitled “Tanger Sewer Trunk Service
area,” which is attached as “Attachment A” to the ordinance codified in
this section and on file in the office of the city clerk, whether direct or
indirect, will be subject to the Tanger Outlet Mall trunk sewer charge.



   B.   The Tanger Outlet Mall trunk sewer charge shall be paid at the
time the building permit is issued. No connection is permitted until payment
has been received by the city.



   C.   The fund collected will be placed in a restricted “major
sewer line account” and can only be used to install future major trunk,
interceptor or relief services.



   D.   The charge will be based upon the following fee schedule:



   1.   The city has constructed a sewer line to provide sewerage
service to the Tanger Outlet Mall. The line will also provide sewerage
service to areas south of the Mall. This plan provides for reimbursement to
the city for the costs incurred in building the line.



   2.   A total of four hundred twenty-three thousand three hundred
twenty-one dollars and ninety-three cents was expended to construct the
Tanger sewer line. The cost includes construction costs, engineering costs,
inspection costs and incidental costs.



   3.   The service area for the Tanger sewer line as shown in the
cross-hatched area on the map of Tanger Sewer Trunk Service Area referenced
in subsection A of this section. The net area comprises two thousand one
hundred seventy-eight acres. Computation of the net area for each section
consisted of deducting half section line rights-of-way of fifty feet and
midsection line right-of-way of eighty feet from the gross acreage.
Interstate highway, state highway and railroad right-of-way has also been
deducted from the gross area. Any development within the service area that
does not receive sewerage service from the Tanger sewer line shall not be
charged this development fee and likewise any development outside the service
area that receives sewerage service from the Tanger sewer line will be
charged this development fee.



   4.   The base reimbursement rate shall be as follows:



Total Cost   $423,321.93  =  $194.36/acre
Net Acreage:    2,178.00



   5.   Reimbursement due the city shall be adjusted to reflect the
current prevailing market rate of construction. The index rate of adjustment
shall increase according to the Engineering News Record index using March,
1992, as the base rate. The March, 1992, Index value was four thousand nine
hundred twenty-six dollars and fifty cents. The calculation is as follows:



Base unit fee x ENR Cost Index (present)
                              $4,926.50



(Ord. 1397.13.3, 1991)



13.08.353  Coyote Ranch trunk sewer fee.



   A.   All connections, whether direct or indirect, to the Coyote
Ranch trunk sewer, within the cross hatched area on the map entitled "Coyote
Ranch Trunk Sewer Service Area," which is attached as "Exhibit A" to the
ordinance codified in this section and the agreement between the city and
Gardner Development Corporation (identified in city records as C.G. Contract
No. 898-1) and on file in the office of the city clerk will be subject to the
Coyote Ranch trunk sewer fee.



   B.   The Coyote Ranch trunk sewer charge shall be paid at the time
the first building permit is issued. No sewer connection shall be permitted
until payment has been received by the city.



   C.   The fund collected will be remitted to Gardner Development
Corporation by the city.



   D.   The fee will be based upon the following schedule:



   1.   Gardner Development Corporation has constructed a sewer line to
provide sewerage service to Gardner's project known as Coyote Ranch. The line
will also provide sewerage service to areas outside of the Coyote Ranch
project. This plan provides for reimbursement to Gardner Development
Corporation for the costs incurred in building the trunk sewer line.



   2.   A total of one hundred sixty-two thousand five hundred dollars
($162,500) was expended to construct the Coyote Ranch trunk sewer line. The
cost includes construction costs, engineering costs, inspection costs and
incidental costs.



   3.   The service area for the Coyote Ranch sewer line as shown in
the cross-hatched area on the map of Coyote Ranch sewer trunk service area
referenced in subsection (A)(2), above. The area comprises three hundred
(300) gross acres. Any development within the service area that does not
receive sewerage service from the Coyote Ranch sewer line shall not be
charged this fee and likewise any development outside the service area that
receives sewerage service from the Coyote Ranch sewer line, as described in
the agreement, will be charged this fee.



   4.   The base reimbursement rate shall be as follows:



Total cost: $162,500



Gross acreage: 300



Base reimbursement rate: $162,500/300 = $541.66 per acre



   5.   Reimbursement due to Gardner Development Corporation, through
the city, shall be adjusted to reflect the current prevailing market rate of
construction. The index rate of adjustment shall increase according to the
Engineering News Record index using May 15, 1998 as the base rate. The Index
Value for that date was 5881.41 and will be used to calculate the actual area
charge at the time a construction permit is to be issued. The calculation of
the index adjusted area charge is as follows:



Area Charge = $541.66 x Eng. Cost Index*
                 5881.41** 



* at time of issuance of construction permit



** Eng. Cost Index May 15, 1998



(Ord. 1397.13.12, § 2, 1998)



Article III. Extension Policy



13.08.360  Construction to meet city specifications.



   A developer who wishes to extend sewer facilities must employ a civil
engineer registered in Arizona to perform the field engineering and prepare
detailed plans and specifications for the sewer extension. The final detailed
plans and specifications for the main sewer extension must be approved by the
Arizona State Department of Health and by the city before construction
begins. The design and engineering will be in accordance with the
specifications of the Arizona State Department of Health and the city prior
to construction. The construction shall meet the city's specifications,
requirements and approval, and will be subject to inspection by the city's
agents during construction. Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the
city agrees to permit the developer to connect into the city's existing trunk
sewer lines and the main sewer line to be constructed by the developer herein
provided.



(Ord. 1397.13.20 § 6 (part), 2009; prior code § 13- 3-1)



13.08.370  Service area.



   The maximum area to be served by the proposed main sewer line and its
ultimate branches and laterals shall be determined by the city engineer based
on local drainage conditions. In the event that the area to be serviced by
the developer is lesser in size than the maximum area to be serviced by the
proposed main sewer line and its ultimate laterals, the aforesaid main sewer
line shall be designed, engineered and constructed to serve the maximum area
described heretofore. Should other parties in the service area desire to join
with the developer in constructing the proposed main sewer line, this
agreement will be considered as including such additional parties.



(Prior code § 13-3-2)



13.08.380  Extension costs.



   The developer shall pay the costs for utility extension using one of
the following two options:



   A.   Option I. The developer shall pay in full for the
rights-of-way, the construction and installation of the lines, pipes and
mains, and all other features of the extension.



   B.   Option II.



   1.   The construction cost of the extension shall be determined and
agreed upon prior to commencement of construction after the developer has
submitted a cost breakdown to the city engineer. The engineering costs
incurred by the developer for the preparation of plans and staking of the
main sewer only, may be included in the agreed construction cost. Costs of
lateral and branch sewers and their appurtenances will not be included in the
agreed construction cost or in the main sewer project agreement. The city
reserves the right to reject the developer's cost breakdown if they are in
appreciable variance within the city's estimate.



   2.   In the event that the area to be serviced by the developer is
the entire area described herein as the maximum service area, then the
developer will pay in full for the construction cost and will not be eligible
for repayment. In the event that the area to be serviced by the developer is
lesser in size than the maximum area to be serviced by the proposed main
sewer line and its ultimate branches and laterals, the city agrees to enter
into agreement with any party desirous of obtaining a connection to the main
sewer line. Such agreement will establish a just, equitable and reasonable
charge to permit the connection, the charge to be made on a cost per acre
basis of the area to be served, using the heretofore agreed main sewer line
construction cost and maximum service area acreage to determine the cost per
acre. The amount of the connection charge will be paid to the city who agrees
to repay the amount to the developer, the total of the repayments not to
exceed that portion of the agreed construction cost of the main sewer line
allotted to the acreage outside the service area of the developer.



   3.   In no way is any agreement to be construed as including any
branch or lateral sewer within the service area.



(Prior code § 13-3-3)



13.08.390  Connection charges.



   Any connection charge will not affect the right of the city to assess
its regular tax charges and sewage rental charges against the owners of
property within the developer's area. Building or house connection charges
shall be paid to the city at the prevailing rate and are not refundable.



(Prior code § 13- 3-4)



13.08.400  City to have exclusive control of connections.



   The city shall have exclusive control of connections to the proposed
main sewer line and upon its completion, the aforesaid main line shall become
to be the property of the city. Except as otherwise herein provided, all
provisions of this code and ordinances or amendments thereto applicable to
sewer services including charges therefore shall apply to services in the
proposed area.



(Prior code § 13-3-5)



Article IV. Department and Consumer Responsibilities



13.08.410  Sewer department responsibilities and liabilities.



   A.   The sewer department shall not be responsible for the
installation, maintenance or inspection of the consumer's service line piping
or apparatus or for any defects therein.



   B.   The sewer department shall have the right to refuse service
unless the consumer's lines or piping are installed in such manner as to
prevent cross connections or backflow.



   C.   Under normal conditions, the consumer shall be notified of any
anticipated interruption of service.



   D.   The sewer department shall not be responsible for the
negligence of third persons or forces beyond the control of the sewer
department resulting in any interruption of services or damage to the
property of the consumer.



   E.   The sewer department may refuse service to any prospective
consumer when the capacity of the sewer system will not permit additional
loads being placed thereon.



(Prior code § 13-4-1)



13.08.420  Consumer responsibility.



   A.   Building or house sewer connection on the consumer's premises
shall be so arranged as to provide service to one lot. If additional service
is required, it will be considered as a separate and individual account.



   B.   The consumer's house or building service line, sewer connection
and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer, at the
consumer's expense, in a safe and efficient manner and in accordance with the
sewer department's rules and regulations and in full compliance with the
regulations of the State Department of Health.



   C.   The consumer shall safeguard the sewer department's property
placed on the consumer's premises and shall permit access to it only by the
authorized representatives of the sewer department.



   D.   In the event that any loss or damage to the property of the
sewer department or any accident or injury to persons or property is caused
by or results from the negligence or wrongful act of the consumer, his agents
or employees, the cost of necessary repairs or replacements shall be paid by
the consumer to the sewer department and any liability otherwise resulting
shall be assumed by the consumer. The amount of the loss or damage or the
cost of repairs may be added to the consumer's bill and if not paid, service
may be discontinued by the sewer department.



   E.   The sewer department may discontinue its service without notice
for the following additional reasons:



   1.   To prevent fraud or abuse;



   2.   The consumer's wilful disregard of or refusal to comply with
this chapter or other rules as may be adopted by the city.



   F.   When service to a consumer shall require the laying of any city
sewer lines or the installation of any other city property on, under, across
or over the consumer's property, the consumer will grant to the city an
easement, right-of-way, or license for the installation.



   G.   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer
shall be made at the lateral or “Y” branch, if such lateral or “Y”
branch is available at a suitable location. Where no properly located “Y”
branch is available, a neat hole may be cut into the public sewer to receive
the building or lateral sewer, with entry in the downstream direction at an
angle of about forty-five degrees. A wye saddle shall be used for the
connection and in no case shall the pipe protrude into the main sewer. The
invert of the building or lateral sewer at the point of connection shall be
at a higher elevation than the invert of the public sewer. A smooth neat
joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight by
encasement in concrete. The connection to the public sewer shall be made in
the presence of the city inspector and under his supervision and direction.
Any damage to the public sewer shall be repaired at the cost of the applicant
to the satisfaction of the city inspector.



(Ord. 1397.13.20 § 6 (part), 2009; prior code § 13-4-2)



13.08.430  Unlawful interference.



   It is unlawful for any person:



   A.   To interfere in any way with the officers of the city water
department, sewer department or building inspector in the discharge of any of
their duties, either in the tapping of any sewer pipe, main or lateral
belonging to the city or in the laying or connecting of the pipe, main or
lateral.



   B.   To dig up or cause to be dug up any street or alley in the city
for the purpose of connection with the sewer system of the city without first
obtaining a permit from the sewer department.



   C.   Who has a permit to dig up any portion of any street or alley
of the city for the purpose of connecting with the sewer system of the city
and fail or neglect to place the street or alley in its original condition
under the supervision of the sewer department, as required by it.



(Prior code § 13-4-3)



13.08.440  Unsanitary disposal of excrement prohibited.



   It is unlawful for a person to deposit, or permit to be deposited in an
unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the city or in any
area under the jurisdiction of the city any human or animal excrement or
other objectionable waste.



(Prior code § 13-4-4)



13.08.450  Private sewage systems allowed when—Compliance required.



   A.   Except as provided in this article, it is unlawful to construct
or maintain within the city any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or
other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.



   B.   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available for a distance
of three hundred feet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction
of the city, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage
disposal system, which complies with the regulations of the state department
of public health. Such private sewage disposal system shall be constructed,
maintained and operated at all times in a sanitary manner.



(Prior code § 13-4-5)



13.08.460  Tampering with equipment prohibited.



   No person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the municipal sewage works.



(Prior code § 13-4-6)



13.08.470  Unauthorized connections prohibited.



   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance without
first obtaining a written permit from the sewer department.



(Prior code § 13-4-7)



13.08.480  Application for building connection required.



   Upon issuance of a required permit to any person, each and every permit
issued shall be presented by the person to the sewer department and
application made for the building connection.



(Prior code § 13- 4-8)



13.08.490  Inspection and approval required prior to connection.



   No building sewer will be connected to a building connection until it
has been inspected and approved by the sewer department or building inspector.



(Prior code § 13-4-9)



13.08.500  Reserved



13.08.510  Violation—Penalty.



   A.   A violation of any provision of this chapter is a Class 2
misdemeanor, punishable by a sentence of incarceration not to exceed four
months, a fine not to exceed seven hundred and fifty dollars (exclusive of
penalty assessments prescribed by law), or both.



   B.   Each day a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute
a separate violation.



   C.   Each violation of any requirement of this chapter constitutes a
separate offense.



(Ord. 1397.13.20 § 7, 2009)



Chapter 13.12
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS



Sections:



13.12.010   Reserved



13.12.020   Adoption by reference



13.12.030   Applicability



13.12.040   Judicial enforcement remedies



13.12.050   Collection of fees, charges and penalties



13.12.060   Remedies nonexclusive



13.12.010  Reserved



13.12.020  Adoption by reference.



   A.   That certain document known as “City of Casa Grande
Pretreatment Regulations,” three copies of which are on file in the office
of the Casa Grande city clerk, which document was made a public record by
Resolution 5030 of the City of Casa Grande, Arizona, is hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section.



   B.   The pretreatment regulations contained in the public record
adopted by Casa Grande Resolution 2565, and adopted by reference through Casa
Grande Ordinance 1397.13.11 in 1998, that are in conflict with the provision
of this section, or any part of the document known as the City of Casa Grande
Pretreatment Regulations adopted herein by reference, are hereby repealed.



(Ord. 1397.08.26 § 5, 2017; Ord. 1397.13.11 §§ 1, 3, 1998)



13.12.030  Applicability.



   The Casa Grande Pretreatment Regulations dated April 3, 2017, set forth
uniform requirements for all industrial users discharging to the city's
publicly-owned treatment works (POTW), and enables the city to comply with
all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 USC
§§ 1251 et seq.), the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR Part 403),
and the discharge permits issued by the Arizona Department of Environmental
Quality. Any industrial user, the discharge from which directly or indirectly
enters the city’s POTW from areas within or without the boundaries of the
city, shall be bound by the pretreatment regulations. The pretreatment
regulations may be enforced against any industrial user.



(Ord. 1397.08.26 § 6, 2017)



13.12.040  Judicial enforcement remedies.



   A.   Injunctive Relief. When it finds that an industrial user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of the  pretreatment
regulations adopted in Section 13.12.020, an industrial wastewater discharge
permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the city may petition a court of competent jurisdiction for the
issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which
restrains or compels the specific performance of the industrial wastewater
discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by these pretreatment
regulations on activities of an industrial user. The city may also seek such
other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a
requirement for the industrial user to conduct environmental remediation. A
petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite
for, taking any other action against an industrial user.



   B.   Civil Penalties.



   1.   An industrial user who has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of these pretreatment regulations, an industrial wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement shall be liable to the city for a maximum civil
penalty not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) per day per
violation. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge
limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of violation.



   2.   The city may recover reasonable attorneys’ fees, court costs,
and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling
and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the
city.



   3.   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against,
or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against an industrial user.



   C.   Civil/Administrative Fine Pass Through. In the event that an
industrial user discharges such pollutants which cause the city to violate
any condition of its NPDES permit, and the city is fined by the EPA or the
state for such violation, then such industrial user shall be fully liable for
the total amount of the fine assessed against the city by the EPA and/or the
state.



   D.   Criminal Penalties.



   1.   An industrial user that willfully, recklessly or negligently
violates any provision of these pretreatment regulations, including making
false statements, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500)
for each violation, and/or by imprisonment up to six months. Each day any
violation of these pretreatment regulations occurs shall constitute a
separate offense.



   2.   The city may refer violations that may warrant criminal
prosecution to the U.S. Attorney General’s Office, State Attorney General,
EPA Criminal Investigation Division or other appropriate agency. This
referral shall not preclude the city from taking a parallel administrative or
civil enforcement action.



(Ord. 1397.08.26 § 7, 2017)



13.12.050  Collection of fees, charges and penalties.



   The amount of any penalty imposed by the provisions of these
pretreatment regulations, including interest and penalty assessments, shall
be deemed a debt owed to the city. An action in the name of the city may be
commenced in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any
penalties. If legal action is brought by the city, or its assignee, to
enforce collection of any amount charged and due under these pretreatment
regulations, any judgment rendered in favor of the city shall include costs
of suit incurred by the city, or its assignee, including a reasonable
attorney's fee.



(Ord. 1397.08.26 § 8, 2017)



13.12.060  Remedies nonexclusive.



   The remedies provided for in these pretreatment regulations are not
exclusive of any other remedies that the city may have under the provisions
of state law. The city may take any, all, or any combination of actions
against a noncompliant industrial user as specified in, but not limited to,
Section 8 of the pretreatment regulations adopted in Section 13.12.020 of
this code. The city shall seek damages from any industrial user who
discharges, or causes to be discharged, to the POTW any pollutant that causes
damage or detrimental effects on the POTW, or otherwise causes the city to
expend resources to respond to such discharge.



(Ord. 1397.08.26 § 9, 2017)



Chapter 13.16
IRRIGATION FEES AND ASSESSMENTS



Sections:



13.16.010   City offers irrigation service.



13.16.020   Fees for service.



13.16.030   Fee assessment.



13.16.040   Billing procedure.



13.16.010  City offers irrigation service.



   The city offers irrigation service to the portion of the city described
in the map codified at the end of this chapter. Property owners in this area
may receive irrigation service subject to the procedures set out in Sections
13.16.020 through 13.16.040.



(Ord. 1099 (part), 1986: prior code Art. 11-4)



13.16.020  Fees for service.



   The fee for irrigation service, including valve changes, shall be
established in the City Consolidated Fee Schedule pursuant to Section
1.04.0170. The fees are designed to recover electrical and employee costs
incurred by the city in providing the service. Any unexpected expenses, such
as pump replacement or repair, will be assessed directly back to the district.



(Ord. 1397.02.10 § 7, 2008; Ord. 1406, 1991; Ord. 1099 (part), 1986: prior
code § 11-4-1)



13.16.030  Fee assessment.



   Assessments are designed to recover large costs to the district which
occur on an irregular or unpredictable schedule. Examples of the costs are
repair and replacement of the pump and vehicle used in providing the service.
Assessments shall be divided equally among all users of the service.



(Ord. 1099 (part), 1986: prior code § 11-4-2)



13.16.040  Billing procedure.



   Fees and assessments are payable by the property owner and the billings
may, in the discretion of the city, be made a part of the sewer and trash
bill. If the billings are made a part of the sewer and trash bill, the
property owners will be subject to all the penalties and collection costs
associated with sewer and trash bills.



(Ord. 1099 (part), 1986: prior code § 11-4-3)











Title 14
(RESERVED)





Title 15
BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION



Chapters:



15.04   Electrical Code Administrative Provisions Adopted



15.06   Residential Code Adopted



15.08   Building Code Adopted



15.10   Fuel Gas Code Adopted



15.12   Mechanical Code Adopted



15.14   Energy Conservation Code Adopted



15.16   Plumbing Code Adopted



15.20   Electrical Code Adopted



15.24   Sign Code Adopted



15.28   Property Maintenance Code Adopted



15.30   Existing Building Code Adopted



15.32   Public Improvement Requirements for Land Developers



15.36   Trailers and Trailer Courts



15.40   Flood Damage Prevention



15.44   Miscellaneous Construction Requirements



15.48   Outdoor Light Control



Chapter 15.04
ELECTRICAL CODE ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS ADOPTED



Sections:



15.04.010   City of Casa Grande Building and Technical Administrative Code.



15.04.020   Violation—Penalties.



15.04.010  City of Casa Grande Building and Technical Administrative Code.



   That certain document known as the City of Casa Grande Building and
Technical Administrative Code which was made a public record by Resolution
No. 4874 of the City of Casa Grande, Arizona, three copies of which are on
file in the office of the Casa Grande City Clerk, are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section.



(Ord. 1397.08.25 § 3, 2014)



15.04.020  Violation—Penalties.



   A.    It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to
erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or
demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building, structure or building
service equipment, or cause or permit the same to be done, in violation of
this chapter and the other technical codes adopted by the City of Casa Grande.



   B.   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this chapter is guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor; and each such person,
firm or corporation shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every
day or portion thereof during which any violation of any provision of the
code is committed, continued or permitted. Upon conviction, each violation is
punishable by a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars (plus any
applicable surcharges), by imprisonment for not more than four months, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.         



   C.   The imposition of one penalty for any violation of this chapter
shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. Application of the
above penalty shall not be held to preclude the forced removal of prohibited
conditions.



(Ord. 1397.08.20 § 10(part), 2008)



Chapter 15.06
RESIDENTIAL CODE ADOPTED



Section:



15.06.010   International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family
Dwellings.



15.06.020   Violation—Penalties.



15.06.010  International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings.



   Those certain documents known as (i) “International Residential Code
for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2012 Edition” including appendices A, B,
C, D, E, G, H, J, and K; and (ii) “City of Casa Grande Amendments to the
International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2012
Edition,” as set forth in the document entitled “August 2014 Casa Grande
Amendments to the Building, Health, and Safety Codes”, both of which were
made a public record by Resolution No. 4874 of the City of Casa Grande,
Arizona, three copies of which are on file in the office of the Casa Grande
City Clerk, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if
fully set out in this section.



(Ord. 1397.08.25 § 4, 2014)



15.06.020  Violation—Penalties.



   A.    It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to
erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or
demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building, structure or building
service equipment, or cause or permit the same to be done, in violation of
this chapter and the other technical codes adopted by the City of Casa Grande.



   B.   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this chapter is guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor; and each such person,
firm or corporation shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every
day or portion thereof during which any violation of any provision of the
code is committed, continued or permitted. Upon conviction, each violation is
punishable by a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars (plus any
applicable surcharges), by imprisonment for not more than four months, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.



     C.   The imposition of one penalty for any violation of this
chapter shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. Application
of the above penalty shall not be held to preclude the forced removal of
prohibited conditions.



(Ord. 1397.08.20 § 10(part), 2008)



Chapter 15.08
BUILDING CODE ADOPTED



Section:



15.08.010   International Building Code.



15.08.020   Violation—Penalties.



15.08.010  International Building Code.



   Those certain documents known as (i) “International Building Code,
2012 Edition” including Appendices C and I; and (ii) “City of Casa Grande
Amendments to the International Building Code, 2012 Edition,” as set forth
in the document entitled “August 2014 Casa Grande Amendments to the
Building, Health, and Safety Codes”, both of which were made a public
record by Resolution No. 4874 of the City of Casa Grande, Arizona, three
copies of which are on file in the office of the Casa Grande City Clerk, are
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in
this section.



(Ord. 1397.08.25 § 5, 2014)



15.08.020  Violation—Penalties.



   A.    It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to
erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or
demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building, structure or building
service equipment, or cause or permit the same to be done, in violation of
this chapter and the other technical codes adopted by the City of Casa Grande.



   B.   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this chapter is guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor; and each such person,
firm or corporation shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every
day or portion thereof during which any violation of any provision of the
code is committed, continued or permitted. Upon conviction, each violation is
punishable by a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars (plus any
applicable surcharges), by imprisonment for not more than four months, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.



   C.   The imposition of one penalty for any violation of this chapter
shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. Application of the
above penalty shall not be held to preclude the forced removal of prohibited
conditions.



(Ord. 1397.08.20 § 10(part), 2008)



Chapter 15.10
FUEL GAS CODE ADOPTED



Section:



15.10.010   International Fuel Gas Code.



15.10.020   Violation—Penalties.



15.10.010  International Fuel Gas Code.



   Those certain documents known as (i) “International Fuel Gas Code,
2012 Edition” including appendices A, B, and C; and (ii) “City of Casa
Grande Amendments to the International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition,” as set
forth in the document entitled “August 2014 Casa Grande Amendments to the
Building, Health, and Safety Codes”, both of which were made a public
record by Resolution No. 4874 of the City of Casa Grande, Arizona, three
copies of which are on file in the office of the Casa Grande City Clerk, are
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in
this section.



(Ord. 1397.08.25 § 6, 2014)



15.10.020  Violation—Penalties.



   A.    It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to
erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or
demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building, structure or building
service equipment, or cause or permit the same to be done, in violation of
this chapter and the other technical codes adopted by the City of Casa Grande.



   B.   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this chapter is guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor; and each such person,
firm or corporation shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every
day or portion thereof during which any violation of any provision of the
code is committed, continued or permitted. Upon conviction, each violation is
punishable by a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars (plus any
applicable surcharges), by imprisonment for not more than four months, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.         



   C.   The imposition of one penalty for any violation of this chapter
shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. Application of the
above penalty shall not be held to preclude the forced removal of prohibited
conditions.



(Ord. 1397.08.20 § 10(part), 2008)



Chapter 15.12
MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED



Section:



15.12.010   International Mechanical Code.



15.12.020   Violation—Penalties.



15.12.010  International Mechanical Code.



   Those certain documents known as (i) “International Mechanical Code,
2012 Edition” and (ii) “City of Casa Grande Amendments to the
International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition,” as set forth in the document
entitled “August 2014 Casa Grande Amendments to the Building, Health, and
Safety Codes”, both of which were made a public record by Resolution No.
4874 of the City of Casa Grande, Arizona, three copies of which are on file
in the office of the Casa Grande City Clerk, are hereby referred to, adopted
and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section.



(Ord. 1397.08.25 § 7, 2014)



15.12.020  Violation—Penalties.



   A.    It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to
erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or
demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building, structure or building
service equipment, or cause or permit the same to be done, in violation of
this chapter and the other technical codes adopted by the City of Casa Grande.



   B.   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this chapter is guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor; and each such person,
firm or corporation shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every
day or portion thereof during which any violation of any provision of the
code is committed, continued or permitted. Upon conviction, each violation is
punishable by a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars (plus any
applicable surcharges), by imprisonment for not more than four months, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.         



   C.   The imposition of one penalty for any violation of this chapter
shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. Application of the
above penalty shall not be held to preclude the forced removal of prohibited
conditions.



(Ord. 1397.08.20 § 10(part), 2008)



Chapter 15.14
ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE ADOPTED



Section:



15.14.010   International Energy Conservation Code.



15.14.020   Violation—Penalties.



15.14.010   International Energy Conservation Code.



   Those certain documents known as (i) “International Energy
Conservation Code, 2012 Edition” and (ii) “City of Casa Grande Amendments
to the International Energy Conservation Code, 2012 Edition,” as set forth
in the document entitled “August 2014 Casa Grande Amendments to the
Building, Health, and Safety Codes”, both of which were made a public
record by Resolution No. 4874 of the City of Casa Grande, Arizona, three
copies of which are on file in the office of the Casa Grande City Clerk, are
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in
this section.



(Ord. 1397.08.25 § 8(part), 2014)



15.14.020   Violation—Penalties.



   A.    It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to
erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or
demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building, structure or building
service equipment or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this
chapter and the other technical codes adopted by the City of Casa Grande.



   B.   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this chapter is guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor, and each such person,
firm or corporation shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every
day or portion thereof during which any violation of any provision of the
code is committed, continued or permitted. Upon conviction, each violation is
punishable by a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars, plus any
applicable surcharges, by imprisonment for not more than four months, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.



   C.   The imposition of one penalty for any violation of this chapter
shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. Application of the
above penalty shall not be held to preclude the forced removal of prohibited
conditions.



(Ord. 1397.08.25 § 8(part), 2014)



Chapter 15.16
PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED



Section:



15.16.010   International Plumbing Code.



15.16.020   Violation—Penalties.



15.16.010  International Plumbing Code.



   Those certain documents known as (i) “International Plumbing Code,
2012 Edition” and (ii) “City of Casa Grande Amendments to the
International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition,” as set forth in the document
entitled “August 2014 Casa Grande Amendments to the Building, Health, and
Safety Codes”, both of which were made a public record by Resolution No.
4874 of the City of Casa Grande, Arizona, three copies of which are on file
in the office of the Casa Grande City Clerk, are hereby referred to, adopted
and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section.



(Ord. 1397.08.25 § 9, 2014)



15.16.020  Violation—Penalties.



   A.    It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to
erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or
demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building, structure or building
service equipment, or cause or permit the same to be done, in violation of
this chapter and the other technical codes adopted by the City of Casa Grande.



   B.   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this chapter is guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor; and each such person,
firm or corporation shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every
day or portion thereof during which any violation of any provision of the
code is committed, continued or permitted. Upon conviction, each violation is
punishable by a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars (plus any
applicable surcharges, by imprisonment for not more than four months, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.



   C.   The imposition of one penalty for any violation of this chapter
shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. Application of the
above penalty shall not be held to preclude the forced removal of prohibited
conditions.



(Ord. 1397.08.20 § 10(part), 2008)



Chapter 15.20
ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED



Section:



15.20.010   National Electrical Code.



15.20.020   Violation—Penalties.



15.20.010  National Electrical Code.



   Those certain documents known as (i) “National Electrical Code, 2011
Edition” and (ii) “City of Casa Grande Amendments to the National
Electrical Code, 2011 Edition,” as set forth in the document entitled
“August 2014 Casa Grande Amendments to the Building, Health, and Safety
Codes”, both of which were made a public record by Resolution No. 4874 of
the City of Casa Grande, Arizona, three copies of which are on file in the
office of the Casa Grande City Clerk, are hereby referred to, adopted and
made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section.



(Ord. 1397.08.25 § 10, 2014)



15.20.020  Violation—Penalties.



   A.    It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to
erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or
demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building, structure or building
service equipment, or cause or permit the same to be done, in violation of
this chapter and the other technical codes adopted by the City of Casa Grande.



   B.   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this chapter is guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor; and each such person,
firm or corporation shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every
day or portion thereof during which any violation of any provision of the
code is committed, continued or permitted. Upon conviction, each violation is
punishable by a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars (plus any
applicable surcharges), by imprisonment for not more than four months, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.         



   C.   The imposition of one penalty for any violation of this chapter
shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. Application of the
above penalty shall not be held to preclude the forced removal of prohibited
conditions.



(Ord. 1397.08.20 § 10(part), 2008)



Chapter 15.24
SIGN CODE ADOPTED



Sections:



15.24.010   Adoption.



15.24.010  Adoption.



   That certain code entitled “Sign Code for the City of Casa Grande,”
dated April 19, 1976, and adopted by Ordinance No. 583 as amended, and adding
Chapter 15.04, Administrative Provisions, is adopted as the “Sign Code”
for the city and made a part of this code the same as though specifically set
forth in full. At least three copies of the code shall be filed in the office
of the city clerk, and kept available for public use and inspection.



(Prior code § 9-7-1)



Chapter 15.28
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED



Sections:



15.28.010   City of Casa Grande Property Maintenance Code.



15.28.020   Violations—Penalties.



15.28.010  City of Casa Grande Property Maintenance Code.



   That certain document known as the “City of Casa Grande Property
Maintenance Code” which was made a public record by Resolution No. 4874 of
the City of Casa Grande, Arizona, three copies of which are on file in the
office of the Casa Grande City Clerk, are hereby referred to, adopted and
made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section.



(Ord. 1397.08.25 § 11(part), 2014)



15.28.020  Violations—Penalties.



   A.    It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to
erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or
demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building, structure or building
service equipment or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this
chapter and the other technical codes adopted by the City of Casa Grande.



   B.   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this chapter is guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor, and each such person,
firm or corporation shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every
day or portion thereof during which any violation of any provision of the
code is committed, continued or permitted. Upon conviction, each violation is
punishable by a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars, plus any
applicable surcharges, by imprisonment for not more than four months, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.



   C.   The imposition of one penalty for any violation of this
ordinance shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue.
Application of the above penalty shall not be held to preclude the forced
removal of prohibited conditions.



(Ord. 1397.08.25 § 11(part), 2014)



Chapter 15.30
EXISTING BUILDING CODE ADOPTED



Sections:



15.30.010   International Existing Building code.



15.30.020   Violations—Penalties.



15.30.010  International Existing Building Code.



   Those certain documents known as (i) “International Existing Building
Code, 2012 Edition” including Chapters A1, A2, A3, A4, A5, C1, C2 and C3;
Appendix B; Resource A; and Resource A-Appendix;  and (ii) “City of Casa
Grande Amendments to the International Existing Building Code, 2012
Edition,” as set forth in the document entitled “August 2014 Casa Grande
Amendments to the Building, Health, and Safety Codes”, both of which were
made a public record by Resolution No. 4874 of the City of Casa Grande,
Arizona, three copies of which are on file in the office of the Casa Grande
City Clerk, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if
fully set out in this section.



(Ord. 1397.08.25 § 12(part), 2014)



15.30.020  Violations—Penalties.



   A.    It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to
erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or
demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building, structure or building
service equipment or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this
chapter and the other technical codes adopted by the City of Casa Grande.



   B.   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this chapter is guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor, and each such person,
firm or corporation shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every
day or portion thereof during which any violation of any provision of the
code is committed, continued or permitted. Upon conviction, each violation is
punishable by a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars, plus any
applicable surcharges, by imprisonment for not more than four months, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.



   C.   The imposition of one penalty for any violation of this chapter
shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. Application of the
above penalty shall not be held to preclude the forced removal of prohibited
conditions.



(Ord. 1397.08.25 § 12(part), 2014)



Chapter 15.32
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR LAND DEVELOPERS



Sections:



15.32.010   Purpose of provisions.



15.32.020   Definitions.



15.32.030   Exceptions.



15.32.040   Purpose of provisions to establish minimum acceptable
standards.



15.32.050   Engineering plans required.



15.32.060   Street dedication requirements.



15.32.070   Certain requirements not applicable when.



15.32.080   Grant of easement when.



15.32.090   Right-of-way width requirements.



15.32.100   Required improvement widths—Applicability.



15.32.110   Required improvements—Roadway sections.



15.32.120   Required improvements—Other roadways.



15.32.130   Required improvements—Storm drainage.



15.32.140   Required improvements—Sanitary sewage disposal.



15.32.150   Required improvements—Irrigation facilities.



15.32.160   Required improvements—Water supply.



15.32.170   Street lights.



15.32.180   Required improvements—Utilities.



15.32.190   Required improvements—Refuse containers.



15.32.200   Improvement district agreements when.



15.32.210   Notification and approval of work to be done on right-of-way
required.



15.32.220   Modifications to regulations allowed when.



15.32.230   Multimodal transportation study adopted by reference.



15.32.010  Purpose of provisions.



   A.   The purpose of these regulations is to provide for the orderly
growth and harmonious development of the city; to ensure that proper off-site
facilities are constructed in conjunction with the development of
unsubdivided land for commercial, industrial, and multiple-family and
single-family residential uses where no subdivision of land is required; to
provide for public dedication of such rights- of-way, as streets or
easements, as are reasonably required by or related to, the effect of the
proposed use; to secure adequate provisions for water supply, drainage,
sanitary sewerage, and other health requirements as part of the development.



   B.   In its interpretation and application, the provisions of these
regulations are intended to provide a common ground of understanding and
equitable working relationship between public and private interests to the
end that both independent and mutual objectives can be achieved in the
development of land where no subdivision is required.



(Prior code Art. 19-1)



15.32.020  Definitions.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:



   “Council” means the city council of the city of Casa Grande.



   “Developer” means the individual, firm, corporation, partnership,
association, syndication, trust or other legal entity that initiates the
development of land for commercial, industrial, multifamily or single- family
residential purposes in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; and
the developer need not be the owner of the property as defined by this
chapter.



   “Development” means an improvement to a parcel, lot or tract of
land for which a building permit is required, or other approval is required
under any existing city code or ordinance.



   “Easement” means a grant by the owner of the use of a strip of land
by the public, a corporation or persons, for specific uses and purposes and
so designated.



   “Engineering plans” means plans, profiles, cross sections and other
required details for the construction of public improvements, prepared by a
civil engineer registered in the state of Arizona in compliance with
standards of design and construction approved by the council.



   “Grantor” means the individual, firm, corporation, partnership,
association, syndication, trust or other legal entity that has authority to
convey land to the city.



   “Irrigation facilities” means and includes canals, laterals,
ditches, conduits, gates, pumps and allied equipment necessary for the
supply, delivery and drainage or irrigation water and the construction,
operation, maintenance of such.



   “Owner” means the person or persons holding a title by deed to
land, or holding any other title of record.



   “Pedestrian way” means a public walk dedicated entirely through a
block from street to street and/or providing access to a school, park,
recreation area or shopping center.



   “Right-of-way” means any public right-of-way, and includes any area
required for public use pursuant to any general or specific plan.



   “Standard specifications and details” means a set of uniform
development specifications approved by the city engineer and adopted by the
city council.



   “Streets” means any existing or proposed street, avenue, boulevard,
road, lane, parkway, place, bridge, viaduct or easement for public vehicular
access or street shown in a plat duly filed and recorded in the county
recorder's office. A street includes all land within the street right-of-way
whether improved or unimproved and includes such improvements as pavement,
shoulders, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, parking spaces, bridges and drainage
improvements.



   1.   “Arterial street” means a major street of exceptional
continuity that is intended to carry the greatest portion of through traffic
from one area of the city to another. All section-line streets shall be
designated arterial streets.



   2.   “Collector street” means a street designed to accommodate
traffic within residential neighborhoods with the primary purpose of
collecting and distributing traffic to and from the arterial streets.



   a.   “Primary collector street” means a street located at or in
the vicinity of mid-section lines.



   b.   “Secondary collector street” means a street located at or
in the vicinity of quarter section lines.



   3.   “Local street” means a residential street which has limited
continuity with the primary purpose of serving only those lots which are
adjacent to it.



   4.   “Cul-de-sac” means a short local street having but one end
open for vehicular traffic, the opposite end being terminated with a
permanent turn-around.



   5.   “Alley” means a public service way used to provide
secondary vehicle access to properties otherwise abutting upon a street.



   “Transportation plan” means an element of the Casa Grande
Comprehensive Plan, adopted by city council, which indicates collector
streets, arterial streets, and other transportation facilities.



   “Utilities” means installations or facilities, underground or
overhead, furnishing for the use of the public electricity, gas, steam,
communications, water, drainage, sewage disposal or flood control, owned and
operated by any person, firm, corporation, municipal department or board,
duly authorized by state or municipal regulations. Utility or utilities as
used herein may also refer to such persons, firms, corporations, departments
or board as sense requires.



(Prior code § Art. 19-2)



15.32.030  Exceptions.



   All improvements shall be required for all developments in all zoning
classifications with the following exceptions:



   A.   Curb and gutter, concrete sidewalks shall not be required in
low density residential (thirty- five thousand square foot lots minimum) on
interior streets. Arterial and collector streets, both primary and secondary,
are not exempted from these requirements.



   B.   Concrete sidewalks on interior streets shall not be required in
an area zoned heavy industrial.



(Ord. 1397.15.4 § 2 (part), 1992; prior code Art. 19-6)



15.32.040  Purpose of provisions to establish minimum acceptable standards.



   A.   It is the purpose of this chapter to establish in outline the
minimum acceptable standards for improvement of public streets and utilities,
including dedication of additional rights-of-way where needed, to define the
responsibility of the developer in the planning, constructing, and financing
of public improvements and to establish procedures for review and approval of
engineering plans.



   B.   All improvements required in streets, alleys or easements which
are required as a condition of site plan approval shall be the responsibility
of the developer.



(Prior code Art. 19-3 (1))



15.32.050  Engineering plans required.



   It is the responsibility of the developer to have prepared by a civil
engineer, registered in the state of Arizona, a complete set of engineering
plans satisfactory to the city engineer, for construction of required
improvements. The plans shall be prepared and submitted to the city building
inspector together with the on-site construction plans.



(Prior code Art. 19-3 (2))



15.32.060  Street dedication requirements.



   A.   No building or structure shall be erected or enlarged and no
building permit shall be issued therefor on any parcel of land in any zoning
district which abuts any existing or proposed street or alley, if the
prospective erection or enlargement of the building or structure and use
thereof will affect an increase of traffic in the street right-of-way, unless
the one-half of any such abutting right-of-way which is located on the same
side of the center of the street or alley as such parcel of land has been
dedicated and improved for the full width of the parcel where it abuts so as
to meet the standards for each right-of- way as provided in the right-of-way
standards and the requirements of subsection C of this section or such
dedication and improvement has been assured to the satisfaction of the city
engineer. As used in this chapter, the center of the street or alley means
the centers of those existing and proposed rights-of-way as they are shown on
any adopted plans of the city or as would ordinarily be required and
developed under requirements of Chapter 16 of this code.



   B.   The maximum area of land required to be so dedicated shall not
exceed twenty-five percent of the area of any such parcel which was out of
record as of the effective date of the adoption of the ordinance codified in
this chapter, in the Pinal County recorder's office. In the event such
dedication reduces the parcel below a width of an area which is the minimum
permitted by Chapter 17 for a lot zoned as the lot is zoned, an application
for a variance to the zoning regulations may be made to the board of
adjustments.



   C.   The additional public improvements required to be constructed
under subsection A of this section, except when subsection D of this section
applies to a parcel and imposes any different requirements outlined in
Section 15.32.100.



   D.   No additional improvements shall be required on such a parcel
where complete roadway, paving, curb, gutter, sidewalk, fire hydrants, street
lights, and storm drain improvements exist within the present dedication
contiguous thereto and which were constructed according to city or county
standards applicable at the time of construction for public improvements, if
the improvements meet the standards in effect at that time.



(Prior code Art. 19-3 (3))



15.32.070  Certain requirements not applicable when.



   Dedications and improvements required by Section 15.32.060 shall not
apply to:



   A.   Additions and accessory buildings incidental to a residential
building legally existing on the parcel, provided no additional dwelling
units or guest rooms are created;



   B.   Additions and accessory buildings incidental to other than a
residential building existing on the parcel on the date of the adoption of
the ordinance codified in this chapter provided that the total cumulative
floor area of all such additions and accessory buildings shall not exceed two
hundred square feet;



   C.   In any case where the city engineer finds that the prospective
erection or enlargement of the involved building or structure, and the use
thereof, will affect no increase in traffic generation on any street as
prescribed in Section 15.32.060 of this chapter. Any such determination by
the city engineer within the purview of this subsection, whether such
determination be affirmative or negative, is appealable to the city council,
provided an appeal is presented in writing to the city clerk within ten days
of the decision.



(Prior code Art. 19-3 (4))



15.32.080  Grant of easement when.



   Any person required to dedicate land by the provisions of this chapter
shall provide and offer a grant of easement, or, at his option, grant deed
for the necessary right-of-way in a standard form acceptable to the city
attorney. Dedication shall be considered as satisfactorily assured when the
document has been accepted for recordation by the city engineer.



(Prior code Art. 19-3 (5))



15.32.090  Right-of-way width requirements.



   The minimum right-of-way widths of streets, alleys and ways will be as
follows:



   A.   Major arterial streets, one hundred thirty feet;



   B.   Minor arterial streets, one hundred ten feet;



   C.   Collector streets, eighty feet;



   D.   Local streets, forty-four feet;



   E.   Local half streets, thirty feet;



   F.   Cul-de-sacs, forty feet;



   G.   Pedestrian ways, eight feet;



   H.   Alleys, twenty.



(Ord. 1397.15.4 § 2 (part), 1992)



15.32.100  Required improvement widths—Applicability.



   The following required improvement widths set out in Sections 15.32.110
through 15.32.160 shall apply to all streets, alleys, and pedestrian ways
within the city limits. All improvements shall be constructed in accordance
with city standard specifications and details.



(Prior code Art. 19-5 (part))



15.32.110  Required improvements— Roadway sections.



   Paving width measured between backs of curbs shall be as follows:



   A.   Major arterial streets, ninety-three feet;



   B.   Minor arterial streets, seventy-four feet;



   C.   Collector streets, forty-eight feet;



   D.   Local streets, thirty-six feet;



   E.   Local half streets, twenty-four feet;



   F.   Cul-de-sacs, thirty-two feet with terminous roadway radius of
forty-four feet.



(Ord. 1397.15.4 § 2 (part), 1992)



15.32.120  Required improvements—Other roadways.



   Other roadway improvements shall be:



   A.   Sidewalks, four feet, except along arterial streets where
sidewalks shall be five feet;



   B.   Curb and gutter, twenty-four inches in width;



   C.   Pedestrian ways, eight feet;



   D.   Alleys: developments utilizing an alley as access to required
parking shall improve the alley full width, two inches of asphaltic concrete
on six inches of aggregate base course, to the nearest improved intersecting
street;



   E.   Street name signs: signs shall be placed at all street
intersections and be in place by the time the street pavement is ready for
use. Specifications for design, construction, location and installation shall
be in accordance with city standard specifications.



(Ord. 1397.15.4 § 2 (part), 1992; prior code Art. 19-5 (2))



15.32.130  Required improvements— Storm drainage.



   Proper and adequate provision shall be made for disposal or retention
of storm- water; this shall apply equally to grading of private properties
and to public streets. Existing major watercourses shall be maintained and
dedicated as drainage ways. The type, extent, location and capacity of
drainage facilities shall be approved for the individual development by the
city engineer and shall be constructed in accordance with standards and
specifications established by the city standard specifications. The city
engineer may require an engineering study by a consulting registered engineer
employed by the developer.



(Prior code Art. 19-5 (3))



15.32.140  Required improvements— Sanitary sewage disposal.



   Public sanitary sewers shall be installed in accordance with plans,
profiles and specifications approved by the county and state health
departments and the city engineer and in accordance with the city standard
specifications.



(Prior code Art. 19-5 (4))



15.32.150  Required improvements— Irrigation facilities.



   All irrigation facilities to remain within the boundaries of the tract
or in an abutting one-half street or alley right-of-way shall be tiled or
relocated as may be directed by the city engineer. Where street improvements
require relocation of control gates or other structures, such relocation and
reconstruction shall conform to city engineer's requirements.



(Prior code Art. 19-5 (5))



15.32.160  Required improvements— Water supply.



   The development shall be supplied with safe, pure and potable water in
sufficient volume and pressure for domestic use and fire protection in
accordance with city standard specifications. Fire hydrants shall be
installed in accordance with city standard specifications at locations
designated by the chief of the fire department and the city engineer.



(Prior code Art. 19-5 (6))



15.32.170  Street lights.



   Street lights shall be installed on all streets developed. All lights
shall be installed under the direction of the city engineer and in accordance
with the city standard specifications.



(Prior code Art. 19-5 (7))



15.32.180  Required improvements— Utilities.



   All electric power lines (except lines exceeding thirteen KV), all
telephone lines and all cable television lines which are on the site of the
development property, including those on land which will be dedicated to
public use as part of the development, and those utilities lines which must
be extended to provide such utility services to the development property from
an end point outside the development property lines except those lines along
arterial or collector streets, shall be installed underground.



(Ord. 1397.15.11 § 1, 1997: prior code Art. 19-5 (8))



15.32.190  Required improvements— Refuse containers.



   Each development or combination of developments shall be supplied with
a refuse container, at the expense of the developer, to be owned by the
city, as approved by the city engineer unless private containers, approved
for use by the city engineer are supplied. Enclosures for containers in areas
other than single-family residential areas shall be required.



(Prior code Art. 19-5 (9))



15.32.200  Improvement district agreements when.



   In the event any of the off-site improvements cause a hardship on the
city, or it is not practical to construct the improvements because of the
pending formation of an improvement district, the city engineer may
temporarily postpone the off-site improvements upon the developer signing an
agreement with the city to enter into an improvement district.



(Prior code Art. 19-7)



15.32.210  Notification and approval of work to be done on right-of-way
required.



   Prior to any work commencing for any purpose on any public
right-of-way, the person for whom the work is being completed shall file an
application for a right-of-way permit. The city engineer shall require plans
and specifications at the time of application, as well as fees for the city
review of the maintenance, construction or building plans. The fee shall be
established in the City Consolidated Fee Schedule pursuant to Section
1.04.170. Fees shall be made payable to the city. No work shall commence
without the written approval of the city engineer.



(Ord. 1397.02.10 § 8, 2008; Ord. 1397.15.20 1, 2004:  prior code Art. 19-8)



15.32.220  Modifications to regulations allowed when.



   A.   When, in the opinion of the council, there exist extraordinary
conditions of topography, land ownership, or adjacent development or other
circumstances not provided for in these regulations, the council may, upon
investigation and recommendation by the city engineer, waive or modify these
regulations in such manner and to such extent as it may deem appropriate to
the public interest.



   B.   Where, due to extraordinary conditions, the council waives or
modifies these regulations, they may also require such protective covenants,
bonds or other legal provisions as will assure future conformity to these
regulations.



(Prior code Art. 19-9)



15.32.230  Multimodal transportation study adopted by reference.



   A.   That a certain document known as "The Casa Grande Multimodal
Transportation Study," three copies of which are on file in the office of the
City Clerk, and which document was made a public record by Resolution No.
3380, is hereby referred to, adopted by reference and made a part hereof as
if fully set out in this section.



   B.   The provisions of this section and the public record adopted
herein are effective from and after December 3, 2003.



   C.   Any person found guilty of violating any provision of the Casa
Grande Multimodal Transportation Study shall be guilty of a class II
misdemeanor. Each day that a violation occurs shall be a separate offense
punishable as a herein above described.



(Ord. 1397.15.18 § 1, 2003)



Chapter 15.36
TRAILERS AND TRAILER COURTS



Sections:



15.36.010   Definitions.



15.36.020   General authority.



15.36.030   Enforcement authority.



15.36.040   Parking outside court restricted.



15.36.050   Located in specific zone only.



15.36.060   Court plan requirements.



15.36.070   Water supply requirements.



15.36.080   Service building and accommodation requirements.



15.36.090   Waste and garbage disposal requirements.



15.36.100   Management facilities required—Duties.



15.36.110   License required to operate—Application requirements.



15.36.120   License fee.



15.36.130   Applicability of technical codes.



15.36.140   Revocation or suspension of license when.



15.36.150   Hearing.



15.36.010  Definitions.



   Whenever used in this chapter, unless a different meaning appears from
the context, the following terms are defined:



   “Trailer” means an automobile trailer, trailer coach, mobile home
or any vehicle or structure so designed and constructed in such manner as
will permit occupancy thereof as sleeping quarters for one or more persons,
the conduct of any business or profession, occupation or trade, or use as a
selling or advertising device, and so designed that it is or may be mounted
on wheels and used as a conveyance on highways or city streets, propelled or
drawn by its own or other motive power, excepting a device used exclusively
upon stationary rails or tracks.



   “Trailer court” means any park, trailer park, trailer court, mobile
home park, court, camp, site, lot, parcel, or tract of land designed,
maintained or intended for the purpose of supplying a location or
accommodations for any trailer coach or mobile home, and upon which any
trailer coach or mobile home is parked, and shall include all buildings used,
or intended for use, as part of the equipment thereof, whether a charge is
made for the use of the trailer court and its facilities or not. “Trailer
court” shall not include automobile, trailer or mobile home sales lots on
which unoccupied trailers are parked for purposes of inspection and sale.



   “Unit” means a section of ground in a trailer court of not less
than twenty-four hundred square feet of unoccupied space in an area
designated as the location for only one automobile and one trailer.



(Prior code § 16-1-1)



15.36.020  General authority.



   The city health officer shall have power to make such other rules and
regulations as are consistent with this chapter, as may be necessary to carry
out its provisions.



(Prior code § 16-2-12)



15.36.030  Enforcement authority.



   It is made the duty of the city health officer, chief of police, chief
of the fire department, building inspector, and plumbing inspector to enforce
the provisions of this chapter as set out herein, or as may hereafter be
enacted, and, for the purpose of securing such enforcement, any of the above
named officials, or their authorized representatives, shall have the right
and are empowered to enter upon any premises on which any trailers are
located, or are about to be located, and inspect the same.



(Prior code § 16-2-13)



15.36.040  Parking outside court restricted.



   A.   It is unlawful, within the city limits, for any person to park
any trailer on any street, alley or highway, or other public place, or on any
tract of land owned by any person, occupied or unoccupied within the city,
except as provided in this chapter.



   B.   No person shall park or occupy any trailer or mobile home on
the premises of any occupied dwelling or on any lot which is not a part of
the premises of any occupied dwelling, either of which is situated outside of
any approved trailer court:



   1.   Except the parking of only one unoccupied trailer in any
accessory private garage building, or in a rear yard in any district, is
permitted providing no living quarters shall be maintained or any business
practiced in the trailer while a trailer is so parked or stored; and



   2.   Except in the event of a hardship temporary use permits may be
granted by the zoning administrator not in conflict with existing zoning
ordinances.



(Prior code § 16-1-2)



15.36.050  Located in specific zone only.



   No trailer court shall be located in any district other than as
provided in Title 17 of this code, or amendments thereto.



(Prior code § 16-2-2)



15.36.060  Court plan requirements.



   A.   Every trailer court shall be located on a well-drained area,
and the premises shall be properly graded so as to prevent the accumulation
of storm or other waters.



   B.   Units shall be clearly designated and the court shall face or
abut on a driveway not less than twenty feet wide, giving easy access from
all units to a public street. The driveway shall be maintained in good
condition, have natural drainage, be well lighted at night, and shall not be
obstructed.



   C.   The court shall be laid out so that no unit shall be located
further than two hundred feet from the toilets and service buildings provided
for herein, and walkways to the buildings shall be well lighted at night.



   D.   Every trailer unit shall be furnished with an electric service
outlet. Such outlet shall be equipped with an externally operated switch or
fuse of not less than thirty amperes capacity, and a heavy duty outlet
receptacle.



   E.   Every trailer court shall have, on at least three sides, a
picket or link fence or comparable structure not less than three feet in
height. Suitable openings for driveways or service entrances in the fences
shall be provided.



(Prior code § 16-2-3)



15.36.070  Water supply requirements.



   A.   An adequate supply of pure water furnished through a pipe
distribution system connected directly with a water main, with supply faucets
located not more than one hundred feet from any trailer, shall be furnished
for drinking and domestic purposes.



   B.   No common drinking vessels shall be permitted, nor shall any
drinking water faucets be placed in any toilet room or water closet
compartment.



   C.   An abundant supply of hot water shall be provided at all times
for bathing, washing and laundry facilities.



(Prior code § 16-2-4)



15.36.080  Service building and accommodation requirements.



   A.   Every trailer court shall have erected thereon, at a distance
not greater than two hundred feet from any unit it is designed to serve, a
suitable building for housing toilets, showers and laundry facilities, as
required by this chapter. Such buildings shall be well lighted at all times,
day or night, well ventilated with screened openings, and constructed of such
moisture proof material as shall permit rapid and satisfactory cleaning,
scouring and washing.



   B.   There shall be provided separate toilet rooms for each sex.
Flush toilets provided with an adequate water supply shall be enclosed in
separate compartments and shall be provided for each sex in the ratio of one
toilet for each ten units or major fraction thereof. Every male toilet room
shall have one urinal for each twenty units, but in no case shall any male
toilet room be without one urinal. Toilet rooms shall contain lavatories with
hot and cold water in the ratio of one lavatory to every four or less water
closets.



   C.   Separate bathing facilities for each sex shall be provided with
one shower enclosed in a compartment for each ten units or major fraction
thereof.



   D.   Laundry facilities shall be provided in the ratio of one double
tray for each fifteen units, or major fraction thereof.



   E.   The above accommodations shall be based on the total court
capacity according to the accepted plans, provided that in the event trailers
occupying a trailer court are equipped with toilet, bathing and laundry
facilities, such facilities need not be erected for trailers so equipped, and
provided further, that it shall be unlawful to rent trailer space to trailers
not so equipped unless such facilities shall have been erected in ratios
provided for in subsections A, B and D of this section. If the operator of a
trailer court adopts, files with the city and enforces a written rule for the
trailer court requiring each trailer parked in his trailer court to have an
independent toilet facility, the provisions of subsection B of this section
shall not apply except that each trailer court shall have at least one
central toilet facility for each sex. If the operator of a trailer court
adopts, files with the city and enforces a written rule for the trailer court
requiring each trailer parked in his trailer court to have an independent
bathing facility, the provisions of subsection C of this section shall not
apply.



   F.   The floors of toilets, showers, and the laundry shall be of
concrete, tile or similar material, impervious to water, and easily cleaned
and pitched to a floor drain.



(Prior code § 16-2-5)



15.36.090  Waste and garbage disposal requirements.



   A.   All waste from showers, toilets, laundries, faucets and
lavatories shall be drained into a sewer system extended from and connected
with the city sewer system, or into approved septic tanks.



   B.   All sanitary facilities in any trailer which are not connected
with the city sewer system, or approved septic tanks, shall be sealed and
their use is declared unlawful.



   C.   There shall be provided a garbage collection stand or stands,
so that no unit will be more than two hundred feet from such stand. At least
one twenty-gallon substantial fly-tight metal garbage can shall be provided
for each five units or major fraction thereof. The garbage collection stand
shall be so located as to permit convenient access thereto by garbage
collection trucks. The garbage collection stand shall not be permitted to
become foul-smelling, unsightly or breeding places for flies.



(Prior code § 16-2- 6)



15.36.100  Management facilities required—Duties.



   A.   In every trailer court there shall be an office building or
rooms in which shall be located the office of the person in charge of the
court. A copy of the court license and of the provisions of this chapter
shall be posted therein, and the court register shall at all times be kept in
the office.



   B.   It is made the duty of the attendant or person in charge,
together with the licensee to:



   1.   Keep at all times a register of all guests, which shall be open
at all times to inspection by state and federal officers and officers of the
city, showing for all guests:



   a.   Names and addresses,



   b.   Dates of entrance and departure,



   c.   License number of all trailers and towing or other automobiles,



   d.   States issuing such licenses;



   2.   Maintain the court in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition,
at all times;



   3.   See that the provisions of this chapter are complied with and
enforced, and report promptly to the proper authorities any violations of
this chapter or any other violations of law which may come to his attention;



   4.   Report to the city health officer all cases of persons or
animals affected or suspected of being affected with any communicable disease;



   5.   Prevent the running loose of dogs, cats, or other animals or
pets;



   6.   Maintain in convenient places, approved by the fire department,
hand fire extinguishers in the ratio of one to each ten units;



   7.   Prohibit the lighting of open fires on the premises;



   8.   Prohibit the use of any trailer by a greater number of
occupants than that which it is designed to accommodate.



(Prior code § 16-2-7)



15.36.110  License required to operate—Application requirements.



   A.   It is unlawful for any person to establish, operate or
maintain, or permit to be established, operated or maintained upon any
property owned or controlled by him, a trailer court, within the limits of
the city, without having first secured a license therefor from the clerk,
granted and existing in compliance with the terms of this chapter. Such
license shall expire on December 31 of each year, but may be renewed under
the provisions of this chapter for additional periods of one year.



   B.   The application for such license or the renewal thereof shall
be filed with the clerk and shall be made on a form furnished by the clerk,
and shall include the name and address of the owner of the tract and a legal
description of the premises upon which the trailer court is or will be
located, as will readily identify and definitely locate the premises. An
original application shall be accompanied by two copies of the court plan,
showing the following, either existing or as proposed:



   1.   The extent and area used for court purposes;



   2.   Roadways and driveways;



   3.   Location and number of sanitary conveniences, including
toilets, washrooms, laundries and utility rooms to be used by occupants of
units;



   4.   Method and plan of sewage disposal;



   5.   Method and plan of garbage removal;



   6.   Plan for water supply;



   7.   Plan for electrical lighting of units.



   C.   All original applications shall be referred to the city
planning and zoning commission, and before the license may be issued, there
must be a favorable recommendation by a majority of the city planning and
zoning commission, and the premises must be inspected and approved by the
city health officer, chief of police, chief of the fire department, building
inspector and plumbing inspector, or their duly authorized representatives,
as complying with all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable
ordinances of the city and provisions of this code.



   D.   Licenses issued under the terms of the chapter convey no right
to erect any building, to do any plumbing work, or to do any electrical work.



(Prior code § 16-2-1)



15.36.120  License fee.



   There is imposed a license fee of forty dollars per year, payable
quarterly in advance, for a license to operate or maintain a trailer court in
the city.



(Prior code § 16-2-8)



15.36.130  Applicability of technical codes.



   All plumbing, electrical, building, mechanical and other work on or at
any court licensed under this chapter shall be in accordance with the
provisions of this code regulating such work.



(Prior code § 16-2-9)



15.36.140  Revocation or suspension of license when.



   The city planning and zoning commission is authorized to revoke any
license issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter, if, after due
investigation, they determine that the holder thereof has violated any of the
provisions of this chapter, or that any trailer or trailer court is being
maintained in an unsanitary or unsafe manner, or is a nuisance.



(Prior code § 16-2-10)



15.36.150  Hearing.



   Any person aggrieved by an order of the city planning and zoning
commission granting, denying, renewing, or revoking a license for a trailer
court under this chapter, may file a written request for a hearing before the
commission within ten days after issuance of the order. The commission shall
give notice of public hearing upon this request to be held in not less than
five days after service of the notice on the person requesting the hearing.
The commission shall also give notice of the hearing to other persons
directly interested in the order in question. At such hearing, the commission
shall determine whether the granting, denial, renewal or revocation of the
license was in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and shall
issue a written findings of fact, and an order to carry out its findings.
These findings of fact and order shall be filed with the clerk and served by
him upon all interested persons appearing or represented at the hearing.



(Prior code § 16-2-11)



Chapter 15.40
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION



Sections:



Article I. Purpose of Provisions



15.40.010   Findings of fact.



15.40.020   Statement of purpose.



15.40.030   Purpose of provisions.



Article II. Definitions



15.40.040   Rules of construction and interpretation—Definitions.



15.40.045   Accessory structure, low-cost and small



15.40.050   Appeal.



15.40.060   Area of shallow flooding.



15.40.070   Area of special flood hazard.



15.40.080   Base flood.



15.40.090   Base flood water service elevation or base flood elevation.



15.40.095   Basement.



15.40.100   Breakaway walls.



15.40.105   Building.



15.40.110   Critical feature.



15.40.120   Development.



15.40.125   Encroachment.



15.40.127   Erosion.



15.40.130   Existing manufactured home park or subdivision.



15.40.140   Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
manufactured home subdivision.



15.40.150   Financial assistance.



15.40.160   Flood or flooding.



15.40.170   Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM).



15.40.180   Flood hazard zones A, AE, AO and AH.



15.40.190   Flood hazard zone X shaded or zone B.



15.40.200   Flood hazard zone X unshaded or zone C.



15.40.210   Flood insurance rate map (FIRM).



15.40.220   Flood insurance study.



15.40.230   Floodplain or flood-prone area.



15.40.240   Floodplain administrator.



15.40.250   Floodplain board.



15.40.260   Floodplain management.



15.40.270   Floodplain management regulations.



15.40.280   Flood protection system.



15.40.290   Floodproofing.



15.40.300   Flood-related erosion.



15.40.310   Floodway.



15.40.320   Functionally dependent use.



15.40.325   Hardship.



15.40.330   Highest adjacent grade.



15.40.335   Historic structure.



15.40.340   Levee.



15.40.350   Levee system.



15.40.360   Lowest floor.



15.40.370   Manufactured home.



15.40.380   Manufactured home park or subdivision.



15.40.385   Market value.



15.40.390   Mean sea level.



15.40.400   New construction.



15.40.410   New manufactured home park or subdivision.



15.40.420   National flood insurance program regulations.



15.40.430   Person.



15.40.440   Deficiency.



15.40.445   Obstruction.



15.40.447   One hundred-year flood or 100-year flood.



15.40.450   Recreational vehicle.



15.40.460   Regulatory flood elevation (RFE).



15.40.465   Regulatory floodway.



15.40.470   Remedy a violation.



15.40.480   Riverine.



15.40.490   Special flood hazard area (SFHA).



15.40.500   Start of construction.



15.40.510   Structure.



15.40.515   Substantial damage.



15.40.520   Substantial improvement.



15.40.530   Variance.



15.40.540   Violation.



15.40.545   Water surface elevation.



15.40.547   Watercourse.



Article III. Applicability, General Provisions and Requirements



15.40.550   Applicability.



15.40.560   Basis for designating areas of special flood hazard.



15.40.570   Compliance required.



15.40.580   Authority of provisions.



15.40.590   Interpretation and application of provisions.



15.40.600   City held harmless.



15.40.610   Statutory exemptions.



15.40.620   Structure declared public nuisance when.



15.40.630   Procedures to abate violations.



15.40.640   Unlawful acts.



15.40.650   Intergovernmental agreements.



Article IV. Permits, Reports and Procedural Requirements



15.40.660   Development permit required prior to construction or
development.



15.40.670   Development permit application—Drainage reports required.



15.40.680   Development permit application—Drainage patterns.



15.40.690   Development permit application—Street crossings at canal
requirements.



15.40.700   Development permit application—Streets not to be used as
water carriers.



15.40.710   Development permit application—Design procedures and
criteria.



15.40.720   Development permit application—Lowest permissible floor
elevations in residential structures.



15.40.730   Development permit application—Lowest permissible floor
elevations in nonresidential structures.



15.40.740   Development permit application—Manufactured homes and
manufactured home parks.



15.40.750   Development permit application—Recreational vehicles.



15.40.760   Development permit application—Base flood water surface
elevations to be indicated.



15.40.770   Development permit application—Information pertaining to
flood protection.



15.40.780   Development permit application—Minimizing the potential for
flood damage.



15.40.790   Development permit application—Stormwater detention or
retention.



Article V. Floodplain Administrator Powers and Duties



15.40.800   Permit review authority.



15.40.810   Review of base flood data.



15.40.820   Duty to maintain and obtain information.



15.40.830   Notification prior to alteration of watercourses.



15.40.840   New delineation of all floodplains when.



15.40.850   Interpretation of FIRM boundaries.



15.40.860   Action on violations.



15.40.870   Notice to county and flood control district when.



15.40.875   Other notices required.



Article VI. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction



15.40.880   Standards to be required.



15.40.890   Anchoring required.



15.40.900   Construction materials and methods.



15.40.910   Elevation and floodproofing requirements.



Article VII. Materials and Equipment Storage Standards



15.40.920   Prohibited storage.



15.40.930   Allowable storage.



Article VIII. Standards for Utilities



15.40.940   New and replacement water and sewage systems.



15.40.950   On-site waste disposal system.



15.40.960   Waste disposal systems.



Article IX. Standards for Subdivisions



15.40.970   Preliminary subdivision proposals.



15.40.980   Final subdivision plans.



15.40.990   Subdivision proposals in general.



15.40.1000   Adequate drainage required.



15.40.1010   Anchoring requirements.



15.40.1020   Standards to be met.



15.40.1030   Placement in floodway prohibited.



15.40.1035   Standards for recreational vehicles.



Article X. Floodways



15.40.1040   Provisions specific to.



15.40.1050   Encroachments prohibited with certain exception.



15.40.1060   Placement in prohibited.



15.40.1070   Compliance with flood hazard reduction provisions required.



15.40.1080   Standards for attached garages.



15.40.1090   Standards for detached garages.



Article XI. Variances and Appeals



15.40.1100   Appeals and requests for variances.



15.40.1110   Administrative error cause for hearing.



15.40.1120   Appeal to superior court when.



15.40.1130   Floodplain board to consider—Criteria.



15.40.1140   Granting of variance when.



15.40.1150   Conditions for issuance of variance.



15.40.1160   Records to be maintained.



15.40.1170   Exceptions.



15.40.1180   Variances denied when.



15.40.1190   Variances issued when.



15.40.1200   Conditions for issuance of variance.



15.40.1210   Written notice of variance issuance required.



Article XII. Storm Drainage



15.40.1220   Purpose of provisions.



15.40.1230   Conceptual drainage plan to be submitted—Contents.



15.40.1240   Subdivisions—Retention and collection facility requirements.



15.40.1250   Nonsubdivision developments—Retention and collection
facility requirements.



15.40.1260   Residential subdivisions—Preliminary hydrology report
required.



15.40.1270   Residential subdivisions—Final hydrology report required.



15.40.1280   Commercial and industrial developments—Reporting
requirements.



15.40.1290   Retention calculations to be submitted.



15.40.1300   Right of city to drain basin when.



15.40.1310   Assessment of drainage costs to city.



15.40.1320   Appeal to city—Terms and conditions.



15.40.1330   Service of notice to property owner.



15.40.1340   Lien for drainage of basin when.



Article I. Purpose of Provisions



15.40.010  Findings of fact.



   A.   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic
inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of tax
base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare.



   B.   These flood losses may be caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights
and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas.
Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from
flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code § 17-1-1)



15.40.020  Statement of purpose.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:



   A.   To protect human life and health;



   B.   To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood
control projects;



   C.   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated
with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;



   D.   To minimize prolonged business interruptions;



   E.   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as
water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard;



   F.   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound
use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize blight
areas caused by flooding;



   G.   To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is
in an area of special flood hazard;



   H.   To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood
hazard assume responsibility for their actions; and



   I.   To maintain eligibility for state disaster relief.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code § 17-1-2)



15.40.030  Purpose of provisions.



   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:



   A.   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;



   B.   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;



   C.   Controlling the alteration of natural flood plains, stream
channels and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
flood waters;



   D.   Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development
which may increase flood damage; and



   E.   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers
which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood
hazards in other areas.



(Prior code § 17-1-3)



Article II. Definitions



15.40.040  Rules of construction and interpretation—Definitions.



   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this
article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.



(Prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.045  Accessory structure, low-cost and small.



   “Accessory structure, low-cost and small” means a structure that is
both:



   A.   Solely for the parking of not more than two cars; or limited
storage (such as a small, low-cost shed); and



   B.   No more than four hundred eighty-four square feet and costs
less than three thousand dollars to construct.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007)



15.40.050  Appeal.



   “Appeal” means a request for review of the floodplain
administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article or a request
for a variance.



(Prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.060  Area of shallow flooding.



   “Area of shallow flooding” means a designated AO or AH Zone on a
community’s flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater
annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet, where a
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding may be characterized by ponding or sheet flow.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.070  Area of special flood hazard.



   “Area of special flood hazard” means the land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in
any given year. These areas are designated as Zone A, AE, AO, AH, and
A1–A30 on the FIRM and other areas determined by the criteria adopted by
the Director of the Arizona Department of Water Resources.  (See also
“Special flood hazard area.”)



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.080  Base flood.



   “Base flood” means the flood having a one percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the “ 100-year flood").



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.090  Base flood water surface elevation or base flood elevation.



   “Base flood water surface elevation or base flood elevation" means:



   A.   The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for Zones
AE, AH, A1–A30, VE and V1–V30 that indicates the water surface elevation
resulting from a flood that has a one percent or greater chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year ; however, when the city determines
that it has more accurate base flood water surface elevation data than the
data shown on the FIRMs, the more accurate data shall be used;



   B.   In a regulatory floodway outside the areas identified in
paragraph A. above, the base flood water surface elevations shall be those
determined by the floodplain delineation accomplished in accordance with the
criteria established by the Director of the Arizona Department of Water
Resources;



   C.   For those areas of the city which are not within a regulatory
floodway, the base flood water surface elevations shall be those which are
established by a drainage report submitted in accordance with the city's
requirements.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.095  Basement.



   “Basement” means any area of the building having its floor
sub-grade, i.e., below ground level, on all sides.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007)



15.40.100  Breakaway walls.



   “Breakaway walls” mean any type of walls, whether solid or lattice,
and whether constructed of concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic, or any
other suitable building material which are not a part of the structural
support of the building and which are so designed as to breakaway, during the
base flood, without damage to the structural integrity of the building on
which they are used or any structures to which they may be carried by
floodwaters.



(Prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.105  Building.



   See “structure.”



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007)



15.40.110  Critical feature.



   “Critical feature” means an integral and readily identifiable part
of a flood protection system without which the flood protection provided by
the entire system would be compromised.



(Prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.120  Development.



   “Development” means any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations, or storage of equipment or materials located within the area of
special flood hazard.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.125  Encroachment. 



   “Encroachment” means the advance or infringement of uses, plant
growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into
a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007)



15.40.127  Erosion.



   “Erosion” means the process of the gradual wearing away of
landmasses.  This peril is not, per se, covered under the program.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007)



15.40.130  Existing manufactured home park or subdivision.



   “Existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means a
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by the community.



(Prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.140  Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision.



   “Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured home
subdivision” means the preparation of additional sites by the construction
of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including the installation of utilities, either final site
grading or pouring of concrete pads, or the construction of streets).



(Prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.150  Financial assistance.



   “Financial assistance” means any form of loan, grant, guaranty,
insurance, payment, rebate, subsidy, disaster assistance loan or grant, or
any other form of direct or indirect federal assistance, other than a general
or special revenue sharing or formula grants made to states.



(Prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.160  Flood or flooding.



   “Flood or flooding” means a general and temporary condition of
partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:



   A.   The overflow of floodwaters;



   B.   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source; and/or



   C.   The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or
other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or
currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by
an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a
severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or
an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event
which results in flooding as defined in this definition.



(Prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.170  Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM).



   “Flood boundary and floodway map” means the official map on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or the Federal Insurance
Administration (FIA) has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards
and the floodway.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.180  Flood hazard Zones A, AE, AO and AH.



   “Flood hazard Zones A, AE, AO and AH” mean the areas on a FIRM
which the federal government has determined will be inundated during a one
hundred-year flood. These areas are called, collectively, “special flood
hazard areas.”



(Prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.190  Flood hazard Zone X shaded or Zone B.



   “Flood hazard Zone X shaded or Zone B” means an area on a FIRM
which is outside the special flood hazard areas, but is subject to inundation
during a five hundred-year flood to a depth of one foot.



(Prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.200  Flood hazard Zone X unshaded or Zone C.



   “Flood hazard Zone X unshaded or Zone C” is an area on a FIRM which
is outside both the special flood hazard areas and the Zone X shaded or Zone
B areas. It is described as an area of minimal flood hazard.



(Prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.210  Flood insurance rate map (FIRM).



   “Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)” means the official map on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or the Federal Insurance
Administration (FIA) has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards
and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.220  Flood insurance study.



   “Flood insurance study” means the official report provided by
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or the Federal Insurance
Administration (FIA) that includes flood profiles, the FIRM, the Flood
Boundary Floodway Map (FBFM), and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.230  Floodplain or flood-prone area.



   “Floodplain or flood-prone area” means any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source (see definition of “flooding”).



(Prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.240  Floodplain administrator.



   “Floodplain administrator” means the city manager who is authorized
by the floodplain board to administer and enforce the provisions of this
chapter, and to delegate authority to other officials in the city to take
such actions or grant or deny development permits in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.250  Floodplain board.



   “Floodplain board” means the city council of Casa Grande at such
times as they are engaged in the enforcement of this chapter.



(Prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.260  Floodplain management.



   “Floodplain management” means the operation of an overall program
of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and
preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the
floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood
control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.270  Floodplain management regulations.



   “Floodplain management regulations” means zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power which control
development in flood-prone areas. The term describes the federal, state or
local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the
purpose of prevention and reduction of flood loss and damage. 



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.280  Flood protection system.



   “Flood protection system” means those physical structural works for
which funds have been authorized, appropriated and expended, and which have
been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the
extent of the area within a community subject to a “special flood hazard”
and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically
includes dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying
works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.



(Prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.290  Floodproofing.



   “Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.



(Prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.300  Flood-related erosion.



   “Flood-related erosion” means the collapse or subsidence of land
along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining
caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or
suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as
a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and
unforeseeable event which results in flooding.



(Prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.310  Floodway.



   “Floodway” means the area of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.320  Functionally dependent use.



   “Functionally dependent use” means a use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are
necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship
building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage
or related manufacturing facilities.



(Prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.325  Hardship.



   “Hardship” means the exceptional hardship that would result from a
failure to grant a requested variance pursuant to Article XI of this
chapter.  A variance must be exceptional, unusual and peculiar to the
property involved.  Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not
exceptional.  Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps,
personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot,
as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be
resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the
alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build
elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended. 



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007)



15.40.330  Highest adjacent grade.



   “Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.



(Prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.335  Historic structure.



   “Historic structure” means any structure that is:



   A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places
(a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;



   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;



   C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of Interior; or



   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:



   1.   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or



   2.   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007)



15.40.340  Levee.



   “Levee” means a man-made structure, usually in an earthen
embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering
practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide
protection from temporary flooding.



(Prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.350  Levee system.



   “Levee system” means a flood protection system which consists of a
levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage
devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound
engineering practices.



(Prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.360  Lowest floor.



   “Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided
that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation
of the non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.



(Prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.370  Manufactured home.



   “Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational
vehicle.”



(Prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.380  Manufactured home park or subdivision.



   “Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots
for sale or rent.



(Prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.385  Market value.



   “Market value” shall be determined by estimating the cost to
replace the structure in new condition, and adjusting that cost figure by the
amount of depreciation which has accrued since the structure was constructed.



   A.   The cost of replacement of the structure shall be based on a
square foot cost factor determined by reference to a building cost estimating
guide recognized by the building construction industry.



   B.   The amount of depreciation shall be determined by taking into
account the age, physical deterioration and functional obsolescence of the
structure, as approved by the floodplain administrator, but shall not include
economic or other forms of external obsolescence.



   Use of replacement costs or accrued depreciation factors different from
those contained in recognized building cost estimating guides may be
considered, only if such factors are included in a report prepared by an
independent professional appraiser, and supported by a written explanation of
the differences.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007)



15.40.390  Mean sea level.



   “Mean sea level" means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations
shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.400  New construction.



   “New construction” means, for the purposes of determining insurance
rates, structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or
after the effective date of an initial flood insurance rate map, or after
December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, “new
construction" means structures for which the “start of construction”
commenced on or after the initial effective date of a floodplain management
regulation adopted by a community, and includes any subsequent improvements
to such structures.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.410  New manufactured home park or subdivision.



   “New manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations
adopted by a community.



(Prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.420  National flood insurance program regulations.



   “National flood insurance program regulations” means laws and
regulations pursuant to Section 206 of the Flood Protection Act of 1973
(Public Law 93-234), and in accordance with the National Flood Insurance Act
of 1968, as amended (Title XIII of the Housing and Urban Development Act of
1968, Public Law 90-448), 42 U.S.C. 40014128, and 44 C.F.R. Part 65.



(Prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.430  Person.



   “Person” means an individual or his agent, firm, partnership,
association or corporation, or agent of the aforementioned groups, or this
state or its agencies or political subdivisions.



(Prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.440  Deficiency.



   “Deficiency” means a defect in a community's floodplain management
regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective
implementation of those floodplain management regulations or of the NFIP
standards.



(Prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.445  Obstruction.



   “Obstruction” means any object, including but not limited to, any
dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection,
excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence,
rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in,
along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede,
retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due
to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the
flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007)



15.40.447  One hundred-year flood or 100-year flood.



   “One hundred-year flood or 100-year flood” means the flood having a
one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. See also
“base flood.”



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007)



15.40.450  Recreational vehicle.



   “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:



   A.   Built on a single chassis;



   B.   Four hundred square feet or less, when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;



   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a
light-duty truck;



   D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use;
and



   E.   Placed on a site for less than one hundred eighty days.



(Prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.460  Regulatory flood elevation (RFE).



   “Regulatory flood elevation” means an elevation one foot above the
base flood elevation for a watercourse, for which the base flood elevation
has been determined and shall be determined by the criteria developed by the
Director of the Arizona Department of Water Resources for all other
watercourses.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.465  Regulatory floodway.



   “Regulatory floodway” means the channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than a designated height.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007)



15.40.470  Remedy a violation.



   “Remedy a violation” means to bring the structure or other
development into compliance with state or local floodplain management
regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its
noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the
structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the
enforcement provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar
violations, or reducing federal financial exposure with regard to the
structure or other development.



(Prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.480  Riverine.



   “Riverine” means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river
(including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.



(Prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.490  Special flood hazard area.



   “Special flood hazard area” means an area in the floodplain subject
to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.  It is
shown on a flood boundary and floodway map or flood insurance rate map as
Zone A, AO, A1–A30, AE, A99 or AH .



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.500  Start of construction.



   “Start of construction” means and includes substantial improvement,
and means the date the building permit was issued; provided the actual start
of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was
within one hundred eighty days of the permit date. The actual start means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on the
site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units
or not a part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.510  Structure.



   “Structure” means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or
liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a
manufactured home.



(Prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.515  Substantial damage.



   “Substantial damage" means:



   A.   Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost
of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred; or



   B.   Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate
occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time
of each such event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty-five percent of
the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.  This is also
known as “repetitive loss.”



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007)



15.40.520  Substantial improvement.



   “Substantial improvement” means any repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure
before the start of construction of the improvement. The term does not,
however, include either:



   A.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official, and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or



   B.   Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
“historic structure.”



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.530  Variance



   “Variance” means a grant of relief from the requirements of this
chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.



(Prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.540  Violation.



   “Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development
to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations.
A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is
presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.



(Prior code Art. 17-2 (part))



15.40.545  Water surface elevation.



   “Water surface elevation” means the height, in relation to the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical
Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, of floods of various magnitudes and
frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007)



15.40.547  Watercourse.



   “Watercourse” means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo,
channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least
periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which
substantial flood damage may occur. 



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007)



Article III. Applicability, General Provisions and Requirements



15.40.550  Applicability.



   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within
the corporate limits of the city.



(Prior code § 17-3-1)



15.40.560  Basis for designating areas of special flood hazard.



   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance
Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled, “The Flood
Insurance Study for the City of Casa Grande, Pinal County, Arizona,” dated
September 1989, with accompanying Flood Insurance Studies and accompanying
Flood Insurance Rate Map, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions
thereto, including but not limited to those anticipated to occur on December
4, 2007, is adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
The Flood Insurance Study is on file at the office of the city clerk, 510
East Florence Boulevard, Casa Grande, Arizona. The Flood Insurance Study is
the minimum area of applicability of this chapter, and may be supplemented by
studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter, and which
are recommended to the floodplain board by the floodplain administrator. 
The floodplain board, within its area of jurisdiction, shall delineate (or
may, by rule, require developers of land to delineate) for areas where
development is ongoing or imminent, and thereafter as development becomes
imminent, floodplains consistent with the criteria developed by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency and the Director of the Arizona Department of
Water Resources. 



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code § 17-3-2)



15.40.570  Compliance required.



   All development of land, construction of residential, commercial or
industrial structures, or future development within delineated floodplain
areas, is subject to the terms of this chapter and other applicable
regulations.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code § 17-3-3)



15.40.580  Authority of provisions.



   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this
chapter and another chapter, ordinance, easement, covenant or deed
restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.



(Prior code § 17-3-4)



15.40.590  Interpretation and application of provisions.



   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions
shall be:



   A.   Considered as minimum requirements;



   B.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and



   C.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under state statutes.



(Prior code § 17-3-5)



15.40.600  City held harmless.



   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the city, the state of Arizona, the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, the Federal Insurance Administration, or
any officer or employer thereof, for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter or an administrative decision lawfully made
hereunder.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code § 17-3-6)



15.40.610  Statutory exemptions.



   A.   In accordance with A.R.S. § 48-3609, nothing in this chapter
shall:



   1.   Affect existing uses of property or the right to continuation
of the use under conditions which existed on the initial effective date of
this chapter except:



   a.    If a nonconforming use of land or a building or structure is
discontinued for twelve months, or destroyed to the extent of fifty percent
of its value as determined by a competent appraiser, any further use shall
comply with this article and regulations of the city council; and



   b.   The requirements for manufactured homes, mobile homes and
recreational vehicles;



   2.   Affect reasonable repair or alteration of property for the
purposes for which the property was used on the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this chapter (August 3, 1984), or any additional
regulations affecting such property take effect, except that any alteration,
addition or repair to a nonconforming building or structure which would
result in increasing its flood damage potential by fifty percent or more
shall be either floodproofed or elevated to or above the regulatory flood
elevation; and provided the repair or alteration does not decrease the
carrying capacity of the watercourse;



   3.   Affect reasonable repair of structures constructed with the
written authorization required by A.R.S. § 48-3613;



   4.   Affect or apply to facilities constructed or installed pursuant
to a certificate of environmental compatibility issued under the authority of
Title 40, Chapter 2, Article 6.2.



   B.   In accordance with A.R.S. § 48-3613, written authorization
shall not be required, nor shall the floodplain board prohibit:



   1.   The construction of bridges, culverts, dikes and other
structures necessary to the construction of public highways, roads and
streets intersecting a watercourse;



   2.   The construction of storage dams for watering livestock or
wildlife, structures on the banks of a creek, stream, river, wash, arroyo or
other watercourse to prevent erosion of or damage to adjoining land, if the
structure will not divert, retard or obstruct the natural channel of the
watercourse or dams for the conservation of floodwaters as permitted by Title
45, Chapter 6;



   3.   Construction of tailing dams and waste disposal areas for use
in connection with mining and metallurgical operations. This subdivision does
not exempt those sand and gravel operations which will divert, retard or
obstruct the flow of waters in any watercourse from any provisions of this
chapter or other regulations adopted by the floodplain board;



   4.   Any flood control district, county, city, town or other
political subdivision, from exercising powers granted to it under A.R.S.
Title 48, Chapter 21.



   5.   The construction of streams, waterways, lakes and other
auxiliary facilities in conjunction with development of public parks and
recreation facilities by a public agency or political subdivision;



   6.   The construction and erection of poles, towers, foundations,
support structures, guy wires and other facilities related to power
transmission as constructed by any utility, whether a public service
corporation or a political subdivision; and



   7.   Other construction upon determination by the floodplain board
that written authorization is unnecessary.



   C.   Before any construction authorized by this section may begin,
the responsible person must submit plans for the construction to the board
for review and comment.



   D.   These exemptions do not preclude any person from liability if
that person's actions increase flood hazards to any other person or property.



   E.   In addition to other penalties or remedies otherwise provided
by law, this state, a political subdivision or a person who may be damaged or
has been damaged as a result of the unauthorized diversion, retardation or
obstruction of a watercourse has the right to commence, maintain and
prosecute any appropriate action or pursue any remedy to enjoin, abate or
otherwise prevent any person from violating, or continuing to violate, this
section or regulations adopted pursuant to this article.  If a person is
found to be in violation of this section, the court shall require the
violator to either comply with this section, if authorized by the floodplain
board, or remove the obstruction and restore the watercourse to its original
state.  The court may also award such monetary damages as are appropriate to
the injured parties resulting from the violation, including reasonable costs
and attorney fees.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code § 17-3-7)



15.40.620  Structure declared public nuisance when.



   All new development located or maintained within any area of special
flood hazard after August 8, 1973, in violation of this chapter is a public
nuisance per se, and may be abated, prevented or restrained by action of this
political subdivision.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code § 17-3-8)



15.40.630  Procedures to abate violations.



   Within thirty days of discovery of a violation of this chapter, the
floodplain administrator shall submit a report to the floodplain board, which
shall include all information available to the floodplain administrator which
is pertinent to the violation. Within thirty days of receipt, the floodplain
board shall either:



   A.   Take any necessary action to effect the abatement of such
violation;



   B.   Issue a variance to this chapter in accordance with the
provisions of Article XI of this chapter,



   C.   Order the owner of the property upon which the violation exists
to provide whatever additional information as may be required for the
board’s determination to the floodplain administrator within thirty days of
such order, and he shall submit an amended report to the floodplain board
within twenty days. At their next regularly scheduled public meeting, the
floodplain board shall either order the abatement of the violation, or it
shall grant a variance in accordance with the provisions of Article XI of
this chapter;



   D.   Submit to the administrator of the Federal Emergency Management
Agency or the Federal Insurance Administration a decision for denial of
insurance, stating that the property is in violation of a cited state or
local law, regulation or ordinance, pursuant to Section 1316 of the National
Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code § 17-3-9)



15.40.640  Unlawful acts.



   A.   It is unlawful for any person to engage in any development, or
to divert, retard or obstruct the flow of waters in a watercourse, if it
creates a hazard to life or property, without securing the written
authorization required by A.R.S. § 48-3613.  Where the watercourse is a
delineated floodplain, it is unlawful to engage in any development affecting
the flow of waters without securing written authorization required by A.R.S.
§ 48-3613 .



   B.   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. Each day that a violation continues shall be
a separate offense punishable as hereinabove described.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code § 17-3-10)



15.40.650  Intergovernmental agreements.



   With the concurrence of the city council, the mayor shall be authorized
to enter into agreements between the city and other political subdivisions,
county and state agencies to coordinate floodplain management.



(Prior code § 17-3-11)



Article IV. Permits, Reports and Procedural Requirements



15.40.660  Development permit required prior to construction or development.



   A.   A development permit shall be obtained before construction or
development begins, including placement of manufactured homes, within any
area of special flood hazard established in Section 15.40.560. Applications
for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the floodplain
administrator and may include, but not be limited to, plans, in duplicate and
drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevation of the
area in question; existing of proposed structures, fill, storage of
materials, drainage facilities and the location of the foregoing.
Specifically, at least the following information shall be required:



   1.   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest
floor (including basement) of all structures. In Zone AO, elevation of
existing highest adjacent natural grade, and proposed elevation of lowest
floor of all structures;



   2.   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure will be floodproofed;



   3.   Certification by a registered professional engineer or
architect that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure
meet the floodproofing criteria of this chapter;



   4.   Base flood elevation data for subdivision proposals or other
development greater than the lesser of fifty lots or five acres; and



   5.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be
altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.



   B.   Reports, construction plans, and other data submitted in
support of an application for a permit shall comply with the criteria as set
out in Sections 15.40.670 through 15.40.790 of this article.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code § 17-41 (part))



15.40.670  Development permit application—Drainage reports required.



   When a drainage report is required, it must be prepared and sealed by a
civil engineer registered as a professional engineer in the state of Arizona,
and it must be prepared in accordance with the criteria established by the
city. The purpose of the report is to analyze the effect that a proposed
development would have upon the rainfall runoff in the vicinity of the
development, to provide data to ensure that the development is designed to be
protected from flooding, and to provide data supporting the design of
facilities to be constructed for the management of rainfall runoff. Each
drainage report must consider rainfall runoff from storms with a return
frequency up to and including a one hundred-year storm. The complexity of the
report depends upon the nature of the development and the site on which the
development will occur. A drainage report shall be submitted by an applicant
requesting one of the following:



   A.   Approval of a subdivision plat or a horizontal regime;



   B.   A permit for grading, unless the requirement is waived by the
floodplain administrator;



   C.   A permit to construct right-of-way improvements;



   D.   A permit to construct any structure.



(Prior code 17-4-1 (A))



15.40.680  Development permit application—Drainage patterns.



   Rainfall runoff from storms of all return frequencies should enter and
depart from property after its development in substantially the same manner
as under predevelopment conditions. Any proposals to modify drainage patterns
must be fully justified by engineering data which shall demonstrate to the
floodplain administrator that hazards to life and property will not be
increased by the proposed modifications. Proposed modifications are such that
they will not alter a floodway in a manner which will raise the estimated
base floodwater surface elevation or will increase flooding hazards upstream
or downstream of the altered portion of the floodway.



(Prior code 17-4-1 (B))



15.40.690  Development permit requirements—Street crossing at canal
requirements.



   A.   The crossing structure requirements listed below will normally
apply; however, the engineer may depart from these requirements if he can
demonstrate to the floodplain administrator's satisfaction that they are
inappropriate because of the type of development or the nature of the terrain
or natural area development requirements would be violated. In extreme cases,
it may be necessary to allow for the entire channel flow to pass over the
road.



   1.   Local and minor collector streets shall have a culvert or
bridge which is capable of carrying all of the park flow of runoff from a
two-year frequency storm beneath the roadway and which is also capable of
carrying enough of the peak flow of runoff from a ten-year frequency storm
beneath the roads so that the portion of the flow over the road is no more
than six inches deep.



   2.   Major collector and major or minor arterial streets shall have
a culvert or bridge which is capable of carrying all of the peak flow of
runoff from a ten-year frequency storm beneath the roadway and which is also
capable of carrying enough of the peak flow of runoff from a twenty-five-year
frequency storm so that the portion of the flow over the road is no more than
six inches deep.



   3.   Watercourse crossings for roads shall be designed so that all
lots and structures within a development will be accessible from the boundary
of that development by at least one route during the period of peak flow by
runoff from a one-hundred-year frequency storm. The boundary shall include
any adjacent street or streets.  Accessibility will be considered to exist
if it can be demonstrated by the engineer that at the time of the peak flow
the depth of flow over the road will be no greater than one foot.



   B.   Regardless of the size of the culvert or bridge, the street
crossing should be designed to convey the one-hundred-year storm runoff flow
under and/or over the road to the area downstream of the crossing to which
the flow would have gone in the absence of the street crossing. The
construction of a channel crossing must not cause the diversion of drainage
flows except when that diversion is part of an approved plan for modification
of drainage patterns.



(Prior code 17-4-1 (C))



15.40.700  Development permit application—Streets not to be used as water
carriers.



   It is expected that streets will carry water from adjacent property and
from local areas, but they are not to be used as major water carriers in lieu
of natural washes or man-made channels. The maximum depth for water flowing
in any street shall be eight inches during the peak runoff from a
one-hundred-year frequency storm. The above requirements imply that in some
cases water may flow deeper than normal vertical curb height and may flow for
a short distance over a sidewalk or other back-of-curb areas, but the flow of
the water shall always be confined to the road right-of-way or to drainage
easements. Particular care must be taken in street sag locations to ensure
that these requirements are met. Catch basins, scuppers, or similar
facilities, together with the necessary channels, must be provided at
appropriate locations to remove water flowing in the streets so as not to
exceed the above described depth limit.



(Prior code 17-4-1 (D))



15.40.710  Development permit application—Design procedures and criteria.



   The design procedures and criteria to be used shall be in accordance
with those prepared and published by the city.



(Prior code 17-4-1 (E))



15.40.720  Development permit application—Lowest permissible floor
elevations in residential structures.



   A.   In flood hazard Zones A and AE, a new residential structure or
the substantial improvement of an existing residential structure shall have
its lowest floor constructed at an elevation which is at least one foot above
the base flood water surface elevation in the vicinity of the proposed
construction site.



   B.   In flood hazard Zone AO, a new residential structure or
substantial improvement of an existing residential structure shall have its
lowest floor constructed at an elevation which is at least one foot above the
elevation determined by finding the elevation of the highest natural ground
adjacent to where the structure will be located and adding to that elevation
the depth number specified on the FIRM for that AO Zone.



   C.   In areas designated as flood hazard Zones X shaded, or Zone B,
and Zone X unshaded or Zone C on the FIRM's which are not in regulatory
floodway, a new residential structure (single- or multifamily) shall be
constructed according to one of the two following requirements, except when
the conditions of subsection C.5 below apply:



   1.   The lowest floor shall be constructed at an elevation which is
one foot above the base flood water surface elevation;



   2.   The lowest floor may be constructed below the base flood water
surface elevation, but flood proofing shall be provided for the structure to
an elevation which is at least one foot above the base flood water surface
elevation.



   D.   In flood hazard Zones X shaded or Zone B and Zones X unshaded
or Zone C, those single-family residential structures which are to be built
without a basement and located at a site which the floodplain administrator
has determined will not be in the vicinity of a watercourse in which the
floor of rainfall runoff might be hazardous to the structure or its
occupants, the elevation of the lowest floor may be established by one of the
methods described in the subdivisions 1, 2 and 3 below.



   1.   If the structure is to be located in flood hazard Zone X shaded
or Zone B, the lowest floor may be set at an elevation which is fourteen
inches above the high point of the natural ground within the area bound by a
ten-foot perimeter offset from the structure.



   2.   If the structure is to be located in flood hazard Zone X
unshaded or Zone C, the lowest floor may be set at an elevation which is
fourteen inches above the high point of the natural ground within the area
bound by a ten-foot perimeter offset from the structure.



   3.   The floor elevations chosen for the residence may be indicated
on a topographic plan of the building site parcel which shows the
construction pad site and any grading proposed on the parcel. This plan must
be prepared and sealed by a civil engineer or architect registered as a
professional engineer or architect in the state of Arizona. The floor
elevation(s) indicated on the plan are to be elevations considered by the
engineer or architect sufficiently high to provide protection in the event of
flooding caused by a one-hundred-year storm.



   E.   A residential structure to be built adjacent to but not within
a regulatory floodway that will have its lowest floor at an elevation lower
than one foot above the base floodwater surface elevation in the adjacent
regulatory floodway must be flood proofed to an elevation at least one foot
above the base floodwater surface elevation.



   F.   In flood hazard Zones AO and A, a depressed floor area shall be
the lowest floor unless there is an area in the structure with a lower floor
such as a basement.



   G.   In areas designated as flood hazard Zone X shaded or Zone B,
and Zone X unshaded or Zone C on the FIRM's which are not in regulatory
floodway, a depressed floor area does not have to be considered as the lowest
floor if there is no door opening directly to the outside which could admit
floodwater into the depressed floor area and if the depressed area walls and
floor are sealed to prevent the infiltration of water into the depressed area.



(Prior code 17-4-1 (F))



15.40.730  Development permit application—Lowest permissible floor
elevations in nonresidential structures.



   A.   In flood hazard Zones A and AE, a new nonresidential structure
or the substantial improvement of an existing nonresidential structure shall
be constructed according to one of the two following requirements:



   1.   The lowest floor shall be constructed at an elevation which is
at least one foot above the base floodwater surface elevation in the vicinity
of the proposed construction site;



   2.   The lowest floor may be constructed below an elevation which is
one foot above the base floodwater surface elevation, but flood proofing
shall be provided for the structure to an elevation which is at least one
foot above the base floodwater surface elevation.



   B.   In flood hazard Zone AO, a new nonresidential structure or the
substantial improvement of an existing nonresidential structure shall be
constructed according to one of the following requirements:



   1.   The lowest floor shall be constructed at an elevation which is
at least one foot above the elevation determined by finding the elevation of
the highest ground adjacent to where the structure will be located and adding
to that elevation the depth number specified on the FIRM for that AO Zone;



   2.   The lowest floor may be constructed below the minimum lowest
floor elevation specified in subdivision B.1 above, but flood proofing shall
be provided for the structure to an elevation which is at least as high as
the minimum lowest floor elevation determined by the method in subdivision
B.1 above.



   C.   In areas designated as flood hazard Zones X shaded or Zone B
and Zone X unshaded or Zone C on the FIRM's which are not only in a
regulatory floodway, a new nonresidential structure or the substantial
improvement of an existing nonresidential structure shall be constructed
according to one of the two following requirements:



   1.   The lowest floor shall be constructed at an elevation which is
at or above the base floodwater surface elevation;



   2.   The lowest floor may be constructed below the elevation of the
base floodwater surface elevation but flood proofing shall be provided for
the structure to an elevation which is at least as high as the base
floodwater surface elevation.



   D.   Certification by a registered professional engineer or
architect that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure
meet the floodproofing criteria in 15.40.910(C).



(Prior code 17-4- 1 (G))



15.40.740  Development permit application—Manufactured homes and home
parks.



   A.   The new installation of a manufactured home within a regulatory
floodway is prohibited except existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions



   B.   The new installation of a manufactured home or the replacement
of an existing manufactured home outside the special flood hazard areas must
be done in a manner that assures that the manufactured home is anchored to
the earth so as to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement in the
event of flooding.



   C.   A manufactured home to be installed in a new location or as a
replacement for an existing manufactured home in flood hazard Zones A, AE,
and AO shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement
by providing over-the-top and frame ties to ground anchors. The following
specific requirements must be met:



   1.   Over-the-top ties must be provided at each of the four corners
of the manufactured home. Manufactured homes fifty feet or more in length
must have two additional over-the-top ties per side at intermediate
locations, and manufactured homes less than fifty feet in length require only
one additional over-the-top tie per side;



   2.   Frame ties must be provided at each of the four corners of the
manufactured home. Manufactured homes fifty feet or more in length must have
two additional frame ties per side, and manufactured homes less than fifty
feet in length must have one additional frame tie per side;



   4.   All components of the anchoring system must be capable of
resisting forces of at least four thousand eight hundred pounds;



   5.   Any additions to a manufactured home must be similarly anchored.



   D.   The owners of the manufactured home parks that are located
within special flood hazard areas shall have evacuation plans prepared
indicating alternate vehicular access and escape routes. These plans shall be
filed with, and approved by both, the State Disaster Preparedness Office and
with the city engineer.



   E.   A manufactured home which is located in flood hazard zones A,
AE or AO may be replaced by another manufactured home only if:



   1.   The manufactured home which is to be replaced was not damaged
by the flood;



   2.   The replacement manufactured home is elevated so that the
bottom of the structural frame or at the lowest point of any attached
appliances, whichever is lower, is at or above an elevation which is one foot
above the base flood water surface elevation.



(Prior code 17-4-1 (H))



15.40.750  Development permit application—Recreational vehicles.



   Recreational vehicles which are placed in flood hazard Zones A, AE or
AO shall either be fully licensed and ready for highway use or meet the
requirements for manufactured homes. A recreational vehicle is ready for
highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick disconnect-type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions.



(Prior code 17-4-1 (I))



15.40.760  Development permit application—Base floodwater surface
elevations to be indicated.



   The grading and drainage plans for any development adjacent to a
regulatory floodway and the grading and drainage plans for any development
which proposes to modify an existing regulatory floodway as a part of the
development must indicate the base flood water surface elevations.



(Prior code 17-4-1 (J))



15.40.770  Development permit application—Information pertaining to flood
protection.



   The following subsections describe requirements for information which
shall be placed on building plans for both residential and nonresidential
structures. Depending upon the type of structure and its location, one or
more of the following subsections will apply:



   A.   The proposed elevation of the lowest floor must be shown,
regardless of the type of structure or its location;



   B.   If the structure is to be built in flood hazard zone A, the
base floodwater surface elevation must be shown;



   C.   If the structure is to be built in flood hazard zone AO, the
elevation of the highest ground adjacent to the structure and the depth
number for the AO Zone must be shown;



   D.   If the lowest floor is to be established by the use of
subsections 15.40.720(D)(1) or (2), the elevation of the highest point of the
natural ground within the area bound by a ten foot perimeter offset from the
structure must be shown.



(Prior code 17-4-1 (K))



15.40.780  Development permit application—Minimizing the potential for
flood damage.



   Within any area of the city where the floodplain administrator
determines that the land is subject to flooding, including but not limited to
the special flood hazard areas, all development, including substantial
improvements to structures, must meet the following requirements:



   A.   All structures shall be anchored at their foundations to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement;



   B.   Building construction materials and utility system equipment
shall be resistant to flood damage. Electrical, heating, ventilation,
plumbing and airconditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be
designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding;



   C.   The construction methods and practices shall be those which
minimize flood damage;



   D.   Multiple occupancy developments, such as subdivisions, shopping
centers, etc., shall have their public utility systems, such as sewer, water,
gas and electric lines, and their associated facilities located and
constructed in a manner to minimize or eliminate the potential for flood
damage. The developments must be constructed with drainage systems which will
minimize the exposure to flood damage;



   E.   New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed and
constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
systems and the discharge of sewage into the floodwaters;



   F.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
systems and the discharge of sewage into the floodwaters.



(Prior code 17-4-1 (L))



15.40.790  Development permit application—Stormwater detention or
retention.



   A.   Except as noted below, the development of land within the city
must include provisions for the management of stormwater runoff from the
property which is to be developed. This management shall consist of the
construction of stormwater detention systems or retention basins. Stormwater
detention systems must provide peak rates of runoff flow from the same
property under natural conditions with no development. If a suitable outlet
for a detention system is not available or if engineering analysis indicates
that available outlet systems would be overtaxed by a detention system
outflow, a stormwater retention basin shall be constructed in lieu of a
detention system. The requirement for construction of a detention system or a
retention basin is waived in the following cases:



   1.   An application for a building permit to construct a
single-family residential structure;



   2.   Development adjacent to a floodway or a drainage channel which
has been determined by the city's project review manager to have been
designed and constructed to handle the additional runoff flow without
increasing the potential for flood damage on downstream property;



   B.   Stormwater detention and retention facilities shall be designed
and constructed according to the procedures and criteria established in
Article XII. No detention or retention basin shall retain standing water
longer than thirty-six hours if the basin has not been designed and
constructed to be a permanent body of water with appropriate health, safety
and water quality measures for such a body of water.



(Prior code 17-4-1 (M))



Article V. Floodplain Administrator Powers and Duties



15.40.800  Permit review authority.



   The floodplain administrator shall:



   A.   Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;



   B.   Ensure that all other required state and federal permits have
been obtained;



   C.   Review all permits to determine that the site is reasonably
safe from flooding;



   D.   Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development adversely affects the flood-carrying capacity of the floodway, or
of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has
not been designated. For purposes of this chapter, "adversely affects" means
that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.



   E.   Develop procedures for identifying and administering
requirements for substantial improvement and substantial damage;



   F.   Assure that all procedures detailed in this chapter are
coordinated with other city departments and divisions and implemented by
staff.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code 17-4-2.1)



15.40.810  Review of base flood data.



   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with
Section 15.40.560, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any base flood data available from a federal, state or
other source, in order to administer Article VI. Any such information shall
be consistent with the requirements of the Federal Emergency Management
Agency and the Director of the Arizona Department of Water Resources, and
shall be submitted to the floodplain board for adoption.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code 17-4-2.2)



15.40.820  Duty to maintain and obtain information.



   The floodplain administrator shall obtain and maintain for public
inspection and make available as needed for flood insurance policies:



   A.   The certified elevation required in subsection 15.40.910(A);



   B.   The certification required in subsection 15.40.910(B);



   C.   The floodproofing certification required in subsection
15.40.910(C);



   D.   The certified elevation required in Section 15.40.980.



   E.   The flood vent certification required in subsection
15.40.910(D);



   F.   The floodway encroachment certification required in subsection
15.40.1050;



   G.   Maintain a record of all variance actions, including
justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its
biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency; and



   H.   Obtain and maintain improvement calculations required by this
chapter.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code 17-4-2.3)



15.40.830  Notification prior to alteration of watercourses.



   The floodplain administrator shall:



   A.   Notify adjacent communities and the Arizona Department of Water
Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit
evidence of such notification to the Federal Management Agency through
appropriate means; and



   B.   Require and assure that the flood-carrying capacity of the
altered or relocated portion of the watercourse is maintained.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code 17-42.4)



15.40.840  New delineation of all floodplains and elevations when.



   A.   Within one hundred twenty days after completion of construction
of any flood control protective works which changes the rate of flow during
the flood or the configuration of the floodplain upstream or downstream from
or adjacent to the project, the person or agency responsible for installation
of the project shall provide to the governing bodies of all jurisdictions
affected by the project a new delineation of all floodplains affected by the
project. The new delineation shall be done according to the criteria adopted
by the Director of the Arizona Department of Water Resources.



   B.   Base flood elevations may increase or decrease resulting from
physical changes affecting flooding conditions.  As soon as practicable, but
not later than six months after the date such information becomes available,
the floodplain administrator shall notify the Federal Emergency Management
Agency of the changes by submitting technical or scientific data in
accordance with 44 C.F.R. § 65.3.  Such a submission is necessary so that,
upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions,
risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements will be based upon
current data.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code 17-4-2.5)



15.40.850  Interpretation of FIRM boundaries.



   The floodplain administrator shall make interpretations where needed,
as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood
hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped
boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of
the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the
interpretation as provided in Article XI.



(Prior code 17-4-2.6)



15.40.860  Action on violations.



   The floodplain administrator shall take actions on violations of this
chapter as required in Section 15.40.630 of this chapter.



(Prior code 17-4-2.7)



15.40.870  Notice to county flood control district when.



   The floodplain administrator shall advise the flood control district of
Pinal County and any adjunct jurisdiction having responsibility for
floodplain management in writing, and provide a copy of development plan of
all applications for floodplain use permits or variances to develop land in a
floodplain or floodway within one mile of the corporate limits of the city.
Also, advise the flood control district of Pinal County in writing, and
provide a copy of any development plan of any major development proposed
within a floodplain or floodway which could affect floodplains, floodways or
watercourses within the district's area of jurisdiction. Written notice and a
copy of the plan of development shall be sent to the district no later than
three working days after having been received by the district



(Prior code 17-4-2.8)



15.40.875  Other notices required. 



   A.   The floodplain administrator shall notify the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and the Arizona Department of Water Resources of
acquisition, by means of annexation, incorporation or otherwise, of
additional areas of jurisdiction.



   B.   The floodplain administrator shall complete and submit a
biennial report to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007)



Article VI. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction



15.40.880  Standards to be required.



   In all areas of special flood hazards, the standards set out in
Sections 15.40.890 through 15.40.910 are required.



(Prior code § 17-5-1)



15.40.890  Anchoring required.



   A.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy.



   B.   All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of
Section 15.40.1010.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code § 17-5-1.1)



15.40.900  Construction materials and methods.



   A.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.



   B.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.



   C.   All new construction, substantial improvement and other
proposed new development shall be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service
facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from
entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding;
and



   D.   Within Zones AH or AO, adequate drainage paths shall be
constructed around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away
from proposed structures.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code § 17-5-1.2)



15.40.910  Elevation and floodproofing requirements.



   A.   Residential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall
have the lowest floor, including basement:



   1.   In an AO Zone, elevated to or above the regulatory flood
elevation, or elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if
no depth number is specified;



   2.   In an A Zone where a base flood elevation has not been
determined, elevated to or above the regulatory flood elevation, or elevated
in accordance with the criteria developed by the Director of the Arizona
Department of Water Resources;



   3.   In Zones AE, AH and A1–A30, elevated to or above the
regulatory flood elevation.



   B.   Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest
floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered professional
engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community's building inspector to
be properly elevated.  Such certification and verification shall be provided
to the floodplain administrator.



   C.   Nonresidential construction, whether new or substantial, shall
either be elevated in conformance with subsections A. and B. of this section,
or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities:



   1.   Be floodproofed so that below the regulatory flood level the
structure is watertight, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water;



   2.   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and



   3.   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certifications
shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.



   D.   All new construction and substantial improvements with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding (excluding
basements and areas that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building
access or storage) shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by
a registered professional engineer or architect to meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:



   1.   A minimum of two openings, on differing sides of each area,
having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square
foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided;



   2.   The bottom of an openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade;



   3.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters.



   If it is not feasible or desirable to meet the openings criteria stated
above, a registered engineer or architect may design and certify the openings.



   E.   Manufactured homes shall meet the above standards and also the
standards of Sections 15.40.1010 through 15.40.1030.



   F.   Garages and low-cost accessory structures shall meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria:



   1.   A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with
the garage floor slab below the regulatory flood elevation, must be designed
to allow for the automatic entry of flood waters as set forth in subsection
15,40.910(c).  Areas of the garage below the regulatory flood elevation must
be constructed with flood-resistant materials.



   2.   A garage attached to a nonresidential structure must meet the
above requirements or be dry floodproofed.



   3.   An accessory structure used solely for parking (two-car
detached garages or smaller) or limited storage (small, low-cost sheds) may
be constructed such that its floor is below the regulatory flood elevation,
provided the structure is designed and constructed in accordance with the
following requirements:



   a.   Use of the accessory structure must be limited to parking or
limited storage;



   b.   The portions of the accessory structure located below the
regulatory flood elevation must be built using flood-resistant materials;



   c.   The accessory structure must be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse and lateral movement;



   d.   Any mechanical and utility equipment in the accessory structure
must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the regulatory flood elevation;



   e.   The accessory structure must comply with floodplain
encroachment provisions in Article X.



   Detached garages and accessory structures not meeting the above
standards must be constructed in accordance with all applicable standards in
this section.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code § 17-5-1.3)



Article VII. Materials and Equipment Storage Standards



15.40.920  Prohibited storage.



   The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding,
buoyant, flammable, explosive, or could be injurious to human, animal or
plant life is prohibited in special flood hazard areas.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code § 17-5-2.1)



15.40.930  Allowable storage.



   Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not subject to
major damage by floods and if firmly anchored to prevent flotation or if
readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning.



(Prior code § 17-5-2.2)



Article VIII. Standards for Utilities



15.40.940  New and replacement water and sewage systems.



   All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall
be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
system and discharge from systems into floodwaters.



(Prior code § 17-5-3.1)



15.40.950  On-site waste disposal system.



   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding.



(Prior code § 17-5-3.2)



15.40.960  Waste disposal systems.



   Waste disposal systems shall not be installed wholly or partially in a
floodway.



(Prior code § 17-5- 3.3)



Article IX. Standards for Subdivisions



15.40.970  Preliminary subdivision proposals.



   All new subdivision proposals and other proposed development (including
proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions), greater than fifty
lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, shall identify the flood hazard
area and the elevation of the base flood.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code § 17-5-4.1)



15.40.980  Final subdivision plans.



   All new subdivision plans and plans for other proposed development
(including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions), greater
than fifty lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, shall provide on its
final subdivision plans the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pads. If
the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the final lowest floor and
grade elevations shall be certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or registered land surveyor and provided to the floodplain
administrator.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code § 17-5-4.2)



15.40.990  Subdivision proposals in general.



   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.



(Prior code § 17-5-4.3)



15.40.1000  Adequate drainage required.



   All subdivision proposals shall be reviewed to assure that adequate
drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.



(Prior code § 17-5-4.4)



15.40.1010  Anchoring requirements.



   All manufactured homes, additions to manufactured homes, and
substantial improvements thereto, shall be elevated so that the bottom of the
structural frame, or the lowest point of any attached appliances, whichever
is lower, is at or above the regulatory flood elevation, and shall be
anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement by one of the
following methods:



   A.   By providing an anchoring system designed to withstand
horizontal forces of twenty-five pounds per square foot and uplift forces of
fifteen pounds per square foot, or such greater amount as may be required by
law; or



   B.   By providing over-the-top and frame ties to ground anchors,
specifically:



   1.   Over-the-top ties be provided to each of the four corners of
the manufactured home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate
locations, except that manufactured homes less than fifty feet long require
only one additional tie per side;



   2.   Frame ties be provided at each of the four corners of the
manufactured home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate
locations, except that manufactured homes less than fifty feet long require
only one additional tie per side;



   3.   All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a
force of four thousand eight hundred pounds, or such greater amount as may be
required by law.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code § 17-5-5.1)



15.40.1020  Standards to be met.



   The following standards are required for all new and replacement
manufactured homes:



   A.   Adequate surface drainage and access for a hauler shall be
provided;



   B.   All manufactured homes shall be placed on pads or lots elevated
on compacted fill or on pilings so that the bottom of the structural frame,
or the lowest point of any attached appliances, whichever is lower, is one
foot above the regulatory flood elevation. If elevated on pilings:



   1.   The lots shall be large enough to permit steps,



   2.   The pilings shall be placed in a stable soil no more than ten
feet apart, and



   3.   Reinforcement shall be provided for pilings more than six feet
above ground level.



(Prior code § 17-5-5.2)



15.40.1030  Placement in floodway prohibited.



   No manufactured home shall be placed in a floodway except in existing
manufactured home parks or subdivisions.



(Prior code § 17-5-5.3)



15.40.1035  Standards for recreational vehicles.



   A.   Be on site for fewer than one hundred eighty consecutive days;
or



   B.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational
vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is
attached to the site only by quick disconnect-type utilities and security
devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or



   C.   Meet the permit requirements of this chapter and the elevation
and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007)



Article X. Floodways



15.40.1040  Provisions specific to.



   Locations within areas of special flood hazard established in Section
15.40.560 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry
debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the provisions set out
in Sections 15.40.1040 through 15.40.1080 apply.



(Prior code § 17-5-6 (part))



15.40.1050  Encroachments prohibited with certain exception.



   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development, unless certification by a registered
professional engineer or architect is provided, demonstrating that
encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.



(Prior code § 17-5-6.1)



15.40.1060  Placement in prohibited.



   Prohibit the placement of any manufactured home except in existing
manufactured home parks or subdivisions.



(Prior code § 17-5-6.2)



15.40.1070  Compliance with flood hazard reduction provisions required.



   If Sections 15.40.1050 and 15.40.1060 are satisfied, all new
construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable
flood hazard reduction provisions of Article VI.



(Prior code § 17-5-6.3)



15.40.1080  Standards for attached garages.



   Attached garages are to be treated the same as an enclosure below the
elevated floor of a building; specifically, the lowest floor of the
residence, if it is used solely for parking, building access, or storage, and
meets the additional criteria at A.R.S. § 60.3(a)(3) and § 60.3(c)(5). The
standards at A.R.S. § 60.3(a)(3) are interpreted as requiring the following:



   A.   No machinery or equipment which services a building, such as
furnaces, air conditioners, heat pumps, hot water heaters, washers, dryers,
elevator lift equipment, electrical junction and circuit breaker boxes, and
food freezers, are permitted below the base flood elevations; and



   B.   All interior wall, floor and ceiling materials located below
the base flood elevation must be unfinished and resistant to flood damage; and



   C.   The walls of any enclosed area below the base flood elevation
must be constructed in a manner to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral
movement of the structure.



(Prior code § 17-5-6.4)



15.40.1090  Standards for detached garages.



   Detached garages shall be elevated to or above the base flood elevation
to minimize damage to the garage and to vehicles and contents stored in the
garage. However, if a detached garage constituted a minimal investment and
was used only for parking or limited storage, that garage could have its
floor below the base flood elevation provided that it was constructed in
accordance with previously established policy on accessory structures. At a
minimum, detached garages which are not elevated so that their floor is one
foot above the base flood elevation would have to be designed and constructed
to meet the following requirements:



   A.   Use of the garage must be limited to parking or limited storage;



   B.   The garage must be built using unfinished and flood
damage-resistant materials;



   C.   The garage must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure;



   D.   Any mechanical and utility equipment in the garage must be
elevated to or above the base flood elevation or floodproofed;



   E.   The garage must comply with floodplain encroachment provisions
at A.R.S. § 60.3(c)(10) or (d)(3).



(Prior code § 17-56.5)



Article XI. Variances and Appeals



15.40.1100  Appeals and requests for variances.



   The floodplain board shall hear and decide appeals and requests for
variances from the requirements of this chapter. A fee of two hundred fifty
dollars will be required at the time the appeal or request for variance is
filed.



(Prior code § 17-6-1.1)



15.40.1110  Administrative error cause for hearing.



   The floodplain board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged
there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the
floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.



(Prior code § 17-6-1.2)



15.40.1120  Appeal to superior court when.



   Those aggrieved by the decision of the floodplain board, or any
taxpayer, may appeal the decision to the superior court of Pinal County.



(Prior code § 17-6-1.3)



15.40.1130  Floodplain board to consider—Criteria.



   The variance criteria set forth in this chapter are based on the
general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property
and are not personal in nature.  A variance may be granted for a parcel of
property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the
requirements of this ordinance would create an exceptional hardship to the
applicant or the surrounding property owners.  The characteristics must be
unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels.  The unique
characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its
inhabitants or the property owners.



   It is the duty of the city to help protect its citizens from
flooding.  This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of
insuring a structure built below the regulatory flood elevation are so
serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in
the flood ordinance should be quite rare.  The long-term goal of preventing
and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly
limited.  Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this section are
more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a
variance can be properly granted.  The criteria are designed to screen out
those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more
appropriate.



   In passing upon applications, the floodplain board shall consider its
directive as set forth above, all technical evaluations, all relevant
factors, standards specified in other sections of the chapter, and:



   A.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;



   B.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;



   C.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of the damage on the individual owner;



   D.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;



   E.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;



   F.   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;



   G.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;



   H.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for that area;



   I.   The safety of access to the property in time of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;



   J.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and



   K.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and
bridges.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code § 17-6-1.4)



15.40.1140  Granting of variance when.



   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size,
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the base flood level, provided subsections 15.40.1130(A) through (K)
have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre,
the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.



(Prior code § 17-6-1.5)



15.40.1150  Conditions for issuance of variance.



   Upon consideration of the factors of Section 15.40.1130, and the
purposes of this chapter, the floodplain board may attach the conditions to
the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of
the chapter.



(Prior code § 17-6-1.6)



15.40.1160  Records to be maintained.



   The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all variance
and appeal actions, including justification for their issuance, and report
such variances issued in its biennial report to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code § 17-6-1.7)



15.40.1170  Exceptions.



   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places
or the State Inventory of Historic Places, upon a determination that the
proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s
continued designation as a historic structure, and the variance is the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of
this article.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code § 17-6-2.1)



15.40.1180  Variances denied when.



   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.



(Prior code § 17-6-2.2)



15.40.1190  Variances issued when.



   Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.



(Prior code § 17-6-2.3)



15.40.1200  Conditions for issuance of variance.



   Variances shall only be issued upon:



   A.   A showing of good sufficient cause;



   B.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant;



   C.   For facilities meeting the definition of “functionally
dependent use,” a showing that the use cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water; and



   D.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code § 17-6-2.4)



15.40.1210  Written notice of variance issuance required.



   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice, over the signature of a community official, that the structure will
be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the regulatory
flood elevation, that such construction below the base flood level increases
risks to life and property, and that the issuance of a variance to construct
a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance
coverage. The notice will also state that the land upon which the variance is
granted shall be ineligible for exchange of state land pursuant to the flood
relocation and land exchange program provided for by A.R.S. Title 26, Chapter
2, Article 2. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain board
in the office of the Pinal County Recorder, and shall be recorded in manner
so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.



(Ord. 1397.15.21 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code § 17-6-2.5)



Article XII. Drainage



15.40.1220  Purpose of provisions.



   The relatively flat topography and lack of defined drainage patterns
necessitates special attention for controlling stormwater collection and
retention. Regulatory controls and measures are identified in this article to
minimize stormwater problems.



(Ord. 1397.15.5 § 2 (part), 1994)



15.40.1230  Conceptual drainage plan to be submitted—Contents.



   A conceptual stormwater collection and retention plan shall be
submitted with a preliminary plat or site development plan and approved prior
to the approval of the plat or plan. In the design of the development, every
effort shall be made to utilize the natural slope of the land for the
stormwater collection system. The plan shall include but not be limited to
the following:



   A.   Method of collection (surface and/or subsurface);



   B.   Depth, side slopes and area of retention;



   C.   Calculations of volume held and required;



   D.   High water elevation and invert of pipes;



   E.   Method of disposal of water within thirty-six hours;



   F.   Areas tributary to each retention basin;



   G.   Any other data to form a complete plan.



(Ord. 1397.15.5 § 2 (part), 1994)



15.40.1240  Subdivisions—Retention and collection facility requirements.



   A.   All water which falls within the subdivisions (including the
respective one-half of all abutting streets to the subdivision) from a
onehundred-year storm of a one-hour duration (approximately 2.39 inches), as
established by the Arizona Highway Department Hydrological Design and Revised
Precipitation Maps, must be retained within the boundaries of the subdi-
vision unless street runoff is allowed per subsection K of this section. The
method of collection and retention shall be approved by the city engineer.
The method of retention calculation, drainage flows and dry wells shall
conform to Section 15.40.1290.



   B.   Two or more developers may join together to provide a common
retention facility. A letter or agreement signed by all developers
participating in the common retention must be presented to the city engineer
and the recorded plat shall indicate that the retention area is a joint
facility. The joint retention area must meet all criteria in a single area.



   C.   Where possible, all retention basins shall have a design
capacity to preclude a water depth in excess of three feet resulting from a
one-hundred-year, one-hour storm. The depth of retention shall be measured
from nearest adjacent top of curb. Side slopes shall conform to the following
slope-depth ratio:



   BASIN DEPTH      STEEPEST SLOPE



   (measured from top)      (horizontal:vertical)



   First 3 feet          4:1



   From 3 to 6 feet       8:1



   Exceptions to minimum slope requirements will be considered when
innovative and aesthetically pleasing design features are presented and
public safety is not compromised.



   In no event shall stormwater stand in the retention basins longer than
thirty-six hours. Where possible, basins may be drained by pumping or
controlled gravity flow into existing storm drainage lines, irrigation
ditches, or streets when approved by the city engineer. With the permission
of the city engineer, the right-of-way area from one foot in back of sidewalk
may be used for the retention basin.



   D.   Retention basins shall be protected from further development by
a recorded drainage easement and must be fully improved with landscaping,
irrigation systems, lighting and such other aesthetic and recreational
improvements as may be required by the city. Conceptual landscape plans
showing all required improvements shall be submitted with the preliminary
plat. Final improvement plans for retention areas must be submitted for
approval with the subdivision improvement plans. It shall be the
responsibility of the developer to establish a system acceptable to the city
to provide perpetual operation, maintenance and replacement of all retention
areas not dedicated to the city. This maintenance system may be the formation
of a homeowner's association or some other type of financial guarantee
acceptable to the city.



   E.   On-lot retention is permissible only in single-family
developments where each proposed residential lot contains not less than seven
thousand square feet of five gross acres or less where each proposed lot
contains not less than 1.25 net acres. Each proposed residential lot shall be
depressed in the front yard, as defined in Chapter 17.12 of this code, to
contain the indicated design storm, including that of the proposed street
runoff, unless street runoff is allowed per subsection K of this section. The
deed of each lot shall have a restriction indicating on-lot retention shall
be maintained in perpetuity. In addition, on-lot retention basins shall be
shown as retention easements on the subdivision plat.



   F.   Curbed streets shall be designed and constructed to carry the
stormwater runoff from a ten-year, one-hour storm (approximately 1.60 inches)
between curbs.



   G.   The finish floor elevation of all buildings shall be one foot
above the one-hundred-year storm.



   H.   All storm drain pipe installed in alleys or streets under curb,
gutter and pavement shall be constructed of rubber gasket reinforced concrete
pipe capable of withstanding H-22 highway loads or an alternate as approved
by the city engineer.



   I.   Lakes or ponds used for stormwater collection will be required
to meet all retention basin requirements specified herein except for the
water depth, drainage time and side slopes below the normal water level.



   J.   Commercial/industrial and single lot multifamily (duplex,
triples, etc.) subdivisions may provide either community retention basins or
on-site retention for each lot including street runoff.



   K.   Street runoff may be allowed, at the discretion of the city
engineer, in those circumstances where stormwater can be quickly conveyed to
established drainage facilities.



(Ord. 1397.15.19 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1397.15.5 § 2 (part), 1994)



15.40.1250  Nonsubdivision developments—Retention and collection facility
requirements.



   A.   All stormwater from a one-hundred-year storm of one-hour
duration (approximately 2.39 inches) as established by the Arizona Highway
Department Hydrological Design and Revised Precipitation Maps, shall be
retained on site. All stormwater within the right-of-way adjacent to the site
shall be retained within the site unless other means of disposal of the water
(i.e., storm drain, irrigation ditch, or drainage way) is designed and
constructed to handle that water.



   B.   A maximum of fifty percent of the required retention can be
held upon asphalt, concrete or other hard surface except in a special
situation and with permission of the city engineer.



   C.   The city shall not be responsible for the design, performance,
operation or maintenance of the retention basin.



   D.   The retention basin shall conform to Section 15.40.1240(C) and
the calculations, drainage flows and dry wells shall conform to Section
15.40.1290.



(Ord. 1397.15.5 § 2 (part), 1994)



15.40.1260  Residential subdivisions—Preliminary hydrology report required.



   Preliminary hydrology reporting requirements for residential
subdivisions are as follows:



   A.   A preliminary drainage report must be presented with the
application for subdivision review. No review will be scheduled until this
report is obtained.



   B.   A preliminary report shall discuss the general storm drainage
problem and state the method of resolution proposed. Any obvious drainage
problems such as existing waste ditches, natural drainage channels, runoff
from existing adjacent subdivision, etc. must be discussed in detail.



   C.   If lot runoff will be retained on the lot, a sample plot plan
must be included.



   D.   A preliminary retention basin design must be presented. This
should include the size and depth of the basin and possible methods of
draining it.



   E.   All calculations must be made a part of the report.



(Ord. 1397.15.5 § 2 (part), 1994)



15.40.1270  Residential subdivisions— Final hydrology report required.



   A.   A final drainage report must be presented before construction
plans will be approved.



   B.   A reduced (eight and one-half inches by eleven inches) copy of
the subdivision plat must be included in the report. Drainage areas and peak
street flows are to be shown on this plat as well as the location for the
retention basin.



   C.   Detailed street flow calculations are to be made a part of the
report. Where the flows exceed the street capacities, pipe flow calculations
and sizing data shall be included.



   D.   Detailed drawings of the retention basin, inlet structures,
outlet structures, etc. shall be submitted with the report.



   E.   If the storm runoff flows onto the property to be subdivided
from adjacent properties, this must be included in detail in the report.
Drainage area, calculated peak flows, and other pertinent runoff data must be
presented. If the flow is in a defined channel, the channel must be improved
to carry a one-hundred-year flow with a minimum freeboard of one foot.



   F.   If improvements in an adjacent subdivision have channeled
runoff onto the developing property, this flow should be carried through the
new subdivision. It will, however, be necessary to abide by all provisions in
Section 15.40.1240.



(Ord. 1397.15.5 § 2 (part), 1994)



15.40.1280  Commercial and industrial developments—Reporting requirements.



   Hydrology reporting requirements for commercial and industrial
developments shall be as follows:



   A.   Show all proposed buildings, asphalt areas, grass areas,
concrete or desert landscape, and dimensions of same;



   B.   Show existing grades by a grid method or contour lines,
especially at property lines and back of sidewalks;



   C.   Establish a bench mark (BM) of known or assumed elevation to
which every other elevation is referenced;



   D.   Indicate direction that roof will drain and the finished floor
elevation of all buildings;



   E.   Show enough finished grades that drainage direction of asphalt
areas, etc., are clearly evident. If it helps, show this direction with
arrows. Show the finished grade of all parking and landscaped areas;



   F.   Show all items of construction that will affect drainage and
retention;



   G.   Divide the lot into drainage areas and calculate runoff for
each area;



   H.   Calculate the retention volume provided for each area. See
Section 15.40.1290 for calculations of runoff and retention volume.



   I.   Changes or additions to sites which require approval of a site
development plan will be required to address drainage on the entire site and
meet storm drainage requirements as set forth in this chapter for the
complete site.



(Ord. 1397.15.5 § 2 (part), 1994)



15.40.1290  Retention calculations to be submitted.



   A.   Retention calculations shall be submitted as follows:




Vr = D(A)(Cw)





  12




A = Area (square feet or acres)



Vr = Volume required to be retained (cubic feet or acre feet)



D = 100 year=one hour rainfall (inches) = 2.39



Cw = Runoff factor for tributary areas (weighted factors may be required for
multiple retention areas and/or special conditions as determined by the city
engineer:



Typical runoff factors:



Pavement (asphalt, concrete brick, etc) 0.95



Roofs 0.95



Grass lawn (average slope 0-7%) 0.20



Grass lawn (steep slope 7% or greater) 0.35



Desert lawn or rock lawn 0.70



Farm land 0.10



Bare ground (vacant lots) 0.40



Undeveloped desert 0.25



Commercial, industrial area: 0.80



Residential area:



Range areas, 18,000 square feet or larger 0.45



Single-family areas less than 18,000 sq. ft. 0.50



Multi-unit area:



Townhouses, patio homes, mobile home parks 0.50



Apartments 0.60



Note: The weighted “C” is obtained from the total summated “C” areas
divided by the total area or subareas being developed.



   B.   The point or points at which a natural drainage way enters,
flows through and leaves prior to development shall remain the same after the
property has been altered for the development unless the city engineer
specifically approves rerouting of flows.



   C.   Shallow pit percolation tests shall be performed in retention
areas to determine natural percolation. Test results shall be submitted to
the city engineer prior to approval of drainage plans. Dry wells are
permitted to drain surface retention areas only when no other means of
disposal is available. Infiltration into the dry well cannot be considered to
reduce the size of the retention area. The property owner of record shall be
responsible for the design, performance, operation or maintenance of dry
wells used with on-site retention. A percolation test must be carried out on
the dry well before acceptable. The percolation test results are to be filed
with the city engineer.



   D.   All building construction and development projects shall
receive a final grading inspection and approval by the city engineer before
issuance of a certificate of occupancy. In the case of single and two-family
residential construction, such approval shall be evidenced by the final
building inspection.



(Ord. 1397.15.5 § 2 (part), 1994)



15.40.1300  Right of city to drain basin when.



   It is unlawful for any person owning or controlling a retention basin
to permit stormwater to stand therein longer than thirty-six hours. In
addition to any penalty provided by law, should the persons owning or
controlling any privately-owned and maintained basin fail, neglect or refuse
to drain the retention basin within thirty-six hours, as required in Section
15.40.1240(C), it is the right of the city, upon the authorization of the
director of public works, or his appointed agent, to enter upon the
privately-owned retention basin property and take such action as may
reasonably be necessary to drain the basin. The draining of the basin shall
be at the expense of the owners or person controlling the basin.



(Ord. 1397.15.5 § 2 (part), 1994)



15.40.1310  Assessment of drainage costs to city.



   Upon completion of the work, the director of public works shall prepare
or cause to be prepared, a verified statement of account of the actual cost
of draining of the basin, the date the work was completed, and the street
address and the legal description of the property on which the work was done,
including five percent for inspection and other incidental costs in
connection therewith and shall serve a duplicate copy of the verified
statement upon the person owning or controlling the property in the manner
prescribed in Section 15.40.1320.



(Ord. 1397.15.5 § 2 (part), 1994)



15.40.1320  Appeal to city—Terms and conditions.



   The owner or person controlling the property shall have thirty days
from the date of service upon him of the assessment to appeal in writing to
the council from the amount of the assessment as contained in the verified
statement. If an appeal is not filed with the city council within the
thirty-day period, then the amount of the assessment, as determined by the
director of public works, shall become final and binding. If an appeal is
taken, the council shall, at its next regular meeting, hear and determine the
appeal and may affirm the amount of the assessment, modify the amount
thereof, or determine that no assessment at all shall be made. The decision
of the council shall be final and binding upon all persons.



(Ord. 1397.15.5 § 2 (part), 1994)



15.40.1330  Service of notice to property owner.



   Notice shall be personally served on the owner or person controlling
the property, by an officer of the police department, in the manner provided
in Rule 4(d) of the Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure, or mailed to the owner
or person controlling the property at his last known address or by certified
or registered mail, or the address to which the tax bills for the property
were last mailed. If the owner does not reside on the property, a duplicate
notice shall also be sent to him by certified or registered mail at his last
known address.



(Ord. 1397.15.5 § 2 (part), 1994)



15.40.1340  Lien for drainage of basin when.



   If no appeal is taken from the amount of the assessment, or if an
appeal is taken and the council has affirmed or modified the amount of the
assessment, the original assessment or the assessment as so modified shall be
recorded in the office of the county recorder and from the date of its
recording, shall be a lien on the lot or tract of land until paid. Said liens
shall be subject and inferior to the lien for general taxes and to all prior
recorded mortgages and encumbrances of record. A sale of the property to
satisfy a lien obtained under the provisions of this section shall be made
upon judgment of foreclosure or order of sale. The city shall have the right
to bring an action to enforce the lien in a court of competent jurisdiction
at any time after the recording of the assessment, but failure to enforce the
lien by such action shall not affect its validity. The recorded assessment
shall be prima facie evidence of the truth of all matters recited thereof. A
prior assessment for the purposes provided in this section shall not be a bar
to a subsequent assessment or assessments for such purposes, and any number
of liens on the same lot or tract of land may be enforced in the same action.



(Ord. 1397.15.5 § 2 (part), 1994)



Chapter 15.44
MISCELLANEOUS CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS



Sections:



15.44.010   Required setback from canal.



15.44.020   Water main specifications.



15.44.030   Placement of utilities along alleys.



15.44.040   Tearing up of street—Restoration to prior condition required.



15.44.010  Required setback from canal.



   Any building constructed, repaired or remodeled shall be set back a
distance of at least ten feet from the centerline of any canal; provided,
that the term “canal” does not include laterals.



(Prior code § 9-6-1)



15.44.020  Water main specifications.



   A.   Wherever the word street appears in this section, it shall also
be taken to mean an alley.



   B.   All water mains laid or placed within the city by any utility
company, corporation, firm, or person shall be of the following size and
manner:



   1.   All water mains in and along the streets of the business
section of the district of the city shall not be less than eight inches in
diameter;



   2.   Water mains in and along any of the streets in the residential
sections of the city shall be not less than six inches in diameter;



   3.   Connections made and pipes laid from the main over to a
property line shall be at such distance apart as to accommodate and serve
each lot along the street or water main;



   4.   All water mains laid in and along any paved streets shall be
laid under and along the sidewalk of the street.



(Prior code § 9-6-2)



15.44.030  Placement of utilities along alleys.



   All water mains, pipe lines of any description, telephone, telegraph,
electric light poles, cables or conduits, gas lines or other lines of any
kind, shall be placed, laid or erected in, along and through alleys;
provided, that in through blocks, where there are no alleys, such water
mains, pipe lines, telephone, telegraph poles, cables or conduits, or gas
lines, may be placed in and along the streets around the block where there
are no alleys.



(Prior code § 9-6-3)



15.44.040  Tearing up of street—Restoration to prior condition required.



   Whenever a utility company, corporation, firm or person shall lay,
place, or erect any water main, electric light, telephone line, cable,
conduit or other pipe line of any description across or along any street or
alley where it is necessary to tear up or remove any part of the paving,
sidewalk, curb or gutter for the purpose of laying, erecting or placing any
water main, electric light or telephone line, cable, conduit or other pipe
line, the same shall be repaired, replaced, and put in the same condition as
the paving, sidewalk, curb or gutter was before the tearing up or cutting
across same.



(Prior code § 9-6-4)



Chapter 15.48
OUTDOOR LIGHT CONTROL*



Sections:



15.48.010   Purpose of provisions.



15.48.020   Conformance with applicable codes required.



15.48.030   Provisions nonrestrictive—Approved materials and methods in
compliance.



15.48.040   Definitions.



15.48.050   Shielding required.



15.48.060   Filtration required when.



15.48.070   Shielding and filtering requirements.



15.48.080   Searchlights prohibited.



15.48.090   Recreational facility lighting restricted.



15.48.100   Unshielded outdoor illumination prohibited when.



15.48.110   Installation of mercury vapor fixtures prohibited.



15.48.120   Permanent and special exemptions.



15.48.130   Application to install outdoor lighting required.



15.48.140   Application contents.



15.48.150   Permit issuance.



15.48.160   Amendment to permit when.



15.48.170   Request for temporary exemption.



15.48.180   Appeal for temporary exemption.



15.48.190   Violation—Penalty.



*Editor's Note: Chapter 15.48 consists of Ordinance 911, adopted May 16, 1983
and revised February 23, 1990)



15.48.010  Purpose of provisions.



   This chapter is intended to restrict the permitted use of outdoor
artificial illuminating devices emitting undesirable rays into the night sky
which have a detrimental effect on astronomical observations.



(Ord. 911 § 1.01, 1983)



15.48.020  Conformance with applicable codes required.



   A.   All outdoor artificial illuminating devices shall be installed
in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, Title 17 of this code and
any building ordinances which may hereinafter be enacted, as applicable.



   B.   Where any provisions of any of the Arizona State statutes or
any federal law or any companion of the city ordinance comparatively
conflicts with the requirements of this outdoor light control chapter, the
most restrictive shall govern.



(Ord. 911 § 1.02, 1983)



15.48.030  Provisions nonrestrictive—Approved materials and methods in
compliance.



   The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the use of
any material or method of installation not specifically prescribed by this
chapter; provided, any such alternate has been approved. The city zoning
inspector may approve any such alternate provided he finds that the proposed
design, material or method:



   A.   Provides approximate equivalence to those specific requirements
of this chapter; or



   B.   Is otherwise satisfactory and complies with the intent of this
chapter.



(Ord. 911 § 1.03, 1983)



15.48.040  Definitions.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined as
set out in this section.



   “Individual” means any private individual, tenant, lessee, owner,
or any commercial entity including but not limited to companies,
partnerships, joint ventures or corporations.



   “Installed” means the initial installation of outdoor light
fixtures as defined in this section, following the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this chapter, but shall not apply to those outdoor
light fixtures installed prior to such date.



   “Outdoor light fixtures” means and includes outdoor artificial
illuminating devices, outdoor fixtures, lamps and other devices, permanent or
portable, used for illumination or advertisement. Such devices shall include,
but are not limited to search, spot, or flood lights for:



   A.   Buildings and structures;



   B.   Recreational areas;



   C.   Parking lot lighting;



   D.   Landscape lighting;



   E.   Billboards and other signage (advertising and other);



   F.   Street lighting.



   This chapter shall not apply to single-family residences unless a
single illuminating device exceeds one hundred fifty watts.



(Ord. 911 §§ 2.01—2.03, 1983)



15.48.050  Shielding required.



   A.   All exterior illuminating devices, except those exempt from
this chapter and those regulated by Section 15.48.100 shall be fully or
partially shielded as required by Section 15.48.070.



   B.   “Fully shielded” means that those fixtures shall be
shielded in such a manner that light rays emitted by the fixture, either
directly from the lamp or indirectly from the fixture, are projected below a
horizontal plane running through the lowest point on the fixture where light
is emitted.



   C.   “Partially shielded” means that those fixtures shall be
shielded in such a manner that the bottom edge of the shield is below the
plane centerline of the light source (lamp), minimizing light above the
horizontal.



(Ord. 911 § 3.01, 1983)



15.48.060  Filtration required when.



   A.   Those outdoor light fixtures requiring a filter in Section
15.48.070 shall be equipped with a filter whose transmission is less than
five percent total emergent flux at wavelengths less than three thousand nine
hundred angstroms. Total emergent flux is defined as that between three
thousand and seven thousand angstrom units.



   B.   It is recommended that existing mercury vapor fixtures shall be
equipped with a filter whose transmission is less than ten percent total
emergent flux at wavelengths less than four thousand four hundred angstroms.
Total emergent flux is defined as that between three thousand and seven
thousand angstrom units.



   C.   Low pressure sodium lamps are the preferred lamp for minimizing
adverse effects on astronomical observations.



(Ord. 911 § 3.02, 1983)



15.48.070  Shielding and filtering requirements.



   The requirements for shielding and filtering light emissions from
outdoor light fixtures shall be as set forth in Table 15.48.070, codified at
the end of this chapter.



(Ord. 911 § 3.03, 1983)



15.48.080  Searchlights prohibited.



   The operation of searchlights for advertising purposes within the city
limits is prohibited except as provided for in Chapter 15.24 of this title.



(Ord. 911 § 4.01, 1983)



15.48.090  Recreational facility lighting restricted.



   No outdoor recreational facility, public or private, shall be
illuminated by nonconforming means after eleven p.m. except to conclude a
specific recreational or sporting event or any other activity conducted at a
ball park, outdoor amphitheater, arena, or similar facility in progress to
eleven p.m.



(Ord. 911 § 4.02, 1983)



15.48.100  Unshielded outdoor illumination prohibited when.



   The unshielded outdoor illumination of any building, landscaping,
signing or other purpose, is prohibited except with incandescent fixtures
less than one hundred fifty watts.



(Ord. 911 § 4.03, 1983)



15.48.110  Installation of mercury vapor fixtures prohibited.



   The installation of mercury vapor fixtures is prohibited effective
ninety days after the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this
chapter.



(Ord. 911 § 4.04, 1983)



15.48.120  Permanent and special exemptions.



   The following are permanent exemptions to the provisions of this
chapter.



   A.   Nonconforming Fixtures. All outdoor fixtures existing and fully
installed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
chapter may remain “nonconforming” indefinitely; provided, however, that
no change in use, replacement, structural alteration, or restoration after
abandonment of outdoor light fixtures shall be made unless it thereafter
conforms to the provisions of these regulations.



   B.   Fossil Fuel Light. Fossil fuel light produces directly or
indirectly by the combustion of natural gas or other utility-type fossil
fuels.



   C.   Federal and State Facilities. Those facilities and lands owned,
operated or protected by the U.S. Federal Government or the state of Arizona
are exempted by law from all requirements of this chapter. Voluntary
compliance with the intent of this chapter at those facilities is encouraged.



   D.   Special Exemption. The zoning inspector may grant a special
exemption to the requirements of Section 15.48.070 only upon a written
finding that there are extreme geographic or geometric conditions warranting
the exemption and that there are no conforming fixtures that would suffice.



(Ord. 911 § 5.01 through 5.04, 1983)



15.48.130  Application to install outdoor lighting required.



   A.   Any individual applying for a building or use permit under
Title 17 of this code intending to install outdoor lighting fixtures shall as
a part of the application submit evidence that the proposed work will comply
with this chapter.



   B.   All other individuals intending to install outdoor lighting
fixtures shall submit an application to the zoning inspector providing
evidence that the proposed will comply with this chapter.



   C.   Utility companies entering into a duly approved contract with
the city in which they agree to comply with the provisions of these
regulations, shall be exempt from applying for and obtaining a permit for the
installation of outdoor light fixtures, including residential security
lighting.



(Ord. 911 § 6.01, 1983)



15.48.140  Application contents.



   A.   The submission shall contain but shall not necessarily be
limited to the following, all or part of which may be part of or in addition
to the information required elsewhere in Title 17 upon application for the
required permit:



   1.   Plans indicating the location on the premises, and the type of
illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, other devices, etc.;



   2.   Description of illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports
and other devices, etc. This description may include but is not limited to,
manufacturers catalog cuts, and drawings (including sections where required).



   B.    The above required plans and descriptions shall be
sufficiently complete to enable the city zoning inspector to readily
determine whether compliance with the requirements of this chapter will be
secured. If such plans and descriptions cannot enable this ready
determination, by reason of the nature or configuration of the devices,
fixtures or lamps proposed, the applicant shall submit evidence of compliance
by certified test reports as performed by a recognized testing lab.



(Ord. 911 § 6.02, 1983)



15.48.150  Permit issuance.



   Upon compliance with the requirements of this chapter, the zoning
inspector shall issue a permit for installation of the outdoor lighting
fixtures, to be installed as in the approved application. In the event the
application is part of the building permit application under the zoning
regulations, the issuance of the building permit will be made if the
applicant is in compliance with this chapter as well as the other
requirements for issuance under the zoning regulations. Appeal procedures of
the zoning regulations for decisions of the zoning inspector shall apply.



(Ord. 911 § 6.03, 1983)



15.48.160  Amendment to permit when.



   Should the applicant desire to substitute outdoor light fixtures or
lamps after a permit has been issued, the applicant must submit all changes
to the zoning inspector for approval, with adequate information to assure
compliance with this chapter.



(Ord. 911 § 6.04, 1983)



15.48.170  Request for temporary exemption.



   A.   Any individual as defined herein may submit a written request
on a form prepared by the planning and zoning department to the zoning
inspector for a “temporary exemption” to the requirements of this
chapter, such exemption to be valid for thirty days, renewable at the
discretion of the zoning inspector. The written request must include:



   1.   Specific exemptions requested;



   2.   Type and use of exterior light involved;



   3.   Duration of time for requested exemption;



   4.   Type of lamp and calculated lumens;



   5.   Total wattage of lamp or lamps;



   6.   Proposed location of exterior light;



   7.   Previous temporary exemptions, if any;



   8.   Physical size of exterior light and type of shielding provided.



   B.   In addition to the above data, the zoning inspector may request
any additional information which would enable him to make a reasonable
evaluation of the request for temporary exemption.



(Ord. 911 § 7.01, 1983)



15.48.180  Appeal for temporary exemption.



   The zoning inspector, within five days from the date of the properly
completed request for temporary exemption, shall approve or reject in writing
the request. If rejected, the individual making the request shall have the
right of appeal to the appropriate board of adjustment for review pursuant to
the procedures applicable to any other appeal of a decision of the zoning
inspector.



(Ord. 911 § 7.02, 1983)



15.48.190  Violation—Penalty.



   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a Class II misdemeanor, and each
person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or
portion thereof during which a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter is committed, continued or permitted and upon conviction of any such
violation such person, firm, or corporation shall be punished as prescribed
in the Arizona Revised Statutes.



(Ord. 911 Art. 8, 1983)



Table 15.48.070
Requirements for Shielding and Filtering



 



Fixture Lamp Type
 

Shielded

 

Filtered4



Low Pressure Sodium1
 

Partially

 

None



High Pressure Sodium
 

Fully

 

None



Metal Halide6
 

Fully

 

Yes



Fluorescent
 

Fully5

 

Yes2



Quartz3
 

Fully

 

None



Incandescent greater than 150 W
 

Fully

 

None



Mercury Vapor
 

Fully7

 

Yes7



Fossil Fuel
 

None

 

None



Glass Tubes filled with Neon, Argon, Krypton
 

None

 

None



Other Sources
 

As approved by the zoning inspector



Footnotes:
 


 




1 This is the preferred light source to minimize undesirable light into the
night sky affecting astronomical observations.


2 Warm white and natural lamps are preferred to minimize detrimental effects.


3 For the purposes of this title, quartz lamps shall not be considered an
incandescent light source.


4 Most glass, acrylic, or translucent enclosures satisfy these filter
requirements.


5 Outdoor advertising signs of the type constructed of translucent materials
and wholly illuminated from within do not require shielding.


6 Metal halide display lighting shall not be used for security lighting after
11 p.m. (or after closing hours if before 11 p.m.) unless fully shielded.
Metal halide lamps shall be in enclosed luminaries.


7 Recommended for existing fixtures. The installation of mercury vapor
fixtures is prohibited effective 90 days after the date of adoption of this
title.




 



Title 16
SUBDIVISIONS



Chapters:



16.04   General Provisions



16.08   Definitions



16.12   Platting Procedures and Requirements



16.16   Design Standards



16.20   Improvement Guarantees



16.24   Fees and Penalties



Chapter 16.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS



Sections:



16.04.010   Short title.



16.04.020   Purpose of provisions.



16.04.030   City development policy declared.



16.04.040   Authority and jurisdiction.



16.04.050   Administration and enforcement.



16.04.060   Agencies and officials held harmless.



16.04.070   Interpretation and conflicting provisions.



16.04.080   Authority of provisions.



16.04.090   Amendments.



16.04.010  Short title.



   These regulations shall hereafter be known, cited and referred to as
the Casa Grande Subdivision Regulations except as referred to herein, where
it shall be known as “this title.”



(Ord. 1179 § 1.1, 1987)



16.04.020  Purpose of provisions.



   The purpose of this title is that of assuring sites suitable for
building purposes and human habitation, of providing for the harmonious
development of the city, of providing adequate open spaces for traffic,
recreation, light and air, of providing proper distribution of population and
of creating conditions favorable to the health, safety, and general welfare
of the residents of the city.



(Ord. 1179 § 1.3, 1987)



16.04.030  City development policy declared.



   A.   It is declared to be the policy of the city to consider the
subdivision of land and the subsequent development of the subdivided plat as
subject to the control of the city pursuant to the city general plan and
zoning ordinance for the orderly, planned, efficient and economical
development of the city.



   B.   Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be
used safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from
fire, flood or other menace, and land shall not be subdivided until available
public facilities and improvements exist and proper provision has been made
for drainage, water, sewerage, and capital improvements such as schools,
parks, recreation facilities, transportation facilities, and other public
improvements.



(Ord. 1179 § 1.2, 1987)



16.04.040  Authority and jurisdiction.



   A.   Authorization for the city to adopt subdivision regulations is
given in the Arizona Revised Statutes, Section 9-463.01, 1977 compilation,
Municipal Subdivision Regulations.



   B.   Platting jurisdiction for the city shall encompass all the
territory within the incorporated limits of the city which may from time to
time be amended through annexation.



(Ord. 1179 § 1.4, 1987)



16.04.050  Administration and enforcement.



   A.   These regulations shall be administered and enforced by the
planning and development department of the city or other agency as designated
by the city manager, through the planning director.



   B.   All subdivision plats submitted to the city shall first have
been examined by the planning director and the planning and zoning commission
in accordance with the procedures established by these regulations. As part
of their examination, the director and the commission may consult with other
public or private agencies to determine whether or not the plat, as proposed,
will contribute to the orderly growth and development of the city.



(Ord. 1179 § 1.5, 1987)



16.04.060  Agencies and officials held harmless.



   The city shall hold harmless the planning director, other city agencies
and officials, and their official agents and representatives, when acting in
good faith and without malice, from all personal liability for any damage
that may accrue to any person or property as a result of any act required by
these regulations, or for the omission of any act on the part of the
department, agency or official or their authorized agents in the discharge of
their duties hereunder. Any suit brought against the city or the city
administration because of any such act or omission in the carrying out of the
provisions of these regulations shall be defended by the city's legal
department through final determination of such proceedings.



(Ord. 1179 § 1.6, 1987)



16.04.070  Interpretation and conflicting provisions.



   A.   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
title shall be held to be the minimum requirements necessary for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare.



   B.   This title is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or
annul any ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law
except as noted herein. Where any provisions of this title impose
restrictions different from those imposed by any other provision of this
title or any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law,
whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher standards shall
control.



   C.   This title is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant
or any other private agreement or restriction, provided that where the
provisions of this title are more restrictive or impose higher standards or
regulations than such easement, covenant, or other private agreement or
restriction, the requirements of this title shall govern. Where the
provisions of the easement, covenant, or private agreement or restriction
impose duties and obligations more restrictive than this title, and such
private provisions are not inconsistent with this title or determinations
thereunder, then such private provisions shall be operative and supplemental
to this title and determinations made thereunder.



   D.   If any part or provision of this title or application thereof
to any person or circumstance is judged invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such judgment shall be confined in its operation to the part,
provision, or application directly involved in all controversy in which such
judgment shall have been rendered and shall not affect or impair the validity
of the remainder of this title or the application thereof to other persons or
circumstances.



(Ord. 1179 § 1.7, 1987)



16.04.080  Authority of provisions.



   This title shall not be construed as abating any action now pending
under, or by virtue of, prior existing subdivision regulations, or
discontinuing, abating, modifying, or altering any penalty accruing or about
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm, or corporation,
or as waiving any right of the municipality under any section or provision
existing at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this title, or
as vacating and annulling any rights obtained by any person, firm, or
corporation, by lawful action of the municipality except as shall be
expressly provided for in this title.



(Ord. 1179 § 1.8, 1987)



16.04.090  Amendments.



   For the purpose of providing for the public health, safety, and general
welfare, the governing body may from time to time amend the provisions
imposed by this title.



(Ord. 1179 § 1.9, 1987)



Chapter 16.08
DEFINITIONS



Sections:



16.08.010   Rules of construction.



16.08.020   Alley.



16.08.030   Applicant.



16.08.040   Block.



16.08.050   Bond.



16.08.060   Building.



16.08.070   Capital improvements program.



16.08.080   City manager.



16.08.090   Commission.



16.08.100   Construction plan.



16.08.110   Council.



16.08.120   Cul-de-sac.



16.08.130   Developer.



16.08.140   Easement.



16.08.150   Engineer, city.



16.08.160   Escrow.



16.08.170   Final plat.



16.08.180   Frontage.



16.08.190   General plan.



16.08.200   Grade.



16.08.210   Lot.



16.08.220   Lot improvement.



16.08.230   Model home.



16.08.240   Municipality.



16.08.250   Nonresidential subdivision.



16.08.260   Off-site.



16.08.270   Ordinance.



16.08.280   Owner.



16.08.290   Perimeter street.



16.08.300   Planning director.



16.08.310   Plat.



16.08.320   Preliminary plat.



16.08.330   Protective covenant.



16.08.340   Public improvement.



16.08.350   Registered architect.



16.08.360   Registered engineer.



16.08.370   Resubdivision.



16.08.380   Right-of-way.



16.08.390   Roadway.



16.08.400   Sale or lease.



16.08.410   Sketch plat.



16.08.420   Street.



16.08.430   Street, dead-end.



16.08.440   Subdivide.



16.08.450   Subdivider.



16.08.460   Subdivision.



16.08.470   Subdivision agent.



16.08.480   Subdivision plat.



16.08.490   Temporary improvement.



16.08.500   Tract.



16.08.510   Utilities.



16.08.520   Vacation, public land.



16.08.530   Zoning.



16.08.010  Rules of construction.



   A.   For the purpose of these regulations, certain numbers,
abbreviations, terms and words used herein shall be used, interpreted, and
defined as set forth in this section.



   B.   Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words
used in the present tense include the future tense; words used in the plural
number include the singular; the word “herein” means “in.”



   C.   A “person” includes a corporation, a partnership, and an
incorporated association of persons such as a club; “shall” is always
mandatory; a “building” includes a “structure”; a “building” or
“structure” includes any part thereof; “used” or “occupied” as
applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words
“intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied.”



   D.   Except as specifically defined herein or, if not defined herein
but defined in Title 17 of this code, all words in this title shall have
their customary dictionary definition.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.1, 1987)



16.08.020  Alley.



   “Alley” means a public or private right-of-way primarily designed
to serve as secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose
principal frontage is on some other street.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.030  Applicant.



   “Applicant” means the owner of land proposed to be subdivided, or
his/her representative.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.040  Block.



   “Block” means a tract of land bounded by streets and public parks,
cemeteries, railroad rights-of- way, or boundary lines of the municipality.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.050  Bond.



   “Bond” means any form of security including a cash deposit, surety
bond, collateral, property, or instrument of credit in an amount and form
satisfactory to the city council.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.060  Building.



   “Building” means any structure built for support, shelter, or
enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind, and
includes any structure.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.070  Capital improvements program.



   “Capital improvements program” means a proposed schedule of all
future municipal improvement projects listed in order of construction
priority together with cost estimates and the anticipated means of financing
each project.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)   



16.08.080  City manager.



   “City manager” means the person designated by city council to be
administrative head of the city and who is, by city charter, responsible for
enforcement of this title.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.090  Commission.



   “Commission” means the planning and zoning commission of the city.
Also referred to as planning and zoning commission or planning commission.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.100  Construction plan.



   “Construction plan” means the maps or drawings accompanying a
subdivision plat and showing the specific location and design of improvements
to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with the requirements of the
city as a condition of the approval of the plat.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.110  Council.



   “Council” means the city council of the city of Casa Grande. Also
referred to as the governing body.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.120  Cul-de-sac.



   “Cul-de-sac” means a local street with only one outlet and having
an appropriate terminus for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic
movement. A cul-de-sac cannot exceed six hundred feet except by approval of
the fire chief.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.130  Developer.



   “Developer” means the owner of land proposed to be subdivided or
his/her representative.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.140  Easement.



   “Easement” means authorization by a property owner for the use by
another, and for a specified purpose, of any designated part of his/her
property.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.150  Engineer, city.



   “Engineer, city” means the professional engineer engaged by the
city.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.160  Escrow.



   “Escrow” means a deposit of cash with the local government in lieu
of an amount required and still in force on a performance or maintenance bond.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.170  Final plat.



   “Final plat” means the map or plan or record of a subdivision and
any accompanying material, as described in these regulations.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.180  Frontage.



   “Frontage” means that side of a lot abutting on a street or way and
ordinarily regarded as the front of the lot, but it shall not be considered
what would be the side of a corner lot.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.190  General plan.



   “General plan” means the document (Casa Grande General Plan), or
part thereof, officially adopted by the city council which provides for the
development of the city and which indicates the general locations recommended
for major roadways, parks, public utilities and buildings, and land uses.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.200  Grade.



   “Grade” means the slope of a road, street, or other public way,
specified in percentage terms.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.210  Lot.



   “Lot” means a piece, parcel, plot, tract or area of land separated
from other pieces, parcels, plots, tracts or areas by description, as in
subdivision or on a record survey map or by metes and bounds, for purposes of
sale, lease or separate use.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.220  Lot improvement.



   “Lot improvement” means any building, structure, place, work of
art, or other object, or improvement of the land on which they are situated
constituting a physical betterment of real property.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.230  Model home.



   “Model home” means a dwelling unit used initially for display
purposes which typifies the units that will be constructed in a subdivision.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.240  Municipality.



   “Municipality” means the city of Casa Grande, as incorporated by
state law.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.250  Nonresidential subdivision.



   “Nonresidential subdivision” means a subdivision whose intended use
is other than residential, such as commercial or industrial.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.260  Off-site.



   “Off-site” means any premises not located within the area of the
property to be subdivided, whether or not in the same ownership of the
applicant for subdivision approval.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.270  Ordinance.



   “Ordinance” means any legislative action, however denominated, of a
local government which has the force of law, including any amendment or
repeal of any ordinance.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.280  Owner.



   “Owner” means any person or group of persons, firm or firms,
corporation or corporations, or any other legal entity having legal title to
or sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided under
these regulations.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.290  Perimeter street.



   “Perimeter street” means any existing street to which the parcel of
land to be subdivided abuts on only one side.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.300  Planning director.



   “Planning director” means the individual charged by the city
manager to administer this title.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.310  Plat.



   “Plat” means a map, chart, survey, plan or replat certified by a
licensed, registered land surveyor containing a description of the subdivided
land with ties to permanent monuments.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.320  Preliminary plat.



   “Preliminary plat” means the preliminary drawing or drawings,
described in this title, indicating the proposed manner of layout of the
subdivision.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.330  Protective covenant.



   “Protective covenant” means a restriction on the use of private
property within a subdivision for the purpose of providing mutual protection
against undesirable aspects of a development. Protective covenants regulating
the use of land represent an express agreement between the subdivider and the
lot purchasers. Also referred to as covenants, conditions and restrictions or
CCRs.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.340  Public improvement.



   “Public improvement” means any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway,
sidewalk, pedestrian way, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot
improvement, or other facility for which the city of Casa Grande may
ultimately assume responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may
effect an improvement where the responsibility rests with the city.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.350  Registered architect.



   “Registered architect” means an architect registered in the state
of Arizona.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.360  Registered engineer.



   “Registered engineer” means an engineer registered in the state of
Arizona.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.370  Resubdivision.



   “Resubdivision” means a change in a map of an approved or recorded
subdivision plat, if such change affects any street layout on such map or
area reserved thereon for public use, or any lot line; or if it affects any
map or plan legally recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations
controlling subdivisions.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.380  Right-of-way.



   “Right-of-way” means a strip of land occupied or intended to be
occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line,
oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, trees or for
another special use.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.390  Roadway.



   “Roadway” means that portion of a street right-of-way intended for
driving or parking.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.400  Sale or lease.



   “Sale or lease” means any immediate or future transfer of
ownership, or any possessory interest in land, including contract of sale,
lease, intestate succession, or transfer, of an interest in a subdivision or
part thereof, whether by metes and bounds, deed, contract, plat, map, lease,
intestate succession, or other written instrument.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.410  Sketch plat.



   “Sketch plat” means a sketch preparatory to the preparation of the
preliminary plat (or final plat when deemed appropriate) to enable the
subdivider to save time and expense in reaching general agreement with the
planning and zoning commission as to the form of the plat and the objectives
of these regulations.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.420  Street.



   “Street” means a general term used to describe a paved
right-of-way, municipally or privately owned, serving as a means of vehicular
travel. Streets are classified by function as follows:



   A.   “Local street” means a street intended to serve and provide
access exclusively to the properties abutting thereon, and not connecting
with other streets in such a manner as to encourage through traffic.



   B.   “Collector street” means a street connecting local
residential streets to each other, to community facilities and to principal,
major or minor arterial streets.



   C.   “Principal, major and minor arterial streets” means streets
designed to carry large amounts of traffic across or through the city and
designated as such by the general plan.



   D.   “Service street” means a street running parallel to a
freeway, expressway or other roadway, and serving abutting properties. Also
called Frontage Road.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.430  Street, dead-end.



   “Street, dead-end” means a street or portion of a street with only
one vehicular-traffic outlet.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.440  Subdivide.



   “Subdivide” means the act of dividing land into two or more parts
by platting, or by metes and bounds description, into tracts of less than
thirty-six acres in any one calendar year, for the purpose of:



   A.   Sale for building purposes;



   B.   Laying out a municipality or any part thereof;



   C.   Adding to a municipality;



   D.   Laying out suburban lots; or



   E.   Resubdivision.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.450  Subdivider.



   “Subdivider” means any person who:



   A.   Having an interest in land, causes it, directly or indirectly,
to be divided into a subdivision; or who



   B.   Directly or indirectly, sells, leases, or develops, or offers
to sell, lease, or develop, or advertises for sale, lease, or development,
any interest, lot parcel site, unit or plat in a subdivision; or, who



   C.   Engaging directly or through an agent in the business of
selling, leasing, developing, or offering for sale, lease, or development a
subdivision or any interest, lot, parcel site, or plat in a subdivision; and
who



   D.   Is directly or indirectly controlled by, or under direct, or
indirect common control with any of the foregoing.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.460  Subdivision.



   “Subdivision” means improved or unimproved land or lands divided
for the purpose of financing, sale or lease, whether immediate or future:



   A.   Into four or more lots, tracts, or parcels of land; or



   B.   If a new street is involved, any such property which is divided
into two or more lots, tracts, or parcels of land; or



   C.   Any such property, the boundaries of which have been fixed by
recorded plat, which is divided into more than two parts.

 



   “Subdivision” also includes any condominium, cooperative, community
apartment, townhouse, or similar project containing four or more parcels, in
which an undivided interest in the land is coupled with the right of
exclusive occupancy of any unit located thereon, but plats of such projects
need not show the buildings or the manner in which the buildings or air space
above the property shown on the plat are to be divided.



   “Subdivision” does not include the following:



   A.   The sale or exchange of parcels of land to or between adjoining
property owners if such sale or exchange does not create additional lots;



   B.   The partitioning of land in accordance with other statutes
regulating the partitioning of land held in common ownership;



   C.   The leasing of apartments, offices, stores or similar space
within a building or trailer park, nor mineral, oil or gas leases.



(Ord. 1179.2 § 2, 1991)



16.08.470  Subdivision agent.



   “Subdivision agent” means any person who represents or acts for or
on behalf of a subdivider.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.480  Subdivision plat.



   “Subdivision plat” means the final map or drawings, described
herein, on which the subdivider's plan of subdivision is presented to the
planning and zoning commission and city council for approval and which, if
approved, may be submitted to the county recorder for filing.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.490  Temporary improvement.



   “Temporary improvement” means improvements built and maintained by
a subdivider during construction of the subdivision and prior to release of
the performance bond.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.500  Tract.



   “Tract” means a defined area of land regardless of size.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.510  Utilities.



   “Utilities” mean installations or facilities, underground or
overhead, furnishing for the use of the public; electricity, gas, steam,
communication, water, drainage, sewage disposal or flood control, owned and
operated by any person, firm, corporation, municipal department or board,
duly authorized by state or municipal regulations. Utility or utilities may
also refer to such persons, firms, corporations, departments or boards as
tense requires.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.520  Vacation, public land.



   “Vacation, public land” means an official action taken by the
governing body to give up public ownership of previously owned public land,
including streets, parks or easements.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



16.08.530  Zoning.



   “Zoning” means the regulation by districts of the height, area, and
use of buildings; use of land and density of population.



(Ord. 1179 § 2.2 (part), 1987)



Chapter 16.12
PLATTING PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS



Sections:



16.12.010   Preapplication procedure.



16.12.020   Preliminary plat submittal requirements.



16.12.030   Preliminary plat—Drawing required.



16.12.040   Preliminary plat—Supporting material required.



16.12.050   Preliminary plat review procedure.



16.12.060   Final plat requirements—Certification of accuracy.



16.12.070   Final plat requirements—Staged approval.



16.12.080   Final plat requirements—Format.



16.12.090   Final plat requirements—Materials.



16.12.100   Final plat requirements—Signatures.



16.12.110   Final plat requirements—Information.



16.12.120   Final plat requirements—Fee.



16.12.130   Final plat requirements—Supporting material.



16.12.140   Final plat requirements—Drainage collection and retention
plan and report.



16.12.150   Final plat requirements—Soils report.



16.12.160   Final plat requirements—Grading, drainage and development
plan.



16.12.170   Final plat requirements—Construction plans and details.



16.12.180   Final plat requirements—Deeds.



16.12.190   Final plat requirements—Preliminary title report.



16.12.200   Final plat requirements—Floodplain.



16.12.210   Final plat requirements—Financial guarantee.



16.12.220   Final plat requirements—Letters of certification, covenants,
conditions and restrictions.



16.12.230   Final plat requirements—Compliance with approved preliminary
plat.



16.12.240   Final plat requirements—Staff review of supporting
information.



16.12.250   Final plat requirements—City council action.



16.12.260   Final plat requirements—Filing with county recorder.



16.12.270   Final plat requirements—Alternate approval procedure.



16.12.280   Simultaneous submittal of preliminary and final plats.



16.12.290   Corrected plats and resubdivisions.



16.12.300   Variances.



16.12.310   Vacating public lands.



16.12.010  Preapplication procedure.



   A.   Prior to the submission of a preliminary plat as required by
this title, the subdivider shall contact the planning director and any other
administrative personnel or private agencies to determine:



   1.   Procedures and requirements for filing the sketch plat and
preliminary and final plats;



   2.   Availability of public water and sewer or requirements when
public systems are not readily available;



   3.   Zoning requirements on the property;



   4.   Requirements of the duly adopted general plan for major and
minor streets, land use, drainage, schools, parks and other public open space;



   5.   The location and extent of any floodplains.



   B.   As a part of this contract, the subdivider may discuss with the
planning director his/her tentative proposals for the development of the
property.



   C.   The subdivider shall submit, and the planning director shall
review and comment on, a sketch plat prior to the preparation of a
preliminary plat. The planning director shall make such a review and make its
comments known to the subdivider within five days from the date of the
review. The sketch plat shall contain or show two-foot contours and shall
address the requirements of subsection A of this section.



   D.   The purpose of this preapplication procedure is to determine
any problems with the proposed development before expenses are incurred in
the preparation of a preliminary plat. No official action is required other
than to offer appropriate comments on the proposal and indicating suitability
for proceeding through the platting process.



(Ord. 1179 § 3.1, 1987)



16.12.020  Preliminary plat submittal requirements.



   Copies of the preliminary plat, the number to be determined by the
planning director, shall be submitted, with a reproducible copy, to the
planning director. The preliminary plat shall consist of a drawing or
drawings and supporting material and information as prescribed by these
regulations.



(Ord. 1179 § 3.2(A), 1987)



16.12.030  Preliminary plat—Drawing required.



   The preliminary plat drawing shall be prepared at a scale of one inch
equals one hundred feet or larger for subdivisions where the majority of lots
are less than five acres in size. The scale may be reduced to one inch equals
two hundred feet for subdivisions in which the minimum lot size is five acres
or more. The preliminary plat shall be prepared in a twenty-four by
thirty-six inch sheet size format. If more than one sheet is necessary, each
sheet shall be numbered, keyed and each sheet shall show match lines. The
face of the drawing shall contain the following information:



   A.   The Name of the Subdivision. The name shall not duplicate or
too closely resemble the name of any subdivision previously filed in the city;



   B.   Date of Preparation, Scale and North Arrow. The top of each
sheet shall represent north wherever possible;



   C.   Vicinity Map. A vicinity map drawn at a scale of one inch
equals one thousand feet or one inch equals two thousand feet, showing the
location of the proposed subdivision in the city and its relationship to
surrounding development;



   D.   The names, addresses and phone numbers of the developer or
subdivider, and the individual or firm responsible for the preparation of the
preliminary plat;



   E.   A legal description of the subdivision boundary;



   F.   The boundary lines of the subdivision in a heavy, solid line
and referenced to section or quarter section lines;



   G.   A description of all monuments, both found and set, which mark
the boundary of the subdivision, and a description of all control monuments
used in the survey;



   H.   Existing contours at a maximum interval of one foot unless
waived by the planning director;



   I.   General location and extent of any significant natural features
such as streams, or drainageways;



   J.   Floodplains and floodways as delineated on maps available from
the planning director with certification that if such floodplains exist all
lots can and shall be elevated to one foot above the one- hundred-year flood
elevation;



   K.   Location, dimensions, and names of existing roads, streets,
alleys, railroad rights-of-way and structures within two hundred feet
immediately adjacent to the property showing how they relate to the proposed
subdivision layout;



   L.   Location, size and grades of existing sanitary and storm sewers
and location and size of water mains, gas lines, pipelines, or other
underground utilities or installations within the proposed subdivision and
within two hundred feet immediately adjacent thereto;



   M.   Locations and dimensions of all easements of record;



   N.   Existing zoning and land use of the proposed subdivision and
immediately adjacent areas;



   O.   Location and width of proposed streets, alleys, pedestrian ways
and easements, with proposed names for streets;



   P.   Layout, numbers and approximate dimensions of proposed lots and
blocks;



   Q.   Location of proposed fire hydrants, light standards, stop
signs, traffic signals and gang mail boxes;



   R.   Location, dimension and size in acres of all sites proposed to
be used for commercial, industrial, multifamily residential, public or
quasi-public use, with the use noted;



   S.   A summary of the total number of acres, number of lots, acreage
of commercial or industrial areas, acreage of open space, amount of land in
rights-of-way and other descriptive material useful in reviewing the proposed
subdivision.



(Ord. 1179 § 3.2(A)(1), 1987)



16.12.040  Preliminary plat—Supporting material required.



   The following information and material shall be a part of any
preliminary plat submittal and shall accompany the preliminary plat drawing:



   A.   Payment of the total amount of the preliminary plat fee;



   B.   A statement explaining the proposed design and function of the
water, sewage, paving, sidewalk (including handicapped accessibility as per
A.R.S. 34-404 through 34-412), stormwater collection and retention systems,
including preliminary drainage calculations and storm drainage systems, their
compatibility with existing systems and the timing and/or phasing of
installation. Approximate size and location of the above may be required on
the plat, as determined by the city engineer;



   C.   A statement describing the development and maintenance
responsibility for any private streets, ways or open space;



   D.   The recommendations of a qualified professional engineer
regarding any unusual soil suitability, erosion control, sedimentation and
flooding problems;



   E.   A description of the phasing and scheduling of phases for the
development, if the final plat is to be submitted in separate phases;



   F.   A petition for annexation to the city if the land to be
subdivided is contiguous to, and outside, either by itself or as part of a
larger tract, the boundaries of the city;



   G.   An application for appropriate zoning for the subdivided area
if the area is to be annexed or if the existing zoning district does not
allow the type of use proposed;



   H.   The names and addresses of all owners of subdivided lots and
unplatted land contiguous to or within two hundred feet of the boundary of
the proposed subdivision;



   I.   Letters of certification and/or signed copies of the proposed
preliminary plat from appropriate agencies and utility companies approving
the proposed preliminary plat and confirming availability of services.



(Ord. 1179 § 3.2(A)(2), 1987)



16.12.050  Preliminary plat review procedure.



   A.   After receipt of a preliminary plat and all required supporting
material, the planning director shall schedule the plat for consideration at
the next regular meeting of the planning and zoning commission which occurs
after twenty-one days from the date on which the plat was submitted.



   B.   The planning director will review the preliminary plat,
summarize the agency comments, add his/her written comments and
recommendations, and present the material and recommendations to the planning
and zoning commission for its consideration.



   C.   At least seven days prior to the date of the planning and
zoning commission meeting at which the plat is to be considered, the planning
director shall, from information provided by the subdivider as a part of his
preliminary plat submittal, notify the owners of subdivided lots and owners
of unplatted land within two hundred feet of the boundaries of the proposed
subdivision of the time and date of the meeting.



   D.   The subdivider, or duly authorized representative, shall attend
the commission meeting at which his/her proposal is scheduled for
consideration.



   E.   At the commission meeting the subdivider and all other
interested or affected parties shall be allowed to offer comments. Upon the
commission's approval or disapproval of the preliminary plat, it shall notify
the subdivider and city council of its decision. If conditions are attached
to its approval, the subdivider and city council shall be informed of such
conditions. No preliminary plat may be continued (tabled) for more than two
consecutive meetings.



   F.   Approval of the preliminary plat by the planning and zoning
commission shall be effective for one year from the date of approval. The
subdivider may apply in writing for, and the planning and zoning commission
may, for cause shown, grant up to a six month extension. If a final plat has
not been submitted within this specified period on all or a portion of the
land area included in the preliminary plat, a preliminary plat must again be
submitted for approval. In a phased development, any land area for which the
preliminary plat has been approved and for which a final plat has not been
submitted within twenty- four months from the date of the approval of the
preliminary plat, shall not be allowed to proceed with final platting until a
new preliminary plat is submitted and approved.



(Ord. 1179 § 3.2(B), 1987)



16.12.060  Final plat requirements—Certification of accuracy.



   After approval of the preliminary plat, a final plat and required
supporting material (see Sections 16.12.130 through 16.12.220) may be
prepared and submitted to the planning director. The final plat shall be
prepared and certified as to its accuracy by a land surveyor registered to do
such work in the state of Arizona. The final plat and required supporting
material shall conform to the design and engineering standards set forth in
these regulations and to any conditions of approval specified by the planning
and zoning commission and/or city council (see Section 16.12.300) during
approval of the preliminary plat.



(Ord. 1179 § 3.3(A)(1), 1987)



16.12.070  Final plat requirements—Staged approval.



   Final platting may be accomplished in stages covering reasonable
portions of the area of an approved preliminary plat. When this is done, each
sheet of the final plat shall contain a vicinity map showing the location of
the portion being submitted in relationship to the area for which the
preliminary plat was submitted. All final plats so submitted shall be of the
same scale, shall have identical titles, legends and other information, and
shall have match lines so that mosaics of the entire subdivision can be
developed. Each stage of the subdivision shall be as nearly self-sustaining
and complete as possible and shall by itself, or in conjunction with previous
stages, meet the design standards set forth in these regulations so that if
development of the entire subdivision is interrupted or discontinued after
one or more stages is completed, a viable development will result.



(Ord. 1179 § 3.3(A)(2), 1987)



16.12.080  Final plat requirements—Format.



   The final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn in black, waterproof
India ink upon mylar of .003 inch in thickness (minimum). Required
affidavits, certificates and acknowledgments shall be legibly printed on the
plat in opaque ink. The sheet size of all final plats shall be twenty-four
inches high by thirty-six inches wide. Information on the plat should be so
positioned that a two-inch margin is on the left side and a one-half inch
margin is shown on the remaining sides. The final plat shall be prepared at a
scale of one inch equals one hundred feet or larger, or at a scale of one
inch equals two hundred feet for subdivisions in which the minimum lot size
is five acres or more. Each sheet of the final plat shall be numbered and the
total number of sheets comprising the plat shall be stated on each sheet (for
example: Sheet 2 of 4). The relationship of one sheet to the other shall be
shown by key maps and match lines.



(Ord. 1179 § 3.3(A)(3), 1987)



16.12.090  Final plat requirements—Materials.



   The original mylar, two reproducible copies (sepia not acceptable) and
prints of the final plat and copies of all required supporting material shall
be submitted to the planning director.



(Ord. 1179 § 3.3(A)(4), 1987)



16.12.100  Final plat requirements—Signatures.



   The submitted final plat shall contain the notarized signatures of the
owner or owners of any and all equitable or legal interest in the land of
whatever nature and the signature of the registered land surveyor.



(Ord. 1179 § 3.3(A)(5), 1987)



16.12.110  Final plat requirements—Information.



   All final plats shall include the following information on the face of
the plat:



   A.   The name of the subdivision, centered at the top of each sheet;



   B.   General location of the subdivision by section, township,
range, county, and state, entered under the name of the subdivision;



   C.   North arrow, date and scale;



   D.   Boundary lines of the subdivision in a heavy solid line;



   E.   Legal description of the subdivision boundary based on an
accurate traverse, giving bearing and linear dimensions that result in a
maximum allowable error of closure of one part in ten thousand;



   F.   The location and description of the point of beginning and its
proper reference to the monumented boundary survey;



   G.   Location and description of all monuments, found or set;



   H.   Bearings, distances and curve data of all perimeter boundary
lines indicated outside of the boundary lines;



   I.   Adjoining parcels' subdivision names, parcel number and
recording information;



   J.   On curved boundaries and on all curves within the plat,
sufficient data to allow the reestablishment of the curves on the ground.



   K.   The location and layout of lots, blocks, tracts, streets,
alleys, easements, and other public grounds within and immediately adjoining
the plat, with accurate dimensions in feet and one-hundredths of feet,
bearings, curve data, length of radii and/or arcs of all curves;



   L.   Drainage easements clearly labeled as such;



   M.   All drainage easements for flood control retention shall remain
in perpetuity;



   N.   The names of all streets;



   O.   All lots logically and consecutively numbered in the center of
the lot with the appropriate address of each lot or parcel of ground;



   P.   All dimensions shown on irregularly shaped lots;



   Q.   Parcels completely or partially surrounded by the area being
subdivided shall be clearly marked “EXCEPTED,” and the common boundary
with the subdivision shown in a heavy solid line with bearings and distances;



   R.   A notation of the total acreage of the subdivision and the
total number of lots;



   S.   A notarized certificate by all parties having any titled
interest in or lien upon the land, consenting to the recording of the plat
and dedicating public ways, grounds and easements. Dedication shall include a
written description by section, township and range of the tract. If the plat
contains private streets, public utilities shall be reserved the right to
install and maintain utilities in the street right-of-way;



   T.   In cases involving vacation of public or private streets or
public ways, easements or grounds, a notarized certificate of all parties
having any titled interest in, or lien upon, the land or other pertinent
interest, consenting to such vacation shall be provided;



   U.   A notarized certificate of a registered land surveyor,
registered under the laws of Arizona, with his/her address and registration
number, stating that the plat is true, accurate and complete and that the
described monuments have been found or set as described;



   V.   Certification of availability of water from the local water
agency supplying water;



   W.   Certificate of approval of the city engineer as follows:



Data on this plat reviewed and approved this     day of            
,19   , by the City Engineer of Casa Grande, Arizona.



________________                     



City Engineer



   X.   Certificate of compliance with the preliminary plat as approved
by the city of Casa Grande planning and zoning commission as follows:



This plat is in compliance with the original preliminary plat approved by the
city of Casa Grande Planning and Zoning Commission on the            
                      day of                        
      , 19         . The Final Plat reviewed and approved this    
day of               , 19     .



________________________



Planning and Zoning Commission Chairperson



                                             



Planning Director



   Y.   Certificate of acceptance and approval by the city council as
follows:



Approved by the City Council of the City of Casa Grande, Arizona, this    
day of                     _______ , 19   .



_____________________________



Mayor



Attest:



_____________________________



City Clerk



   Z.   Certificate for recording by the County Recorder as follows:



This plat was filed for record in the Office of County Recorder at      
o'clock       . m.,               _____________ ,  19     , and
is duly recorded in Book            , Page No.



                                               



County Recorder



(Ord. 1179 § 3.3(A)(6), 1987)



16.12.120  Final plat requirements—Fee.



   The final plat shall be accompanied by the total amount of the final
plat fee.



(Ord. 1179 § 3.3(A)(7), 1987)



16.12.130  Final plat requirements—Supporting material.



   The required final plat supporting material submittal shall consist of
the final plat and all information as set out in Sections 16.12.140 through
16.12.220.



(Ord. 1179 § 3.3(B)(part), 1987)



16.12.140  Final plat requirements—Drainage collection and retention plan
and report.



   A.   A drainage plan and report for the site in question and all
pertinent off-site areas shall be prepared by a registered engineer. The
report shall examine one-hundred-year storm flows (Q 100's), the
one-hundred-year high water mark of any river, creek, arroyo, gully,
diversion ditch, spillway, reservoir, etc., that may in any way affect the
project area, along with the depth of flow for one-hundred-year runoff. The
watershed in all off-site areas shall be considered fully developed.
Intensities shall be for this area's one hour one-hundred-year storm based
upon two and thirty-nine one-hundredths (2.39) inches per hour. A certificate
shall be provided, signed, and sealed by a registered professional engineer
that all drainage facilities, utilizing gutters and streets, are designed and
sized to handle one hundred percent of the Q 100 runoff. The report shall
comply with the requirements and standards of the city storm drainage master
plan and drainage policy.



   B.   Every effort shall be made to utilize the natural slope of the
land for the stormwater collection system. Subsurface drainage systems shall
be discouraged, but where necessary shall be a minimum of twenty-four inches
in diameter. Wherever possible, runoff shall be collected in depressed open
areas throughout the proposed land development project. The plan shall
include but not be limited to, the following:



   1.   Method of collection (surface and/or subsurface);



   2.   Depth, side slopes and area of retention;



   3.   Calculations of volume held and required;



   4.   High water elevation;



   5.   Method of disposal of water within thirty-six hours;



   6.   Any other data to form a complete plan.



   C.   The point or points in which natural drainage flows onto and
from a property prior to development shall remain the same after the property
has been altered for the development.



(Ord. 1179 § 3.3(B)(part), 1987)



16.12.150  Final plat requirements—Soils report.



   A soils report for the site in question and pertinent off-site areas
shall be prepared, if required by the city, by a registered engineer. The
report shall indicate the type and location of soils, using the unified soil
classification system, shall contain drill logs and swell consolidation
curves, shall contain the results of percolation tests and soil bearing
capacity tests, and shall contain a discussion of any present or potential
hazards, associated with soils on the site along with measures which could be
taken to mitigate such hazards. In addition the soils report shall contain
recommendations on subsurface area drains and peripheral drains, foundation
design, erosion control measures and surface drainage.



(Ord. 1179 § 3.3(B)(part), 1987)



16.12.160  Final plat requirements—Grading, drainage and development plan.



   A.   A grading, drainage and development plan shall be prepared by a
registered engineer at a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet or larger,
showing proposed rights-of-way, easements, walkways, parks, common areas,
roadways, waterlines and reservoirs, sewer lines, manholes and treatment
facilities, curbs and gutters, culverts, drains, stormwater detention and
retention basins, swales, ditches and other drainage devices, spot top of
curb elevations, high and low street points, drainage arrows, street plans,
all drainage areas and acreages, all one-hundred-year storm flows (Q 100's)
adjacent to and/or flowing onto the development and on-site at each surface
flow junction, stormwater “pickup” and “takeoff” points designed to
handle one-hundred-year flow on the surface, cross sections and high water
elevations for all one-hundred-year flows. Spot elevations shall be given for
all inverts, low points and flowing entry and exit points.



   B.   All minimum building setbacks shall be shown. No
one-hundred-year flow line shall encroach upon any minimum setback line and
all lowest habitable floor elevations shall be at minimum, one foot above the
one-hundred-year flood elevation. Certification by a registered engineer that
such conditions will be maintained may be required by the city.



(Ord. 1179 § 3.3(B)(part), 1987)



16.12.170  Final plat requirements—Construction plans and details.



   Construction plans and details must be prepared by a registered
professional engineer in the state of Arizona and shall provide for all
improvements indicated on the grading, drainage, and development plan,
including right-of-way and easement cross sections showing construction and
placement of streets, walks, curbs, gutters, medians, lighting standards,
swales, ditches, utilities, planting strips and property lines; details of
hydrants, valves, manholes, pipe junctions, pumps, thrust-blocking, catch
basins, etc.; street profiles showing natural and finish grades, centerline
and both curbs, with a minimum vertical scale of one inch equals two feet and
a horizontal scale of one inch equals twenty feet; sanitary sewer line and
manhole profiles with natural and finish grades, showing area underdrains, if
applicable, and the location of gravity outfall lines; storm drainage system
profiles showing natural and finish grade; erosion control and revegetation
details and other details as necessary to adequately convey the design
intent. Quantity takeoffs shall also be provided.



(Ord. 1179 § 3.3(B)(part), 1987)



16.12.180  Final plat requirements—Deeds.



   When required by the city, a warranty deed or other acceptable
instrument conveying to the city or other appropriate public agency any
public lands other than streets, alleys or easements shown on the final plat
and title insurance, if required by the city on the subject parcel, shall be
presented to the city upon approval of the final plat. The method of
assurance will be approved by the city attorney.



(Ord. 1179 § 3.3(B)(part), 1987)



16.12.190  Final plat requirements—Preliminary title report.



   A preliminary title report prepared by a certified title company shall
be submitted showing title and control of the property.



(Ord. 1179 § 3.3(B)(part), 1987)



16.12.200  Final plat requirements—Floodplain.



   If a subdivision lies within a one-hundred-year floodplain, the
following statement shall appear on the face of the final plat and all
contracts and agreements relating to the subdivision: “THIS SUBDIVISION IS
(OR THE FOLLOWING LOTS ARE) LOCATED WITHIN THE ONE HUNDRED YEAR FLOODPLAIN AS
DEFINED BY THE UNITED STATES FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA).”
(All lots are required to be elevated to one foot above the one-hundred-year
flood elevation.)



(Ord. 1179 § 3.3(B)(part), 1987)



16.12.210  Final plat requirements—Financial guarantee.



   A contractor's performance bond or other financial guarantee acceptable
to the city to guarantee the complete and timely development of any
facilities or improvements which are the subdivider's responsibility shall be
submitted as described in Article I of Chapter 16.20.



(Ord. 1179 § 3.3(B)(part), 1987)



16.12.220  Final plat requirements—Letters of certification, covenants,
conditions and restrictions.



   A.   Letters of certification and/or signed copies of the proposed
final plat from appropriate agencies and utility companies approving the
proposed final plat.



   B.   Any covenants, conditions and restrictions (CCR's) for the
subdivision shall be submitted for review to assure that such CCR's do not
conflict with any city regulations.



(Ord. 1179 § 3.3(B)(part), 1987)



16.12.230  Final plat requirements—Compliance with approved preliminary
plat.



   After receipt of the final plat, the planning director shall review the
submittal with the chairperson of the planning and zoning commission for
completeness and for compliance with the approved preliminary plat. The
director may refer to copies of the final plat to and seek comment from other
officials and agencies.



(Ord. 1179 § 3.3(C)(1), 1987)



16.12.240  Final plat requirements—Staff review of supporting information.



   Upon submittal of all required supportingmaterials, the planning
director shall review them for completeness to determine whether a complete
final plat submittal has been made and shall refer the material to
appropriate agencies for review and comment. Upon being notified of the
comments and any necessary approvals of reviewing agencies, the planning
director shall forward the final plat, comments and approvals of reviewing
agencies and pertinent supporting materials to the council. Incomplete final
plats, or final plats for which necessary approvals have not been secured,
shall not be forwarded to council for action.



(Ord. 1179 § 3.3(C)(2), 1987)



16.12.250  Final plat requirements—City council action.



   Following receipt of the final plat, the recommendation from the
planning director and chairperson of the planning and zoning commission that
the final plat complies with the preliminary plat, and required supporting
materials, the city council shall either approve the final plat or disapprove
the final plat and notify the subdivider of the conditions to be met to gain
approval. If a disapproved final plat is modified and resubmitted to the city
council at a later date for their consideration, the council may require a
concurrent submittal of an updated ownership and encumbrance report or title
opinion.



(Ord. 1179 § 3.3(C)(3), 1987)



16.12.260  Final plat requirements—Filing with county recorder.



   Upon approval by the city council of the final plat, the subdivider
shall be notified to submit payment for the recording fee to the planning
director who shall transmit the subdivider's recording fee and the duly
approved and executed final plat to the county recorder for the filing of the
final plat among the official records of the county.



(Ord. 1179 § 3.3(C)(4), 1987)



16.12.270  Final plat requirements—Alternate approval procedure.



   As an alternate procedure and at the request of the subdivider, the
city council may approve a final plat and instruct the planning director to
withhold the approved final plat from recording for a period of time to allow
the subdivider to install all of the required public improvements according
to the plans and specifications approved by the city engineer. This
procedure, when approved by the council, shall be in lieu of the guarantees
for installation of improvements as set forth in Section 16.12.210 of these
regulations. An executed standard contract as approved by the city attorney
regarding installation of improvements shall be submitted with the final
plat. The contract shall require that all improvements be completed no later
than twelve months from the date the final plat was approved by the city
council and that no lot may be sold. When the completed improvements are
inspected and approved by the city engineer, the plat shall be recorded by
the planning director, and the sale of lots may then proceed according to the
approved and recorded plat, provided that a one year warranty shall be
submitted covering the completed improvements.



(Ord. 1179 § 3.3(C)(5), 1987)



16.12.280  Simultaneous submittal of preliminary and final plats.



   For certain subdivisions, the subdivider may, after discussion with the
planning director, simultaneously submit both the preliminary plat and the
final plat. Depending on the size and complexity of the subdivision and the
amount of street dedication, any or all of the information required in the
preliminary and final plat processes may be submitted. The director shall
determine which information must be submitted for adequate review of the
subdivision. The preliminary and final plats may then be processed
concurrently. It is possible for the preliminary and final plats to be one
and the same instrument.



(Ord. 1179 § 3.3(D), 1987)



16.12.290  Corrected plats and resubdivisions.



   A.   If, after the approval and recording of a final plat, errors
are found in the language or numbers on the recorded plat, the subdivider
shall file a properly signed, corrected or revised original mylar with the
planning director. The plat shall be noted CORRECTED PLAT under the name of
the subdivision. Notations shall be made on the face of the plat listing all
corrections made and the book and page numbers where the original plat was
recorded. The director shall review the plat for corrections, secure the
signatures of the proper public officials on the corrected plat and present
the plat to the city council for the reaffirmation of their approval and to
the county clerk for recording. The recording of the corrected plat shall
void the incorrect original plat, and the council clerk shall note VOID
across the face of the incorrect plat.



   B.   If, after the approval and recording of a final plat, a
subdivider wishes to modify the location of lot lines on part or all of the
recorded plat, and if there is no change in the location or size of dedicated
streets or other dedicated public land, the subdivider shall submit a new
final plat drawing with the lotting arrangement revised. The community
development director shall determine which of the required supporting
materials shall be resubmitted with the revised final plat. The plat shall be
marked the RESUBDIVISION OF                             under
the name of the subdivision and shall be processed as a final plat.



   C.   If, after the approval and recording of a final plat, a
subdivider wishes to change the street or public land location, size or
arrangement of a part or all of the platted area, the resulting subdivision
shall be treated as a new submittal with both a preliminary plat and a final
plat required. Based on the currency of the information submitted with the
original plat and the magnitude of the change(s), the procedure described in
Section 16.12.280 may be applied. The subdivision shall be identified as the
RESUBDIVISION OF         . Any action of the city council approving such
resubdivision shall contain clear reference to the vacation of public lands
as appropriate.



(Ord. 1179 § 3.3(E), 1987)



16.12.300  Variances.



   A.   When it can be shown that in the case of a particular
subdivision, strict compliance with the provisions of these regulations would
cause undue hardship, the city council may authorize a variance to these
regulations provided that the general intent of these regulations is
preserved, the public interest is protected, and that such variances do not
have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the general plan or
Title 17 of this code. The granting of a variance shall be based upon
findings by the council that:



   1.   The subdivider is proceeding in good faith;



   2.   There are unusual topographical or other special circumstances
associated with the property which are not the result of any action of the
subdivider and which prohibit the use of the property in a manner similar to
the use of adjacent or nearby properties;



   3.   The variance is necessary for reasonable development of the
property in question and will alleviate a clearly demonstrable hardship;



   4.   The variance will not nullify the intent or purpose of these
regulations;



   5.   Granting the variance will not be detrimental to the general
public health, safety and welfare.



   B.   Any variance granted shall constitute the minimum adjustment
necessary to alleviate the hardship.



   C.   All requests for variances shall be submitted in writing
together with a preliminary plat and reviewed in the normal manner by the
planning and zoning commission.  The planning and zoning commission may
approve or deny the preliminary plat and variance request.



   D.   Following the planning and zoning commission's action, the
request for variance shall be referred to the city council for consideration
and action.  The council may consider comments from the planning and zoning
commission, staff, the applicant, and the public.  The council may approve
or deny the variance request.  The request may not be tabled for more than
two meetings.  In granting a variance, compliance with the intent of the
objectives and standards of these regulations shall be maintained.



   E.   If the subdivision variance is grantedby the city council, the
subdivider may incorporate the provisions of the variance into the final plat
to be submitted and reviewed in the normal manner at a subsequent meeting of
the city council.  The final plat must, in all respects other than the
variance, conform with the preliminary plat and any other conditions imposed
by the planning and zoning commission.



(Ord. 1179.5 § 2, 1990)



16.12.310  Vacating public lands.



   A.   Any plat may be vacated by the owners or proprietors thereof at
any time before sale of any lots, or before any substantial improvements have
been made in the subdivision, by submitting a copy of the plat to the city
council along with a written request for a vacation. In cases where lots have
been sold, the written request shall be by all of the owners of lots within
the plat. The planning and zoning commission shall make a recommendation on
the vacation to the city council, and the city council shall approve or
disapprove the vacation. The recording of an instrument vacating the plat
shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the recording of the
original plat and to divest all public rights in the streets, alleys, common
and public grounds laid out or described in such a plat.



   B.   Streets and alleys platted and laid out under the provisions of
these regulations or laid out under any prior law of the state of Arizona may
be altered or vacated in the manner provided by law for the alteration or
discontinuance of streets and highways.



   C.   Any part of a plat may be vacated under the provisions and
subject to the conditions of this section and Section 16.12.110, provided
such vacating does not abridge or destroy any of the rights and privileges of
other proprietors in said plat and provided, further, that nothing contained
in this section shall authorize the closing or obstruction of any public
highways laid out according to law. The request for vacation shall be made by
all of the owners of lots within that portion of the overall plat sought to
be vacated.



   D.   When any part of a plat shall be vacated as aforesaid, streets,
alleys, and other public grounds shall be assigned to all lots or parcels
adjacent to the public area being vacated in equal proportions.



   E.   The county clerk shall write in plain, legible letters across
that part of said plat so vacated, the word “vacated” and also make
reference on the same to the volume and page in which said instrument of
vacation is recorded.



   F.   Land covered by a vacated plat may be replatted as described in
these regulations. Any replatting of an area already platted and not vacated
shall be construed to be a request for the vacation of the original plat or
portion thereof. Any such plat, once approved and recorded, shall act to
vacate the original plat which it replaces.



(Ord. 1179 § 3.3(G), 1987)



Chapter 16.16
DESIGN STANDARDS



Sections:



16.16.010   General improvements to comply with certain rules and
regulations.



16.16.020   Self-imposed restrictions.



16.16.030   Permanent reference monuments required.



16.16.040   Land unsuitable for development when.



16.16.050   Subdivision name.



16.16.060   Lot arrangement.



16.16.070   Lot dimensions to comply with minimum standards.



16.16.080   Double frontage lots to be avoided—Access requirements.



16.16.090   Soil preservation and lot drainage requirements.



16.16.100   Debris and waste to be cleared.



16.16.110   Fencing and screen wall requirements.



16.16.120   Performance bond to include lot improvement.



16.16.130   Streets—Frontage requirements.



16.16.140   Streets—Grading and improvement plan.



16.16.150   Streets—Topography and arrangement requirements.



16.16.160   Streets—Block dimension requirements.



16.16.170   Streets—Access to arterial streets.



16.16.180   Street naming requirements.



16.16.190   Street names and regulatory signs requirements.



16.16.200   Street light requirements.



16.16.210   Construction of streets—Dead-end streets.



16.16.220   Streets—General design standards.



16.16.230   Street and sidewalk surfacing and improvement requirements.



16.16.240   Railroads and limited access highways.



16.16.250   Required angles of intersections.



16.16.260   Widening and realignment of existing streets.



16.16.270   Sidewalks and curbs—Required improvements.



16.16.280   Drainage, storm sewers and retention basins—General
requirements.



16.16.290   Retention requirements.



16.16.300   Dedication of drainage easements—Requirements.



16.16.310   Water facility and fire hydrant requirements.



16.16.320   Sewer facility requirements in general.



16.16.330   Public sewerage required.



16.16.340   Private sewerage systems when.



16.16.350   Mandatory connection to public sewer system when.



16.16.360   Individual sewage system disposal requirements.



16.16.370   Design criteria for sanitary sewers.



16.16.380   Utility location and easement requirements.



16.16.390   Public land reservation requirements.



16.16.400   Multimodal transportation study adopted by reference.



16.16.010  General improvements to comply with certain rules and regulations.



   All subdivision improvements shall be in conformance to the following
rules and regulations:



   A.   The city of Casa Grande Zoning Ordinance;



   B.   The general plan of the city including all streets, drainage
systems, and parks shown on the general plan as adopted;



   C.   The rules of the Arizona Department of Transportation if the
subdivision or any lot contained therein abuts a state highway or connecting
street;



   D.   The regulations and requirements of the city Flood Control
Ordinance and storm drainage master plan and drainage policy, as they may be
amended from time to time;



   E.   The Arizona Department of Health Bulletin No. 11, “Design of
Sewage Works” and the Pinal County Department of Health relative to water
supply and sanitary sewage disposal; and



   F.   The design standards and regulations adopted by the city
engineer and officials of the city, which shall include, but not be limited
to, the Uniform Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction and the
Uniform Standard Details for Public Works Construction, as sponsored and
distributed by Maricopa Association of Governments;



   G.   The Manual on Uniform Traffic Control.



(Ord. 1179 § 4.1(A), 1987)



16.16.020  Self-imposed restrictions.



   If the owner places restrictions on any of the land contained in the
subdivision greater than those required by this title or Title 17, such
restrictions or reference thereto may be required to be indicated on the
subdivision plat, or the planning and zoning commission may require that
protective covenants be recorded with the county clerk.



(Ord. 1179 § 4.1(B), 1987)



16.16.030  Permanent reference monuments required.



   The applicant shall place permanent reference monuments in the
subdivision as approved by a registered land surveyor and the city engineer.



(Ord. 1179 § 4.1(C), 1987)



16.16.040  Land unsuitable for development when.



   Land which the planning and zoning commission finds to be unsuitable
for subdivision or development because of flooding, improper drainage, rock
formations, adverse earth formations or topography, utility easements, or
other features which will reasonably be harmful to the safety, health, and
general welfare of the present or future inhabitants of the subdivision
and/or its surrounding areas, shall not be subdivided or developed unless
adequate methods are formulated by the developer and approved by the planning
and zoning commission, upon recommendation of the city engineer, to solve the
problems created by the unsuitable land conditions. Such land shall be set
aside for uses that shall not involve such a danger.



(Ord. 1179 § 4.1(D), 1987)



16.16.050  Subdivision name.



   The proposed name of the subdivision shall not duplicate, or too
closely approximate phonetically, the name of any other subdivision in the
area covered by this chapter. The planning and zoning commission shall have
final authority to designate the name of the subdivision which shall be
determined at sketch plat approval.



(Ord. 1179 § 4.1(E), 1987)



16.16.060  Lot arrangement.



   The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be no foreseeable
difficulties, for reasons of topography or other conditions, in securing
building permits to build on all lots in compliance with Title 17 or in
providing driveway access to buildings on such lots from an approved street.



(Ord. 1179 § 4.2(A), 1987)



16.16.070  Lot dimensions to comply with minimum standards.



   Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards of Title 17.
Where lots are more than double the minimum required area for the zoning
district, the planning and zoning commission may require that such lots be
arranged so as to allow further subdivision and the opening of future streets
where they would be necessary to serve such potential lots, all in compliance
with this title and Title 17. In general, side lot lines shall be at right
angles to street lines (or radial to curving street lines) unless a variation
from this rule will give a better street or lot plan. Dimensions of corner
lots shall be large enough to allow for the erection of buildings, observing
the minimum setbacks from both streets. Depth and width of properties
reserved or laid out for business, commercial, or industrial purposes shall
be adequate to provide for the off-street parking and loading facilities
required for the type of use and development contemplated, as established in
Title 17 of this code.



(Ord. 1179 § 4.2(B), 1987)



16.16.080  Double frontage lots to be avoided—Access requirements.



   A.   Double frontage lots and reversed frontage lots shall be
avoided except where necessary to provide separation of residential
development from traffic arterials or to overcome specific disadvantages of
topography and orientation.



   B.   Lots shall not, in general, derive access exclusively from an
arterial street. Where driveway access from an arterial street may be
necessary for several adjoining lots, the planning and zoning commission may
require that such lots be served by a combined access drive in order to limit
possible traffic hazards on the street. Where possible, driveways should be
designed and arranged so as to avoid requiring vehicles to back into traffic
on arterial streets.



(Ord. 1179 § 4.2(C), 1987)



16.16.090  Soil preservation and lot drainage requirements.



   A.   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until grading has
been completed in accordance with the approved final subdivision plat.



   B.   Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away
from all buildings and individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with the
general storm drainage pattern for the area. Drainage shall be designed so as
to avoid concentration of storm drainage water from each lot onto adjacent
lots and shall comply with the requirements of the city's storm drainage
master plan and drainage policy.



(Ord. 1179 § 4.2(D), 1987)



16.16.100  Debris and waste to be cleared.



   No cut trees, debris, rocks, rubbish, or other waste materials of any
kind shall be buried in any land, or left or deposited on any lot or street
at the time of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.



(Ord. 1179 § 4.2(E), 1987)



16.16.110  Fencing and screen wall requirements.



   Each subdivider and/or developer shall be required to furnish and
install fences and/or screen walls wherever the city council determines that
a hazardous condition may exist. The fences shall be constructed according to
standards established by Title 17 of this code and shall be noted as to
height and material on the final plat. No certificate of occupancy shall be
issued until the fence improvements have been duly installed.



(Ord. 1179 § 4.2(A), 1987)



16.16.120  Performance bond to include lot improvement.



   A.   The performance bond or other financial guarantee shall include
an amount to guarantee completion of all requirements contained in Sections
16.16.060 through 16.16.120 of this chapter including, but not limited to,
soil preservation, final grading, lot drainage, removal of debris and waste,
fencing, and all other lot improvements required by the city council.



   B.   Whether or not a certificate of occupancy has been issued, at
the expiration of the performance bond, the city may enforce the provisions
of the bond where the provisions of the above mentioned sections or any other
applicable law, ordinance or regulation have not been satisfied.



(Ord. 1179 § 4.2(G), 1987)



16.16.130  Streets—Frontage requirements.



   No subdivision shall be approved unless the area to be subdivided shall
have frontage on, and access from, an existing street and unless such street
is:



   A.   A street shown upon a plat approved by the city council and
recorded in the county recorder's office. The street or highway must be
suitably improved as required by Maricopa Association of Governments (MAG)
specifications or be secured by a performance bond required under these
subdivision regulations, with the width and right-of-way required by these
subdivision regulations or the general plan. Wherever the area to be
subdivided is to utilize existing road frontage, such road shall be suitably
improved as provided hereinabove.



(Ord. 1179 § 4.3(A)(1), 1987)



16.16.140  Streets—Grading and improvement plan.



   Roads shall be graded and improved and conform to the city construction
standards and specifications and shall be approved as to design and
specifications by the city engineer, in accordance with the construction
plans required to be submitted prior to final plat approval.



(Ord. 1179 § 4.3(A)(2), 1987)



16.16.150  Streets—Topography and arrangement requirements.



   A.   Roads shall be related appropriately to the topography. Local
roads shall be curved wherever possible to avoid conformity of lot
appearance. All streets shall be arranged so as to obtain as many as possible
of the building sites at, or above, the grades of the streets. Grades of
streets shall conform as closely as possible to the original topography.
Specific standards are contained in the design standards of these regulations.



   B.   All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and
proposed system of thoroughfares and dedicated rights-of-way as established
in the general plan.



   C.   Local streets shall be laid out to conform as much as possible
to the topography, to discourage use by through traffic, to permit efficient
drainage and utility systems, and to require the minimum number of streets
necessary to provide convenient and safe access to the property.



   D.   Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the
tract to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other physical
conditions, unless in the opinion of the city council, such extension is not
necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision
with the existing layout or the most advantageous future development of
adjacent tracts.



(Ord. 1179 § 4.3(A)(3), 1987)



16.16.160  Streets—Block dimension requirements.



   A.   Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of
lots of appropriate depths. Exceptions to this prescribed block width shall
be permitted in blocks adjacent to major streets, railroads, waterways or
parks.



   B.   The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be such as are
appropriate for the locality and the type of development contemplated, but
block lengths in residential areas shall not exceed six hundred feet or
twelve times the minimum lot width required in the zoning district.



   C.   In long blocks the city council may require the reservation of
an easement through the block to accommodate utilities, drainage facilities,
emergency access, or pedestrian traffic.



(Ord. 1179 § 4.3(A)(4), 1987)



16.16.170  Streets—Access to arterial streets.



   Where a residential subdivision borders on or contains an existing or
proposed arterial street, the city may require that access to such streets be
limited by one of the following means:



   A.   The subdivision of lots so that the lots back onto the arterial
street and front onto a parallel local street; no direct access shall be
provided from the arterial street.



   B.   A series of cul-de-sacs, U-shaped streets, or short loops
entered from and designed generally at right angles to such a parallel
street, with the rear lines of their terminal lots backing onto the arterial
street.



   C.   A marginal access or service road (separated from the arterial
street by a planting or landscaped strip and having access thereto at
suitable points).



(Ord. 1179 § 4.3(A)(5), 1987)



16.16.180  Street naming requirements.



   Street names shall be sufficiently different in sound and in spelling
from other street names in the city so as not to cause confusion. A street
which exists or is planned as a continuation of an existing street shall bear
the same name. Street names shall be proposed by the subdivider as per
Section 16.12.030 of this code, but shall be approved by the city council as
part of the final plat.



(Ord. 1179 § 4.3(A)(6), 1987)



16.16.190  Street names and regulatory signs requirements.



   The subdivider shall install all street name signs and regulatory signs
(e.g. yield, stop, speed limit, bicycle route, etc.) as required by the city
engineer. The subdivider shall install all street signs before issuance of
certificates of occupancy for any residence on the streets approved. Street
name signs are to be placed at all intersections within or abutting the
subdivision, the type and location of which are to be approved by the city
engineer.



(Ord. 1179 § 4.3(A)(7), 1987)



16.16.200  Street light requirements.



   Installation of street lights shall be required in accordance with
design and specification standards approved by the city engineer. Lighting on
local and collector streets shall maintain a minimum of .4 lumens at any
given point along the street right-of-way while .7 lumens shall be maintained
along arterial streets. In addition, light standards shall be spaced such
that each intersection is provided at least one light standard.



(Ord. 1179 § 4.3(A)(8), 1987)



16.16.210  Construction of streets—Dead-end streets.



   A.   The arrangement of streets shall provide for the continuation
of principal streets between adjacent properties when such continuation is
necessary for convenient movement of traffic, effective fire protection, for
efficient provision of utilities, and where such continuation is in
accordance with the city general plan. If the adjacent property is
undeveloped and the street must be a dead-end street temporarily, the
right-of-way shall be extended to the property line. A temporary cul-de-sac
or T- or L-shaped turnabout shall be provided on all temporary dead-end
streets, with the notation on the subdivision plat that land outside the
normal street right-of-way shall revert to abuttors whenever the street is
continued. The city may limit the length of temporary dead-end streets in
accordance with the design standards of these regulations.



   B.   Where a street does not extend to the boundary of the
subdivision and its continuation is not required by the city for access to
adjoining property, its terminus shall normally not be nearer to such
boundary than fifty feet. However, the city may require the reservation of an
appropriate easement to accommodate drainage facilities, pedestrian traffic,
or utilities. A cul-de-sac shall be provided at the end of a permanent
dead-end street in accordance with construction standards and specifications,
but in no case shall such cul-de-sac exceed six hundred feet in length,
unless special approval is granted by the fire department and any other
appropriate department.



   C.   For greater convenience to traffic and more effective police
and fire protection, permanent dead-end streets shall, in general, be limited
in length in accordance with the design standards of these regulations.



(Ord. 1179 § 4.3(A)(9), 1987)



16.16.220  Streets—General design standards.



   In order to provide for streets of suitable location, width, and
improvement to accommodate prospective traffic and afford satisfactory access
to police, fire protection, sanitation, and street- maintenance equipment,
and to coordinate streets so as to compose a convenient system and avoid
undue hardships to adjoining properties. Table 1, codified at the end of this
chapter, sets forth design standards for streets.



(Ord. 1179 § 4.3(B)(1), 1987)



16.16.230  Street and sidewalk surfacing and improvement requirements.



   A.   After sewer and water utilities have been installed by the
developer, the applicant shall construct curbs and gutters and shall surface
or cause to be surfaced roadways to the widths prescribed in this title. The
surfacing shall be of such a character as is suitable for the expected
traffic and in harmony with similar improvements in the surrounding areas.
Types of pavement shall be as determined by the city engineer. Adequate
provision shall be made for culverts, drains, and bridges.



   B.   All street pavements, shoulders, drainage and utility
improvements and structures, curbs, turnarounds, and sidewalks shall conform
to the Uniform Standard Details Specifications adopted by the city council,
with provisions for handicapped accessibility as required by A.R.S. Sections
34-404 through 34-412, and shall be incorporated into the construction plans
required to be submitted by the developer for plat approval.



(Ord. 1179 § 4.3(B)(2), 1987)



16.16.240  Railroads and limited access highways.



   Railroad rights-of-way and limited access highways where so located as
to affect the subdivision of adjoining lands shall be treated as follows:



   A.   In residential districts a buffer strip at least twenty-five
feet in depth in addition to the normal depth of the lot required in the
district shall be provided adjacent to the railroad right-of-way or limited
access highway. This strip shall be part of the platted lots and shall be
designated on the plat: “This strip is reserved for screening. The
placement of structures, except for street signs and lighting, hereon is
prohibited.”



   B.   In districts zoned for business, commercial, or industrial
uses, the nearest street extending parallel or approximately parallel to the
railroad shall, wherever practicable, be at a sufficient distance therefrom
to ensure suitable depth for commercial or industrial sites.



   C.   Streets parallel to the railroad when intersecting a street
which crosses the railroad at grade shall, to the extent practicable, be a
distance of at least one hundred fifty feet from the railroad right-of-way.
Such a distance shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum
distance required for future separation of grades by means of appropriate
approach gradients.



(Ord. 1179 § 4.3(B)(3))



16.16.250  Required angles of intersections.



   Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at
right angles. A proposed intersection of two new streets at an angle of less
than seventy-five degrees shall not be acceptable. An oblique street should
be curved approaching an intersection and should be approximately at right
angles for at least one hundred feet therefrom. Not more than two streets
shall intersect at any one point unless specifically approved by the planning
and zoning commission.



(Ord. 1179 § 4.3(B)(4))



16.16.260  Widening and realignment of existing streets.



   Where a subdivision borders an existing narrow street or when the
general plan or Title 17 indicates plans for realignment or widening a street
that would require the use of some of the land in the subdivision, the
applicant shall be required to improve and dedicate at his/her expense such
areas for widening or realignment of such streets. Such streets shall be
improved and dedicated by the applicant at his/her own expense to the full
width as required by these subdivision regulations. Land reserved for any
road purposes may not be counted in satisfying yard requirements of Title 17,
whether the land is to be dedicated to the municipality in fee simple or as
an easement for future expansion or as a private street.



(Ord. 1179 § 4.3(B)(5))



16.16.270  Sidewalks and curbs—Required improvements.



   A.   Sidewalks shall be included within the dedicated nonpavement
right-of-way of all streets as illustrated on Table 2, codified at the end of
this chapter.



   B.   Concrete curbs and gutters are required for all streets.
Collector and arterial streets shall require six inch vertical curbs.



   C.   Handicapped ramps shall be provided on all sidewalks at all
street intersections; ramps will be offset from the sidewalk entering the
street a distance equal to the width of the sidewalk.



   D.   Sidewalks shall be improved as required in Section 16.16.230 of
this chapter.



(Ord. 1179 § 4.4)



16.16.280  Drainage, storm sewers and retention basins—General
requirements.



   A.   The city will not recommend for approval any plat of a
subdivision which does not make adequate provision for storm or floodwater
runoff channels or basins. The stormwater drainage system shall be separate
and independent of any sanitary sewer system. Storm drainage shall be
accommodated in the streets, gutters or retention basins unless otherwise
indicated by the city engineer. Subsurface drainage systems shall be
discouraged, but where storm sewers are required, the cost shall be borne by
the developer for storm sewers to a size of twenty-four inches; if over
twenty-four inches in size and determined to be for benefit outside of the
subdivision, the costs may be shared, as determined by the city council, but
only for that portion determined to be of benefit outside the subdivision.



   B.   All provisions for drainage control shall comply with the
regulations of the city storm drainage master plan and drainage policy,
adopted as ordinance, as it from time to time may be amended.



   C.   The city council may, when it deems necessary for the health,
safety, or welfare of the present and future population of the area and
necessary to the conservation of water, drainage, and sanitary facilities,
prohibit the subdivision of any portion of the property which lies within any
one-hundred-year floodplain as determined by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA). Any development that may be permitted in the floodplain areas
shall comply with the floodplain regulations for the city.



   D.   Floodway areas shall be preserved from any and all destruction
or damage resulting from clearing, grading, or dumping of earth, waste
material, or stumps, except at the discretion of the city council.



(Ord. 1179 § 4.5(A))



16.16.290  Retention requirements.



   A.   All provisions for stormwater retention and all retention
requirements and retention basin capacity calculations shall comply with the
regulations of the city storm drainage master plan and drainage policy, as it
from time to time may be amended.



   B.   Dedicated retention basins will be part of the city's park and
open space system. Nondedicated retention basins shall be maintained by the
owner. All nondedicated retention basin areas shall be designated as easement
areas for retention purposes and shall have a recorded protective covenant
requiring perpetual maintenance.



   C.   Two or more developers may join together to provide a common
retention facility. A letter of agreement signed by all developers
participating in the common retention area must be presented to the city
engineer, and the recorded plat shall indicate that the retention area is a
joint facility. The joint recreation area must meet all criteria as a single
area.



(Ord. 1179 § 4.5(B))



16.16.300  Dedication of drainage easements—Requirements.



   A.   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel, or stream, a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way shall be
provided conforming substantially to the lines of the watercourse, and of the
width and construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose.
Whenever possible, it is desirable that the drainage be maintained by an open
channel with landscaped banks and adequate width for maximum potential volume
of flow.



   B.   Where topography or other conditions are such as to make
impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within road rights-of-way,
perpetual, unobstructed easements of at least fifteen feet in width for such
drainage facilities shall be provided across property outside the road lines
and with satisfactory access to the road. Easements shall be indicated on the
plat. Drainage easements shall be carried from the road to a natural
watercourse or to other drainage facilities.



   C.   When a proposed drainage system will carry water across private
land outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage rights must be secured and
indicated on the plat.



   D.   The applicant shall dedicate, either in fee or by drainage or
conservation easement, land on both sides of existing watercourses to a
distance to be determined by the city council.



   E.   Low-lying lands along watercourses subject to flooding or
overflowing during storm periods, whether or not included in areas for
dedication, shall be preserved and retained in their natural state as
drainage ways. A hydrology report and construction drawings which preserve
the flow characteristics of the drainageway may allow construction within the
low-lying land.



(Ord. 1179 § 4.5(C))



16.16.310  Water facility and fire hydrant requirements.



   A.   The subdivider shall install adequate water facilities
(including fire hydrants) subject to the specifications of the Arizona Water
Company and the city engineer. All water mains shall be at least six inches
in diameter.



   B.   Water main extensions shall be approved by the Arizona Water
Company and city engineer.



   C.   To facilitate the above, the location of all fire hydrants and
all water supply improvements shall be shown on the preliminary plat, and the
cost of installing same shall be included in the performance bond to be
furnished by the developer.



   D.   Fire hydrants shall be required for all subdivisions. Fire
hydrants shall be located no more than three hundred feet apart in
multifamily, commercial and industrial developments and no more than six
hundred feet apart in single-family residential development, shall be within
three hundred feet of any structure, and shall be approved by the city fire
marshal. To eliminate future street openings, all underground utilities for
fire hydrants, together with the fire hydrants themselves, and all other
supply improvements shall be installed before any final paving of a street
shown on the subdivision plat.



(Ord. 1397.16.2 § 1 (part), 2 (part), 1994; Ord. 1179 § 4.6)



16.16.320  Sewer and facility requirements in general.



   The applicant shall install sanitary sewer facilities in a manner
prescribed by the uniform standard details and specifications and the city
engineer.



(Ord. 1179 § 4.7(A))



16.16.330  Public sewerage required.



   For all subdivisions with any lot less than one acre in size and/or the
nearest existing sewer line within five thousand two hundred and eighty feet,
sanitary sewage facilities shall connect with the public sanitary sewage
system. Sewers shall be installed to serve each lot, to grades and sizes
required by the ADHS Bulletin #11 and the city engineer.



(Ord. 1179 § 4.6(B))



16.16.340  Private sewerage systems when.



   Where public sanitary sewage systems are not within 5,280 feet the city
may allow one of the following alternatives:



   A.   Central sewage system, the maintenance cost to be assessed
against each property benefitted. Where plans for future public sanitary
sewage systems exist, the applicant shall install the sewer lines, laterals
and mains to be in permanent conformance with such plans and ready for
connection to the public sewer mains; or



   B.   Individual disposal systems, provided the applicant shall
install sanitary sewer lines, laterals and mains from the street curb to a
point in the subdivision boundary where a future connection with the public
sewer main shall be made. Sewer lines shall be laid from the house to the
street line, and a connection shall be made available in the home to connect
from the individual disposal system to the sewer system when the public
sewers become available. Such sewer systems shall be capped until ready for
use and shall conform to all plans for installation of the public sewer
system, where such exist, and shall be ready for connection to the public
sewer main.



(Ord. 1179 § 4.6(C))



16.16.350  Mandatory connection to public sewer system when.



   If a public sanitary sewer is installed within three hundred feet of an
individual lot, property, or sewer system, the owner thereof shall be
required to connect to the sewer for the purpose of disposing of waste, and
it is unlawful for any such owner or occupant to maintain upon any property
the use of an individual sewage disposal system thereafter.



(Ord. 1179 § 4.6(D))



16.16.360  Individual sewage system disposal requirements.



   If public sewer facilities are not available and individual disposal
systems are proposed, minimum lot areas shall be one acre and approval shall
be by the city engineer. The individual disposal system, including the size
of septic tanks and size of tile fields or other secondary treatment device,
shall be approved by the Pinal County health department and/or ADHS.



(Ord. 1179 § 4.6(E))



16.16.370  Design criteria for sanitary sewers.



   A.   Sanitary sewer systems should be designed for the ultimate
drainage basin population. Consideration should be given to current zoning
regulations, and approved planning and zoning reports where applicable. Sewer
capacities should be adequate to handle the anticipated maximum hourly
quantity of sewage and industrial waste together with an adequate allowance
for infiltration and other extraneous flow. The unit design flows presented
hereinafter should be adequate in each case for the particular type of
development indicated. Sewers shall be designed for the total tributary area
using the criteria codified as Table 4 at the end of this chapter.



   B.   The design factors codified in Table 4 shall apply to
watersheds of three hundred acres or less. Design factors for watersheds
larger than three hundred acres and smaller than one thousand acres shall be
computed on the basis of a linear decrease from the applicable design factor
for an area of three hundred acres to a design factor of .01 cfs/acre for an
area of one thousand acres unless otherwise directed by the city engineer.
Design factors for watersheds larger than one thousand acres shall be .01
cfs/acre unless otherwise directed by the city engineer.



   1.   The diameter of sewers proposed shall not exceed the diameter
of the existing or proposed outlet, whichever is applicable, unless otherwise
approved by the city engineer;



   2.   No public sanitary sewer line shall be less than eight inches
in diameter, unless sewer line is less than four hundred feet long and cannot
be extended;



   3.   All sewers shall be designed to give mean velocities, when
flowing full, of not less than two feet per second. All velocity and flow
calculations shall be based on the Manning Formula. The slopes shall be
minimum for the size indicated;



   4.   All sewers shall be laid with straight alignment between
manholes, unless otherwise directed or approved by the city engineer;



   5.   Manholes shall be installed at the end of each line; at all
changes in grade, size or alignment; at all intersections; and at distances
not greater than three hundred feet for sewers less than eighteen inches, and
four hundred feet for sewers eighteen inches in diameter and larger;



   6.   The difference in elevation between any incoming sewer and the
manhole invert shall not exceed twelve inches except where required to match
crowns. The use of drop manholes will require approval by the city engineer.
The minimum inside diameter of the manholes shall conform to those specified
by the city engineer. When a smaller sewer joins a larger one, the crown of
the smaller sewer shall not be lower than that of the larger one. The minimum
drop through manholes at bends and turns shall be 0.2 feet;



   7.   Manhole covers shall be sealed covers with inverted vented
dishes;



   8.   Sanitary sewers shall be located within street or alley
rights-of-way unless topography dictates otherwise. When located in easements
on private property, access shall be provided to all manholes. A manhole
shall be provided at each street or alley crossing. End lines shall be
extended to provide access from street or alley rights-of-way where possible.
Imposed loading shall be considered in all locations. Not less than 3.0 feet
of cover shall be provided over top of pipe in street and alley rights-of-
way or other areas;



   9.   Cleanouts and lampholes will not be permitted;



   10.   There shall be no physical connection between a public or
private potable water supply system and sewer which will permit the passage
of any sewage or polluted water into the potable supply. Sewers shall be kept
removed from water supply wells or other water supply sources and structures;



   11.   A minimum horizontal distance, from outside to outside of
pipewall, of six feet shall be maintained between parallel water and sewer
lines. At points where sewers cross water mains, the sewer shall be
constructed of cast iron pipe or encased in concrete for a distance of ten
feet in each direction from the crossing, measured perpendicular to the water
line. This will not be required when the water main is at least two feet
above the sewer line;



   12.   These design criteria are not intended to cover extraordinary
situations. Deviations will be allowed and may be required in those instances
where considered justified by the city engineer.



(Ord. 1179 § 4.6(F))



16.16.380  Utility location and easement requirements.



   A.   All utility facilities, including but not limited to gas,
electric power, except electrical lines exceeding thirteen KV capacity,
telephone and cable television shall be located underground throughout the
subdivision. All utility facilities existing throughout the subdivision shall
be located in either the street right-of-way and its adjacent easements or in
a dedicated alley, except where easements between alleys and street
rights-of-way are necessary to connect the utilities as approved by the city.
Underground service connections to the street property line of each platted
lot shall be installed at the subdivider's expense. At the discretion of the
city council, the requirement for service connections to each lot may be
waived in the case of adjoining lots to be retained in single ownership and
intended to be developed for the same primary use.



   B.   Proper coordination shall be established between the subdivider
and the applicable utility companies for the continuation of public utility
easements established in adjoining properties, when rights- of-way or
dedicated alleys are not appropriate.



   C.   Where topographical, locational or other conditions are such as
to make impractical the inclusion of public utilities within rights-of-way or
dedicated alleys, perpetual unobstructed easements of at least ten feet in
width shall be provided. Easements shall be indicated on the plat.



(Ord. 1179 § 4.8)



16.16.390  Public land reservation requirements.



   A.   Where a proposed park, playground, open space, bikeway or other
public use shown on the general plan is located in whole or in part in a
subdivision, the commission and the city council shall require that such area
or areas be shown on plats in accordance with the requirements specified in
this section. Such area or areas shall be reserved to the city by the
subdivider if the city council approves such reservation.



   B.   The commission shall require that plats show sites of a
character, extent and location suitable for the development of a park,
playground, or other stated public purposes.



   C.   In all new residential subdivisions the city may require that
seven percent of the gross area be reserved for public recreation space,
school sites or other public use with such percentage being in addition to
property reserved for streets, alleys, easements or other public ways.



   D.   The city or other public agency shall enter into an agreement
on the method of acquiring such reserved land area prior to approval of the
final plat.



(Ord. 1179 § 4.9)



Table 1
Design Standards for Streets



 



Improvement/Standards
 

Dimensions in Feet



Minimum Width of Right-of-Way
 




Alley
 

20



Local Half Street
 

30*



Cul-de-sac
 

40*



Local
 

44*



Collector
 

80



Major Arterial
 

130



Minor Arterial
 

110



Minimum Pavement Width (defined as back of curb to back of curb)
 




Alley
 

-



Local Half Street
 

24



Local
 

36



Collector
 

48



Major Arterial
 

93



Minor Arterial
 

74



Maximum Posted Speed Limit
 




Local                                            25 mph
 

-



Collector                                      35 mph
 

-



Major Arterial                              45 mph
 

-



Minor Arterial                              40 mph
 

-



Minimum Radius of Curve
 




Local
 

150



Collector
 

400



Major Arterial
 

750



Minor Arterial
 

575



Minimum Lengths of Tangents Between
Reverse Curves**
 




Local, Alleys Two Lanes
 

150



Collector Two Lanes
 

200



Major Arterial (Four Lanes)
 

280



Minor Arterial
 

270



Minimum Sight Distance
 




Local, Alleys
 

175



Collector
 

325



Major Arterial
 

475



Minor Arterial
 

400



Minimum Turn-Around (local streets only)
 




Right-of-Way Diameter
 

100



Pavement Diameter
 

88



Center Island Diameter (if required)
 

30



Curb Radii (from back of curb)
 




Local Half Street
 

20



Local
 

20



Collector
 

30



Major Arterial
 

50



Minor Arterial
 

50



Maximum Length of Cul-de-Sac (Dead End)
 




Permanent
 

600



Temporary
 

100



* Will require a minimum ten (10) foot utility easement outsidbe R.O.W. on
each side of street.


** Length may be reduced with curves of radii of 1,000 feet or greater.


Source: BRW, Inc., 1987; Guidelines for Urban Major Street Design, ITE.




 



Table 2
Sidewalk Requirements



 

Type of Street
 
Sidewalk Requirement


Local
 
Both sides, four feet wide; adjacent to curb


Collector
 
Both sides, four feet wide or as bike route, eight feet wide; one foot inside
right-of-way line


Arterial
 
Both sides, five feet wide or as bike route, eight feet wide; one foot inside
right-of-way line and/or meandering within the right-of-way


Source: BRW, Inc., 1987



 



Table 4
Design Factors



 



Residential
 


 


 




Land Use
 

Density (U/AC)

 

Persons

 

Per day



Urban Ranch
 

1

 

3.5

 

100



Rural Ranch
 

0.3

 

3.5

 

100



Suburban Homestead
 

0.5

 

3.5

 

100



Single-Family (R-1)
 

4.5

 

3.3

 

100



Mobile Home Subd. (R-4)
 

4.5

 

3.3

 

100



Patio Home
 

5.5

 

3.0

 

100



Mobile Home Park (R-5)
 

9

 

2.8

 

95



Duplex-Fourplex (R-2)
 

9

 

2.8

 

95



Townhome
 

12

 

2.5

 

95



Condominium
 

20

 

2.3

 

90



Apartments (R-3)
 

20

 

2.3

 

90



Commercial
 


 


 




Small stores, offices, and miscellaneous businesses (one and two stores)
 


 


 

As Directed by the City Engineer



Shopping Center
(P.C.C.)
 


 


 

As Directed by the City Engineer



Industrial & High Rise
Commercial/Office
 


 


 

As Directed by the City Engineer



Planned Unit
Development
 


 


 

As Directed by the City Engineer





 



(Ord. 1397.17.34 § 3, 2009: Ord. 1397.17.33 § 3, 2006)



16.16.400  Multimodal transportation study adopted by reference.



   A.   That a certain document known as "The Casa Grande Multimodal
Transportation Study," three copies of which are on file in the office of the
City Clerk, and which document was made a public record by Resolution No.
3380, is hereby referred to, adopted by reference and made a part hereof as
if fully set out in this section.



   B.   The provisions of this section and the public record adopted
herein are effective from and after December 3, 2003.



   C.   Any person found guilty of violating any provision of the Casa
Grande Multimodal Transportation Study shall be guilty of a class II
misdemeanor. Each day that a violation occurs shall be a separate offense
punishable as a herein above described.



(Ord. 1397.15.18 § 1, 2003)



Chapter 16.20
IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEES



Sections:



Article I. Financial Guarantees and Improvements



16.20.010   Financial guarantee required—Statutory authority—Approval
by council.



16.20.020   Completion of improvements.



16.20.030   Temporary improvement requirements.



16.20.040   Government units exempt from certain provisions.



16.20.050   Consequences of failure to complete improvements.



16.20.060   Acceptance of dedication and maintenance requirements.



Article II. Inspection of Improvements



16.20.070   General procedures and fees.



16.20.080   On-site representative—Role and authority.



16.20.090   Release or reduction of financial guarantee when.



Article III. Deferral or Waiver of Required Improvements



16.20.100   Deferral or waiver when.



16.20.110   Applicant to pay share of future improvement costs when.



Article IV. Issuance of Building Permits and Certificates of Occupancy



16.20.120   City engineer approval required.



16.20.130   Extent of improvements required.



16.20.140   Ratio of improvements required prior to issuance.



Article V. Building Permits for Lots Outside Approved Subdivisions



16.20.150   Planning director review required when.



16.20.160   Authority of city regulations.



16.20.170   Planning director to certify that requirements met.



Article I. Financial Guarantees and Improvements



16.20.010  Financial guarantee required—Statutory authority—Approval by
council.



   A.   Except as permitted in subsection C, prior to recording of the
final subdivision plat, the city council shall require that the applicant
provide a financial guarantee, such as a performance bond, an irrevocable
letter of credit, assurance of construction of subdivision improvements,
funds in escrow, or other guarantee acceptable to the city, in an amount
sufficient to secure to the city the satisfactory construction, installation
and dedication of the required improvements. The financial guarantee shall
also secure all lot improvements on the individual lots of the subdivision as
required in this title. The amount of financial guarantee shall be one
hundred percent of the cost of the installation and materials necessary to
complete the subdivision as required by this title, including, but not
limited to, street improvements, street lights, sidewalks, perimeter walls,
drainage facilities, water and sewer infrastructure, site grading and
landscaping.



   B.   The financial guarantee shall comply with all statutory
requirements and shall be satisfactory to the city attorney as to form,
sufficiency, and manner of execution, as set forth in this title. The period
within which required improvements must be completed shall be specified by
the city council in the resolution approving the final subdivision plat and
shall be incorporated in the financial guarantee and shall not, in any event,
exceed three years from the date of final approval. The city council may, in
its discretion, grant an extension of the completion date of the guarantee
for a maximum period of two additional years, provided that an updated cost
estimate for the remaining subdivision improvements that have not yet been
completed shall be provided, and the amount of the financial security
adjusted if necessary to adequately secure such improvements in conjunction
with the approval of the extension.



   C.   City council may approve a development agreement permitting an
existing or new subdivision applicant to delay or modify the financial
security requirement set forth in this section. The development agreement
shall contain provisions deemed necessary or appropriate by city council to
ensure that purchasers of lots have adequate assurance that required
subdivision infrastructure necessary to serve that lot will be installed at
or prior to development of the lot, including but not limited to provisions
that:



   1.   Prohibit the sale of any lots, or block of lots, without prior
approval of the city manager, or deputy city manager, and planning director,
until such time as:



   a.   Financial securities have been posted for:



   i.   All required subdivision improvements; or



   ii.   That portion of the subdivision improvements deemed necessary
by the city to serve the portion of the subdivision being sold in accordance
with a phasing plan approved by the planning director and city engineer; or



   b.   The subdivision improvements, or phased portion thereof, have
been completed and accepted by the city, and a maintenance bond meeting the
requirements of Section 16.20.090(D) has been posted.



   2.   Prohibit the issuance of any building permits until such time
as:



   a.   Financial securities have been posted for:



   i.   All required subdivision improvements, or



   ii.   That portion of the subdivision improvements deemed necessary
by the city to serve the portion of the subdivision being sold in accordance
with a phasing plan approved by the planning director and city engineer; or



   b.   The subdivision improvements, or phased portion thereof, have
been completed and accepted by the city and a maintenance bond meeting the
requirements of Section 16.20.090(D) has been posted.



   3.   Allow for the city to require the construction of all, or a
portion, of the required subdivision improvements as a condition to allowing
for non-financial security for the subdivision plat, including but not
limited to:



   a.   Perimeter walls,



   b.   Perimeter landscaping,



   c.   Perimeter streets and sidewalks.



   4.   Permits the partial release of assurances as discrete portions
of subdivision infrastructure have been completed, provided that the
remaining assurance is sufficient, in the opinion of the city engineer, to
complete all remaining required improvements.



(Ord. 1397.16.03 § 1, 2017; Ord. 1179 § 5.1(A), 1987)



16.20.020  Completion of improvements.



   As an alternative to requiring a contractor's performance bond, the
city council, at its discretion, may allow the procedures for completion of
improvements described in Section 16.12.270 of this title.



(Ord. 1179 § 5.1(B), 1987)



16.20.030  Temporary improvement requirements.



   The applicant shall build and pay for all costs of temporary
improvements required by the city council and shall maintain same for the
period specified by the city council. Prior to construction of any temporary
facility or improvement, the developer shall file with the city engineer a
separate, suitable, financial guarantee for temporary facilities, which
guarantee shall ensure that the temporary facilities will be properly
constructed, maintained and removed.



(Ord. 1179 § 5.1(C), 1987)



16.20.040  Governmental units exempt from certain provisions.



   Governmental units to which these financial guarantee and contract
provisions apply may file in lieu of the contract or financial guarantee a
certified resolution or ordinance from officers or agencies authorized to act
in their behalf, agreeing to comply with the provisions of this section.



(Ord. 1179 § 5.1(D), 1987)



16.20.050  Consequences of failure to complete improvements.



   For subdivisions for which no financial guarantee has been posted, if
the improvements are not completed within the period specified by the city
council in the resolution approving the plat, subject to Section 16.12.270 of
this title, the approval shall be deemed to have expired. In those cases
where a financial guarantee has been posted and required improvements have
not been installed within the terms of the guarantee, the city may thereupon
declare the guarantee to be in default, call on the guarantee, and require
that all the improvements be installed regardless of the extent of the
building development at the time the financial guarantee is declared to be in
default.



(Ord. 1179 § 5.1(E), 1987)



16.20.060  Acceptance of dedication and maintenance requirements.



   Acceptance of dedication of land for streets, public areas, and
easements shall be by resolution of the city council. The resolution
approving the final plat shall constitute such acceptance, provided a
statement of dedication is placed on the plat. The approval by the city
council of a subdivision plat shall not be deemed to constitute or imply the
acceptance of maintenance by the city on any street or easement improvements
shown on the plat. The city council may require the plat to be endorsed with
appropriate notes to this effect. A separate resolution accepting
improvements and maintenance shall be required following installation of all
improvements.



(Ord. 1179 § 5.1(F), 1987)



Article II. Inspection of Improvements



16.20.070  General procedures and fees.



   The city council shall provide for inspection of required improvements
during construction and ensure their satisfactory completion. The applicant
shall pay to the city an inspection fee of three percent of the amount of the
financial guarantee or the estimated cost of required improvements, and the
subdivision plat shall not be signed by the mayor unless the fee has been
paid at the time of approval. If the city engineer finds, upon inspection
that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance
with the city's construction standards and specifications, the applicant
shall be responsible for completing the improvements. Wherever the cost of
improvements is covered by a performance bond, the applicant and the bonding
company shall be severally and jointly liable for completing the improvements
according to the specifications.



(Ord. 1179 § 5.2(A), 1987)



16.20.080  On-site representative—Role and authority.



   The developer shall designate, in writing, the name of the agent who
shall be available at all times during its progress and who shall not be
replaced without a written notice to the city engineer. The agent will be the
developer's representative at the site and shall have the authority to act on
the developer's behalf.



(Ord. 1179 § 5.2(B), 1987)



16.20.090  Release or reduction of financial guarantee when.



   A.   The city council will not accept dedication of required
improvements, nor release nor reduce any financial guarantee, until the city
engineer has submitted a certificate stating that all required improvements
have been satisfactorily completed and until the applicant's engineer or
surveyor has certified to the city engineer through submission of detailed
“as-built” construction plans of the subdivision, prepared on mylar,
indicating location, dimensions, materials, and other information required by
the city council or city engineer, that the layout of the line and grade of
all public improvements is in accordance with the construction plans for the
subdivision and that a title insurance policy has been furnished to, and
approved by, the city attorney indicating that the improvements shall have
been completed, are ready for dedication to the city and are free and clear
of any and all liens and encumbrances. Upon such approval and recommendation,
the city council shall thereafter accept the improvements for dedication and
maintenance in accordance with the established procedure.



   B.   A financial guarantee may be reduced upon actual dedication of
public improvements and then only to the ratio that the public improvement
dedicated bears to the total public improvements for the plat. In no event
shall a financial guarantee be reduced below twenty-five percent of the
principal amount, unless all improvements have been dedicated, in which case
they may be reduced to zero; provided a maintenance bond is posted.



   C.   The applicant shall be required to maintain all improvements
within the subdivision and/or on the individual subdivided lots, until
acceptance of the improvements by the city council. If there are any
certificates of occupancy on a street where improvements have not been
dedicated to the city, the city may on twelve hours notice effect emergency
repairs and charge same to applicant.



   D.   The applicant shall be required to file a maintenance guarantee
with the city council prior to dedication of the improvements, in the amount
of ten percent of the improvement costs in a form satisfactory to the city
attorney, in order to assure the satisfactory condition of the required
improvements, including all lot improvements on the individual subdivided
lots for a period of one year after date of their acceptance by the city
council and dedication of the improvements to the city council.



(Ord. 1179 § 5.2(C), 1987)



Article III. Deferral or Waiver of Required Improvements



16.20.100  Deferral or waiver when.



   The city council may defer or waive at the time of final approval,
subject to appropriate conditions, the provision of any or all improvements
as, in its judgment, are not requisite in the interests of the public health,
safety, and general welfare, or which are inappropriate because of inadequacy
or lack of connecting facilities.



(Ord. 1179 § 5.3(A), 1987)



16.20.110  Applicant to pay share of future improvement costs when.



   Whenever it is deemed necessary by the city council to defer the
construction of any improvement required herein because of incompatible
grades, future planning, inadequate or lack of connecting facilities, or for
other reasons identified by the city, the applicant shall pay his/her share
of the costs of the future improvements to the city prior to the signing of
the final subdivision plat, or the applicant may post a bond ensuring
completion of the improvements upon demand of the city council.



(Ord. 1179 § 5.3(B), 1987)



Article IV. Issuance of Building Permits and Certificates of Occupancy



16.20.120  City engineer approval required.



   No certificate of occupancy for any building in the subdivision shall
be issued prior to completion, inspection and approval by the city engineer,
and dedication of the same to the city of all utilities required to serve the
building for which a certificate of occupancy is requested.



(Ord. 1179 § 5.4(A), 1987)



16.20.130  Extent of improvements required.



   The extent of street improvements shall be adequate for vehicular
access by the prospective occupant and by police and fire protection
equipment, prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit.



(Ord. 1179 § 5.4(B), 1987)



16.20.140  Ratio of improvements required prior to issuance.



   No building permit shall be issued for the final ten percent of lots in
a subdivision (or if ten percent is less than two, for the final two lots of
a subdivision), until all public improvements required by the city council
for the plat have been fully completed and dedicated to the city.



(Ord. 1179 § 5.4(C), 1987)



Article V. Building Permits for Lots Outside Approved Subdivisions



16.20.150  Planning director review required when.



   If any lot or parcel is to be created within the city where the
creation of the lot or parcel does not require the use of the requirements
and procedures of Chapters 16.12 and 16.16 of this title, the owner of the
lot or parcel to be created shall be required to discuss with the planning
director the lot or parcel creation to determine the eventual ability to
receive a building permit for the lot or parcel.



(Ord. 1179 § 5.5(A), 1987)



16.20.160  Authority of city regulations.



   Regardless of subjectivity to Chapters 16.12 and 16.16 of this title,
any newly created lot or parcel shall be subject to the provisions of other
city regulations, including Title 17 of this code.



(Ord. 1179 § 5.5(B), 1987)



16.20.170  Planning director to certify that requirements met.



   The planning director shall certify whether or not the newly created
lot or parcel meets all city requirements relative to receiving the building
permit, noting any conditions, if such exist.



(Ord. 1179 § 5.5(C), 1987)



Chapter 16.24
FEES AND PENALTIES



Sections:



Article I. Fees



16.24.010   Preliminary plat fee.



16.24.020   Final plat fee.



16.24.030   Inspection and engineering fees.



16.24.040   Recording fee.



16.24.050   Variance fee.



16.24.060   Annexation plat submittal fee.



Article II. Penalties



16.24.070   Violation—Penalty.



Article I. Fees



16.24.010  Preliminary plat fee.



   Each preliminary plat shall be accompanied by a fee of three hundred
dollars plus two dollars per lot payable to the city for the year of 1987 and
three hundred fifty dollars plus three dollars per lot for 1988 and
subsequent years.



(Ord. 1397.16.2 §§ 1 (part), 2 (part), 1994)



16.24.020  Final plat fee.



   Final plat submittals shall be accompanied by a minimum fee of three
hundred dollars plus two dollars per lot for each lot in excess of ten lots
for the year 1987 and three hundred fifty dollars plus three dollars per lot
for 1988. Fees are payable to the city and are for the purpose of partially
offsetting cost incurred by the city for necessary plat review and shall be
credited to the city general fund.



(Ord. 1179 § 6.1(B), 1987)



16.24.030  Inspection and engineering fees.



   Fees for the city review of construction plans and inspection of
subdivision improvements as described in Section 16.20.070 of this code shall
be submitted based upon three percent of the cost of improvements, plus
twenty dollars per specification sheet. Fees shall be made payable to the
city.



(Ord. 1179 § 6.1(C), 1987)



16.24.040  Recording fee.



   The recording fee shall be as determined by the county recorder. The
fee is to be submitted to the planning director after approval of the final
plat and made payable to Pinal County.



(Ord. 1179 § 6.1(D), 1987)



16.24.050  Variance fee.



   Each request for a variance from these regulations shall be accompanied
by a fee of one hundred dollars payable to the city. Each variance shall
constitute a separate request.



(Ord. 1179 § 6.1(E), 1987)



16.24.060  Annexation plat submittal fee.



   Each annexation plat submitted for consideration by the planning and
zoning commission separate from a subdivision plat shall be accompanied by a
fee of one hundred dollars.



(Ord. 1179 § 6.1(F), 1987)



Article II. Penalties



16.24.070  Violation—Penalty.



   Any and all persons who shall violate any of the provisions of this
title or fail to comply therewith, or who shall fail to comply with any
lawful order or regulation made thereunder, shall severally for each and
every such violation and noncompliance respectively, forfeit and pay a fine
of not less than fifty dollars, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars,
and/or may be imprisoned not to exceed the time of four months for each
offense, the violation constituting a Class 2 misdemeanor under the Criminal
Code of the laws of the state of Arizona. In addition, the costs of any such
action may be imposed at the discretion of the court. The imposition of one
penalty for any violation of this title shall not excuse the violation or
permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or
remedy it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or
remedy such violations and defects within a reasonable time; and each day
that the prohibited condition is not corrected or remedied shall constitute a
separate offense; and the court shall impose a fine on a per diem basis for
each day that the violation is maintained. Application of the above penalty
shall not be held to preclude the forced removal of prohibited conditions.



(Ord. 1179 § 6.2, 1987)



Title 17
ZONING*



*Editor's Note: Title 17 consists of Ordinance 1178 as revised on March 24,
1989; October 23, 1989; and February 6, 1990.



Chapters:



17.04   General Provisions



17.08   Administration



17.12   Definitions



17.14   Fees



17.16   Establishment of Zones



17.20   Residential Zones



17.24   Business Zones



17.28   Community Services Zone



17.30   Commercial Office Zone



17.32   Garden and Light Industrial Zone



17.36   General Industrial Zone



17.40   Planned Area Development Zone



17.44   Neighborhood Conservation District



17.48   Planned Area Development (P.A.D.)— Recreational Vehicle (RV)
Park Overlay Zoning District



17.52   General Building and Development Standards

17.54   Variances



17.56   Off-Street Parking



17.58   Miscellaneous Storage Standards and Handling of Hazardous Waste



17.60   Home Occupations



17.62   Historic Preservation



17.64   Nonconforming Uses



17.68   Administrative Procedures



17.72   Enforcement



Chapter 17.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS



Sections:



17.04.010   Title cite.



17.04.020   Adoption.



17.04.030   Purpose of provisions.



17.04.040   Provisions to coordinate with general plan.



17.04.050   More restrictive regulation to govern in case of conflict.



17.04.060   Private agreements.



17.04.010  Title cite.



   This title shall be known and may be cited as the Casa Grande Zoning
Title, except that when cited herein, it shall be referred to as “this
title.”



(Ord. 1178 § 1.1, 1987)



17.04.020  Adoption.



   This title is adopted as the city of Casa Grande's Zoning Title
relating to comprehensive planning and zoning, pursuant to provisions of
Arizona law, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing,
Section 9.462 and 9-462.01 to 9-462.07, inclusive, Arizona Statutes Revised,
1977.



(Ord. 1178 § 1.2, 1987)



17.04.030  Purpose of provisions.



   It is the intent and purpose of this title to protect the public
health, safety and general welfare of the community and the people of Casa
Grande through the establishment of minimum regulations governing development
and use of land. This title shall divide the city into districts and
establish regulations in regard to location, erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration and use of structures and land. The regulations
are established to promote orderly development and redevelopment; to provide
adequate light, air and access to property; to prevent congestion in the
public rights-of-way; to prevent overcrowding of land and undue concentration
of structures by regulating land, buildings, yards and density of population;
to provide for compatibility of different land uses; to provide for
administration of this title; to provide for amendments; to prescribe
penalties for violation of the regulations; and to define the powers and
duties of the city staff, the planning and zoning commission, the board of
adjustment, and the city council in relation to this title.



(Ord. 1178 § 1.3, 1987)



17.04.040  Provisions to coordinate with general plan.



   The enforcement of, amendments to, and the administration of this title
shall be accomplished in accordance with the recommendations contained in the
Casa Grande General Plan, as developed and amended on a regular basis by the
planning and zoning commission and city council for the city.



(Ord. 1178 § 1.4, 1987)



17.04.050  More restrictive regulations to govern in case of conflict.



   In the case of a conflict between this title and/or any part thereof,
or any other ordinance of the city, the more restrictive provision in all
cases shall apply.



(Ord. 1178 § 1.6, 1987)



17.04.060  Private agreements.



   The provisions of this title are not intended to interfere with or
abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between
private parties when such easements, covenants or other agreements are more
restrictive or otherwise not in conflict with this title. When such
easements, covenants or other agreements are less restrictive or otherwise in
conflict with this title, this title shall prevail.



(Ord. 1178 § 1.7, 1987)



Chapter 17.08
ADMINISTRATION



Sections:



17.08.010   Administrative bodies designated.



Article I. Planning and Zoning Commission



17.08.020   Established.



17.08.030   Membership.



17.08.040   Term of office.



17.08.050   Organization—Meetings.



17.08.060   Duties.



Article II. Board of Adjustment



17.08.070   Established.



17.08.080   Membership.



17.08.090   Adoption of rules to govern—Meetings.



17.08.100   Appeals.



17.08.110   Duties.



Article III. Zoning Administrator



17.08.120   Established.



17.08.130   Duties.



Article IV. Historic Preservation Commission



17.08.140   Established.



17.08.150   Membership.



17.08.160   Term of office.



17.08.170   Duties.



17.08.010  Administrative bodies designated.



   The following will have primary responsibility of administering this
title as established and described in this title:



   A.   Planning and zoning commission;



   B.   Board of adjustment;



   C.   Zoning administrator.



   D.   Historic preservation commission.



(Ord. 1397.17.47 § 1, 2017; Ord. 1178 § 2.1, 1987)



Article I. Planning and Zoning Commission



17.08.020  Established.



   There is created a planning and zoning commission of the city which
shall promote the health, safety, order, beauty, prosperity and general
welfare of the city, and shall secure efficiency, economy and concerted
effort in its growth and development.



(Ord. 1178 § 2.2.1, 1987)



17.08.030  Membership.



   The planning and zoning commission shall consist of seven members, who
shall represent, insofar as possible, different professions or occupations.
Members shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of a majority vote
of the city council. Insofar as possible, appointment of members shall be
made so as to constitute equal representation for all areas within the city.
Members of the planning and zoning commission shall serve without pay or
compensation of any kind except actual expenses and shall hold no other
municipal or county office, except that one member may serve on the board of
adjustment.



(Ord. 1178 § 2.2.2, 1987)



17.08.040  Term of office.



   The term of office of members of the planning and zoning commission
shall be three years. Members may be reappointed. All members shall hold
office until their successors are appointed and qualified. Any member of the
planning and zoning commission may be removed by the mayor with the consent
of a majority vote of the city council for inefficiency, neglect of duty,
malfeasance in office, or other good and sufficient cause. Vacancies
occurring other than through the expiration of the term shall be filled for
the unexpired term by the mayor with the approval of a majority vote of the
city council. Individuals may not serve more than two consecutive three-year
terms.



(Ord. 1178 § 2.2.3, 1987)



17.08.050  Organization—Meetings.



   A.   The planning and zoning commission shall elect a chairperson
from the members of the planning and zoning commission and shall create and
fill such other of its offices as it may determine. The chairperson shall be
eligible for reelection.



   B.   The planning and zoning commission shall hold at least one
regular meeting in each month at such time and place as may be fixed by the
planning and zoning commission. Special meetings of the planning and zoning
commission may be called by the chairperson, or by any three members of the
planning and zoning commission. A majority of the planning and zoning
commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The
planning and zoning commission shall adopt such other rules and regulations
governing its organization and procedures as it may deem necessary, which
rules and regulations shall be subject to the approval of the governing body
of the city and shall not be inconsistent with the ordinances of the city and
the laws of Arizona. The planning and zoning commission shall keep a record
of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record
shall be a public record.



(Ord. 1178 § 2.2.4, 1987)



17.08.060  Duties.



   It shall be the duty of the planning and zoning commission to:



   A.   Submit and recommend to the city council a zoning map dividing
the city into districts of such number, shape and area as may be determined
best suited to carry out the purposes of this title and with the provisions
of Arizona State Statutes and within such districts, it shall recommend such
regulations and restrictions concerning the erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair or use of buildings, structures or land as
it shall deem to be in the best interests of the city and its inhabitants;



   B.   Determine and recommend to the city council, decisions
regarding the classification of parcels of land from one zoning district to
another;



   C.   Recommend to the city council changes in any of the regulations
of this title as to the use of land in any district, or as to the
restrictions upon buildings or structures, therein, by amendment to this
title;



   D.   Review or delegate review of site plans for multiple-dwelling
residential structures or developments, commercial development and industrial
development and to determine the appropriate action and requirements for each
site plan of the development, as called for in this title;



   E.   Determine and make decisions regarding conditional uses as
provided for under this title;



   F.   Determine and make decisions regarding special temporary uses
as provided under this title;



   G.   Make, and recommend to the city council for adoption, a general
plan to guide the physical development of the city;



   H.   Make recommendations to the city council on matters regarding
the interpretation, enforcement, and administration of Title 16 of this code;



   I.   Provide recommendations to the city council concerning purchase
of sites for city buildings and other city facilities, the widening, opening
vacation or other changes to city streets or other public ways, the
beautification of city sites, streets, grounds or premises and other issues
that may tend to promote the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and
welfare in connection with the city's general plan.



(Ord. 1178 § 2.2.5, 1987)



Article II. Board of Adjustment



17.08.070  Established.



   A board of adjustment is established consisting of seven members to be
appointed by the mayor and with the consent of the city council.



(Ord. 1178 § 2.3.1, 1987)



17.08.080  Membership.



   Each member of the board of adjustment shall be appointed for a term of
four years. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term
of any member whose term becomes vacant. Members shall not serve more than
two consecutive four-year terms. Before entering upon the duties of his or
her appointed position, each member may be required to take and subscribe an
oath to support the Constitution and laws of the United States and the state
of Arizona, and the ordinances of the city.



(Ord. 1178 § 2.3.2, 1987)



17.08.090  Adoption of rules to govern—Meetings.



   The board of adjustment shall adopt bylaws and rules governing its
organization and meetings, and the bylaws shall be subject to the approval of
the governing body of the city and shall not be inconsistent with the
ordinances of the city and the laws of the state. It shall be the duty of the
chairperson to call a meeting of the board to pass upon and determine all
variances and appeals and all other matters upon which it is the duty of the
board to act. The board shall meet at any other times as it may prescribe in
its rules. The chairperson of the board, or in his/her absence, the acting
chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All
meetings of the board shall be open to the public. The board shall keep
minutes of all its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each
question, or if absent, or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall
keep records of its examination of other artificial actions, all of which
shall be immediately filed in the offices of the city clerk and shall be of
public record.



(Ord. 1178 § 2.3.3, 1987)



17.08.100  Appeals.



   Appeals to the board of adjustment may be taken by any person, or by
any officer, department, board or commission of the city, aggrieved or
affected by the decision of any administrative officer. Such appeal shall be
taken within thirty days of the aggrievement by filing with the officer from
whom the appeal is taken, and with the board of adjustment, a notice of
appeal specifying the grounds. The officer from whom the appeal is taken
shall forthwith transfer to the board all of the papers constituting the
record upon which the appealed action is taken.



(Ord. 1178 § 2.3.4, 1987)



17.08.110  Duties.



   The board of adjustment shall be, and it is, endowed with the following
enumerated duties:



   A.   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that an error
exists in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an
administrative official in the enforcement of this title or of any ordinance
adopted pursuant to this title;



   B.   To vary or adjust the strict application of the requirements of
this title in the case of an irregular, narrow, shallow, or steep lot or
other physical condition applying to a lot or building as a result of which
strict application would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary
hardship that would deprive the owner of the reasonable use of the land or
building involved. Any such variance granted shall be granted according to
the requirements and procedures established by this title. Variances may be
granted only for hardships related to the physical characteristics of land.
Variances to this title related to permitted, accessory and/or conditional
uses in any use district shall not be allowed. No variance or adjustment in
the strict application of any provision of an ordinance may be granted unless:



   1.   Special circumstances or conditions, fully described in the
board's findings, are peculiar to the land or building for which the
adjustment is sought and do not apply generally to land or buildings in the
neighborhood and have not resulted from any act of the applicant subsequent
to the adoption of this title,



   2.   For reasons fully set forth in the board's finding, the
circumstances or conditions are such that the strict application of the
provisions of this title would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of
the land or building, the granting of the adjustment is necessary for the
reasonable use thereof and the adjustment as granted is the minimum
adjustment that will accomplish this purpose, and



   3.   The granting of the adjustment is in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of this title and will not be injurious to the
neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare;



   C.   To grant exceptions and variances upon request where, after a
showing that an illegal construction or a nonconforming building or use
existed for a period of at least five years in violation of zoning ordinances
and the city, with knowledge of the existence of the condition, has not taken
any steps toward elimination of the violations.



   D.   To hear and decide appeals regarding required exactions and
dedications in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.68.380.



   E.   To hear and decide applications for:



   1.   Temporary use permits in accordance with the provisions of
Subsection 17.68.210(I).



   2.   Special use permits in accordance with the provisions of
Sections 110 and 410.1 of the Sign Code of the City of Casa Grande (as
previously adopted by Casa Grande Ordinance 583).



   3.   Comprehensive sign plan in accordance with the provisions of
Section 606 of the Sign Code of the City of Casa Grande (as previously
adopted by Casa Grande Ordinance 583) 



   4.   The board may, by a simple majority vote of the members
present, approve, deny or table applications for temporary use permits,
special use permits or Comprehensive Sign Plans.



(Ord. 1397.17.43 § 1, 2012; Ord. 1178 § 2.3.5, 1987)



Article III. Zoning Administrator



17.08.120  Established.



   The staff position of zoning administrator shall be, and is established
for the general and specific administration of this title. The planning and
development director shall serve as the zoning administrator but may delegate
such duties as noted in Section 17.08.130. If the duties are delegated, the
zoning administrator shall perform such duties as set forth in this title
under the direction of the planning and development director.



(Ord. 1178 § 2.4.1, 1987)



17.08.130  Duties.



   It shall be the responsibility of the zoning administrator to preform
the following duties:



   A.   Receive, process, record and administer all requests for
approvals and permits, as governed by this title;



   B.   Advise and recommend to the planning and zoning commission, the
board of adjustment and the city council regarding requests for approvals and
permits as required by this title;



   C.   Direct such inspections, observations and analyses of any and
all erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair or use of
buildings, structures or land within the city relating to the regulations and
restrictions as set forth by this title;



   D.   To take action as is necessary for the enforcement of this
title relating to violations of the regulations and restrictions;



   E.   To pass upon all building permits to determine if the proposed
construction, remodeling or alterations are in conformity with the provisions
of this title.



(Ord. 1178 § 2.4.2, 1987)



Article IV. Historic Preservation Commission



17.08.140  Established.



   There is created a historic preservation commission of the city that
serves to protect, enhance and perpetuate the city’s landmarks and historic
districts for the economic, cultural, educational and general welfare of the
public.



(Ord. 1397.17.47 § 2 (part), 2017)



17.08.150  Membership.



   A.   The commission shall consist of seven  members appointed by
the mayor with the consent of city council.



   B.   It is intended that the commission consist of members who
demonstrate an interest in historic preservation, architecture and
development within the city, to be appointed, to the extent possible given
the applications received and interest in the community, as follows:



      1.   At least one shall be a licensed real estate broker or
agent, or a licensed contractor;



      2.   At least one shall be an owner or resident of a
designated historic property, or a property listed on the National Register
of Historic Places;



      3.   At least one shall have demonstrated significant interest
in, and commitment to, the field of historic preservation, evidenced either
by involvement in a local history museum, historic preservation group,
employment or volunteer activity in the field of historic preservation, or
other serious interest in the field; and



      4.   At least one shall be a current or former planning and
zoning commission member, arts and humanities commission member, Casa Grande
main street board member, or a former city council member.



   C.   In the event no qualified applicants meet the requirements of
subsection B at the time a vacancy exists on the commission, the mayor, with
the consent of council, may appoint an interested applicant not otherwise
meeting the qualifications of subsections B (1—4) above to serve.



(Ord. 1397.17.47 § 2 (part), 2017)



17.08.160  Term of office.



   A.   Commission members shall serve for a term of three years.



   B.   Commission members may be reappointed and shall hold office
until their successors are appointed and qualified.  An individual may not
serve more than two consecutive terms. The chairman and vice chairman of the
commission shall be elected by and from among the members of the commission.



(Ord. 1397.17.47 § 2 (part), 2017)



17.08.170  Duties.



   The duties of the commission shall include:



   A.   Promulgation of bylaws, rules and regulations necessary for the
conduct of its business. The bylaws shall be subject to the approval of the
city council, and shall not be inconsistent with the charter and ordinances
of the city, and the constitution and laws of the state of Arizona.



   B.   Review of criteria for the identification of significant
historic, architectural and cultural landmarks, and for the delineation of
historic districts.



   C.   Review existing surveys of significant historic, architectural
and cultural landmarks and historic districts within the city, and
periodically update the survey.



   D.   Provide recommendations to the city council concerning the
designation of identified structures or resources as landmarks and historic
districts.



   E.   Provide recommendations to the city council concerning the
acquisition of facade easements, development rights or other interests in
real property as necessary to carry out the puiposes of this chapter.



   F.   Increasing public awareness of the value of historic, cultural
and architectural preservation by developing and participating in public
education programs.



   G.   Provide recommendations to the city council concerning the
utilization of state, federal or private funds to promote the preservation of
landmarks and historic districts within the city.



   H.   Recommending acquisition of any landmark structure by the city,
where its preservation is essential to the purposes of this chapter, and
where private preservation is not feasible.



   I.   Approval or disapproval of applications for certificates of
appropriateness pursuant to Chapter 17.62.



(Ord. 1397.17.47 § 2 (part), 2017)



Chapter 17.12
DEFINITIONS



Sections:



17.12.010   Rules of construction.



17.12.020   Accessory building or use.



17.12.030   Adult use.



17.12.040   Agricultural/ranching.



17.12.050   Airport.



17.12.060   Alley.



17.12.070   Apartment building.



17.12.080   Area of shallow flooding.



17.12.090   Automobile reduction yard.



17.12.092   Automobile repair services (major)



17.12.094   Automobile repair services (major)



17.12.100   Auto salvage yard.



17.12.110   Reserved



17.12.120   Automobile washing establishment.



17.12.122   Bakery, commercial.



17.12.123   Bakery, retail.



17.12.130   Base flood, one-hundred-year.



17.12.140   Basement.



17.12.145   Bed and breakfast establishment (tourist home).



17.12.150   Block frontage.



17.12.160   Board.



17.12.170   Building.



17.12.180   Building area.



17.12.190   Building envelope.



17.12.200   Building, front line of.



17.12.210   Building, height of.



17.12.220   Building line, front.



17.12.230   Building line, rear.



17.12.240   Building, nonconforming.



17.12.250   Building, principal.



17.12.260   Building, public.



17.12.270   Business.



17.12.280   Campground.



17.12.290   Carport.



17.12.300   Cemetery.



17.12.305   Charity dining facilities, homeless shelters and similar
services.



17.12.310   Church.



17.12.320   City.



17.12.330   Clinic or medical center.



17.12.340   Club, private (nonprofit).



17.12.350   Commission.



17.12.360   Convenience-food restaurant.



17.12.365   Convenience store



17.12.370   Conditional use permits.



17.12.380   Corporate counsel.



17.12.390   Council.



17.12.400   Day care.



17.12.410   Day care center.



17.12.415   Deferred presentment company



17.12.420   Density, gross.



17.12.430   Density, net residential.



17.12.440   Development.



17.12.450   Development disability.



17.12.460   Drive access.



17.12.470   Drive-in business.



17.12.480   Duplex.



17.12.490   Dwelling.



17.12.500   Dwelling, attached.



17.12.510   Dwelling, detached.



17.12.520   Dwelling, single-family.



17.12.530   Dwelling, two-family.



17.12.540   Dwelling, multiple (multi-family).



17.12.550   Dwelling unit.



17.12.560   Family.



17.12.570   Fence.



17.12.580   Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).



17.12.590   Flood insurance study.



17.12.600   Floodplain.



17.12.610   Floodproofing.



17.12.620   Floodway, one-hundred-year.



17.12.630   Floodway fringe, one-hundred-year.



17.12.640   Garage, private.



17.12.650   Garage, public.



17.12.660   General plan.



17.12.670   Grade.



17.12.680   Greenhouse.



17.12.690   Ground floor area.



17.12.700   Group home.



17.12.710   Habitable floor.



17.12.720   Home occupation or profession.



17.12.730   Hospital.



17.12.740   Hotel or motel.



17.12.750   Incidental.



17.12.760   Junkyard.



17.12.770   Kennel.



17.12.771   Large mulitple use shopping center.



17.12.772   Large single retail use.



17.12.780   Loading and unloading bays.



17.12.790   Lodging house.



17.12.800   Lot.



17.12.810   Lot area.



17.12.820   Lot, corner.



17.12.830   Lot, interior.



17.12.840   Lot, through.



17.12.850   Lot coverage.



17.12.860   Lot depth.



17.12.870   Lot, ground level.



17.12.880   Lot line, front.



17.12.890   Lot line, rear.



17.12.900   Lot line, side.



17.12.910   Lot width.



17.12.920   Manufactured home.



17.12.930   Manufacturing.



17.12.940   Manufacturing, light.



17.12.941   Medical marijuana.



17.12.942   Medical marijuana cultivation facility.



17.12.943   Medical marijuana dispensary.



17.12.944   Medical marijuana dispensary cultivation facility.



17.12.945   Medical marijuana infusion facility.



17.12.946   Medical marijuana uses.



17.12.947   Qualifying patient/caregiver cultivation location.



17.12.950   Mining.



17.12.960   Mobile homes.



17.12.970   Mobile home park.



17.12.980   Mobile home space.



17.12.990   Mobile home stand.



17.12.1000   Mobile office.



17.12.1010   Model home.



17.12.1020   Modular or sectional home.



17.12.1030   New construction.



17.12.1040   Noxious matter or material.



17.12.1050   Nonconforming use.



17.12.1060   Nursing home.



17.12.1070   Offices.



17.12.1080   One-hundred-year flood.



17.12.1090   Open sales (or rental) lot.



17.12.1100   Overlay zone.



17.12.1110   Parking area, public.



17.12.1120   Parking space, off-street.



17.12.1130   Party wall.



17.12.1140   Paved parking space or surface.



17.12.1150   Personal and convenience services.



17.12.1160   Persons.



17.12.1170   Plant nursery.



17.12.1180   Property, personal.



17.12.1190   Property, real.



17.12.1200   Recreational vehicle.



17.12.1210   Recreational vehicle park.



17.12.1215   Recycling center.



17.12.1220   Research laboratory.



17.12.1230   Residential facility.



17.12.1240   Restaurant.



17.12.1250   School.



17.12.1260   Screening.



17.12.1270   Setback.



17.12.1280   Setback line.



17.12.1290   Sewer, public.



17.12.1300   Sewer system, community.



17.12.1305   Sexually oriented business.



17.12.1310   Shopping center.



17.12.1320   Sign.



17.12.1330   Sign, free-standing.



17.12.1340   Sign, nonaccessory.



17.12.1350   Sign, wall.



17.12.1360   Site plan.



17.12.1370   Stable, private.



17.12.1380   Stable, public.



17.12.1390   Start of construction.



17.12.1400   Street.



17.12.1410   Street, arterial.



17.12.1420   Street, collector.



17.12.1430   Street, local.



17.12.1440   Street frontage.



17.12.1450   Street, public.



17.12.1460   Structure.



17.12.1470   Structural alteration.



17.12.1480   Substantial improvement.



17.12.1500   Townhouse.



17.12.1510   Townhouse cluster.



17.12.1520   Truck stop.



17.12.1530   Truck washing establishment.



17.12.1540   Use.



17.12.1550   Use, accessory.



17.12.1560   Use, conditionally permitted.



17.12.1570   Use, nonconforming.



17.12.1580   Use, permitted.



17.12.1590   Use, principal.



17.12.1600   Use, temporary.



17.12.1610   Variance.



17.12.1620   Variance, dimensional.



17.12.1630   Warehouse.



17.12.1640   Warehouse, residential storage (mini-warehouse).



17.12.1645   Wireless telecommunication facilities.



17.12.1650   Wrecking yard.



17.12.1660   Yard.



17.12.1670   Yard, corner side.



17.12.1680   Yard, front.



17.12.1690   Yard, rear.



17.12.1700   Yard, side.



17.12.010  Rules of construction.



   A.   Except as specifically defined herein, all words in this title
shall have their customary dictionary definitions. For the purpose of this
title certain words and terms used herein are defined as set out in
subsection B of this section.



   B.   Words used in the present tense include the future tense; words
used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include
the singular; the word “shall” is always mandatory, and the word
“person” includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust,
corporation or company, as well as an individual; the word “lot” includes
the words “plot” or “parcel”; the word “building” includes the
word “structure”; the words “used” or “occupied,” as applied to
any land or building, shall be construed to include the words “intended,
arranged, or designed to be used or occupied”; the words “map” or
“zoning map” mean the zoning map(s) of the city of Casa  Grande that
delineate the area to be governed by these regulations.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.020  Accessory building or use.



   “Accessory building or use” means a subordinate building, or
portion of the principal building, located on the same lot as the principal
building, or a subordinate use of land, either of which is customarily
incidental to the principal building or to the principal use of land. Where
part of an accessory building is connected to a part of the principal
building in a substantial manner as by a roof, such accessory building shall
be counted as part of the principal building. Individual public utility
installations above ground are considered accessory buildings.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.030  Adult use.



   “Adult use” means a retail establishment whose primary business is
that of selling or leasing publications and other material of a sexual
nature, including adult bookstores and theaters.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.040  Agricultural/ranching.



   “Agricultural/ranching” means the cultivation of the soil or the
raising of livestock and all activities incidental thereto. The terms
“farming” and “ranching” shall be interchangeable for purposes of
this title.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.050  Airport.



   “Airport” means a licensed facility where commercial, military and
private aircraft may land or take off and where additional space is provided
for repairs, services, storage facilities, offices, and buildings for
administration and passenger convenience.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.060  Alley.



   “Alley” means a permanent public thoroughfare providing a secondary
means of access to abutting lands.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.070  Apartment building.



   “Apartment building” means a building other than a hotel or motel
containing five or more dwelling units which have the primary entrances from
common hallways.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.080  Area of shallow flooding.



   “Area of shallow flooding” means a designated AO Zone on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three
feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.090  Automobile reduction yard.



   “Automobile reduction yard” means any area of land where two or
more motor vehicles not in running condition and/or two or more unlicensed
motor vehicles, or parts thereof are stored in the open and are not being
restored to operation; or any land, building or structure used for the
wrecking, dismantling, storage or abandonment of motor vehicles or parts
thereof.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.092  Automobile repair services (major).



   “Automobile repair services (major)” means any service, repair,
installation or work on a motor vehicle, truck, motor home, recreational
vehicle, or boat other than those included in Section 17.12.094.



(Ord. 1397.17.36 § 1 (part), 2009)



17.12.094  Automobile repair services (minor).



   “Automobile repair services (minor)” means any service, repair,
installation or work on a motor vehicle, truck, motor home, recreational
vehicle, or boat, including battery, brake, muffler, air conditioning,
automobile glass replacement and tinting, audio and video equipment,
upholstery work, tire repair and change, lubrication, tune ups, and
transmission work, provided it is conducted within a completely enclosed
building.



(Ord. 1397.17.36 § 1 (part), 2009)



17.12.100  Auto salvage yard.



   “Auto salvage yard” means a junkyard primarily containing
inoperable vehicles. (See "junkyard").



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.110  Reserved



17.12.120  Automobile washing establishment.



   “Automobile washing establishment” means a building which has as
its primary purpose washing automobiles. Such facilities shall be considered
incidental to convenience stores, as defined in Section 17.12.365, if not
more than one auto may be washed at one time, and if the convenience store is
clearly the principal use.



(Ord. 1397.17.36 § 2 (part), 2009: Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.122  Bakery, commercial.



   “Bakery, commercial: means an industrial establishment primarily
engaged in manufacturing and distribution of baked products.



(Ord. 1397.17.45 § 1 (part), 2014)



17.12.123  Bakery, retail.



   “Bakery, retail” means an establishment primarily engaged in
preparing, baking, or cooking baked products for on-site retail sales,
on-site or off-site consumption. Said use may include incidental on-site food
service and distribution to local businesses.



(Ord. 1397.17.45 § 1 (part), 2014)



17.12.130  Base flood, one-hundred-year.



   “Base flood, one-hundred-year” means the flood having a one percent
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.140  Basement.



   “Basement” means a portion of a building located partly underground
but having not less than half its floor-to-ceiling height below the average
grade of the adjoining ground.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.145  Bed and breakfast establishment (tourist home).



   “Bed and breakfast” means a dwelling in which the occupants of the
dwelling provide, for compensation, the short term lodging and meals for
guests occupying not more than five guest rooms located within the dwelling.



(Ord. 1397.17.16 § I, 1997)



17.12.150  Block frontage.



   “Block frontage” means all of the property of a given lot or any
portion thereof lying adjacent to a public street or highway.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.160  Board.



   “Board” means the board of adjustment of the city of Casa Grande,
Arizona.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.170  Building.



   “Building” means any structure having enclosed space and a roof for
the housing and/or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels, except mobile
homes, recreational vehicles and mobile offices.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.180  Building area.



   “Building area” means the maximum horizontal projected area of the
principal and accessory building, excluding open steps, terraces, unenclosed
porches of one story, and architectural appurtenances projecting not more
than two feet. Building area, as that portion of a lot upon which
construction is permitted, is as follows: That area of a lot that lies within
the boundaries of the front, side and rear yard setback requirements measured
from the actual lot line.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.190  Building envelope.



   “Building envelope” means that area of a lot lying between the
front, rear, and side yard setback lines and between ground level and the
maximum allowable building height, amounting to a three dimensional area
available for potential building construction.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.200  Building, front line of.



   “Building, front line of” means the line of the face of a building
nearest the front lot line.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.210  Building, height of.



   “Building, height of” means the vertical distance of a building as
measured from the average elevation of the finished grade within twenty feet
of the structure to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or to the
deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between eaves and
ridges for gable and hip or gambrel roofs.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.220  Building line, front.



   “Building line, front” means the line nearest to the front and
across a lot establishing the minimum open space to be pro-  vided between
the front line of a building and the front lot line.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.230  Building line, rear.



   “Building line, rear” means the line nearest to the rear and across
a lot establishing the minimum open space to be provided between the rear
line of a building and the rear lot line.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.240  Building, nonconforming.



   “Building, nonconforming” means a legally existing building which
fails to comply with the regulations set forth in this title applicable to
the zone in which the building is located.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.250  Building, principal.



   “Building, principal” means a building which is conducted in the
main, or principal, use of the lot on which the building is situated.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.260  Building, public.



   “Building, public” means a building, supported by government funds,
to be used in an official capacity on behalf of the entire community.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.270  Business.



   “Business” means the engaging in of the purchase, sale, barter or
exchange of goods, wares, merchandise or service; the maintenance or
operation of offices or recreational or amusement enterprises.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.280  Campground.



   “Campground” means an area of land used to temporarily accommodate
two or more camping parties, including cabins, tents, recreational vehicles
or other camping outfits.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.290  Carport.



   “Carport” means a structure, open on at least two sides, consisting
of a roof and either walls or columns for the purpose of housing automotive
vehicles and other chattels. The structure shall be considered as an
accessory building when detached from the principal building and as a part of
the principal building when attached to the principal building along one or
more sides of the carport or principal building.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.300  Cemetery.



   “Cemetery” means land used for the burial of the dead and dedicated
for cemetery purposes, including crematories, mausoleums and mortuaries when
operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of such cemetery.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.305  Charity dining facilities, homeless shelters and similar services.



   “Charity dining facilities” are defined as facilities that provide
regular on-going charitable meal services.



   “Homeless shelters” are regular on-going facilities designed to
provide temporary, charitable shelter.



   “Similar services” are defined as services other than a charity
dining hall or homeless shelter, that provides essentially similar services
related to shelter and meals as defined above.



   Specifically exempted are any services provided to victims of a county,
state or federally declared disaster.



(Ord. 1397.17.11 § 1, 1994)



17.12.310  Church.



   “Church” means a building, together with its accessory buildings
and uses, where persons regularly assemble for religious worship, and which
building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and
controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.320  City.



   “City” means the city of Casa Grande.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.330  Clinic or medical center.



   “Clinic or medical center” means an establishment where patients
are admitted for special study and treatment by one or more licensed
physicians and/or dentists and their professional associates, as
distinguished from a “professional office” for general consultation
purposes.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.340  Club, private (nonprofit).



   “Club, private (nonprofit)” means a nonprofit association of
persons who are bona fide members paying annual dues which owns, hires, or
leases a building, or a portion thereof; the use of such premises being
restricted to members and their guests.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.350  Commission.



   “Commission” means the city of Casa Grande planning and zoning
commission.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.360  Convenience-food restaurant.



   “Convenience-food restaurant” means an establishment whose
principal business is the sale of foods, frozen desserts, or beverages to the
consumer in a ready-to-eat state for consumption either within the premises
or for carry-out with consumption either on or off the premises and whose
design or principal method of operation includes both of the following
characteristics:



   A.   Foods, frozen desserts, or beverages are usually served in
edible containers or in paper, plastic, or other disposable containers;



   B.   The customer is not served food at his/her table by an employee
but receives it at a counter, window, or similar facility for carrying to
another location for consumption either on or off the premises.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.365  Convenience store.



   “Convenience store” uses are commercial activities which have a
relatively high traffic generation compared to other commercial uses.  A use
is designated as a "convenience store" if the method of operation includes
one or more of the following characteristics:



   A.   Retail gasoline is sold.



   B.   A store where food and drink is sold primarily for consumption
off premises.



(Ord. 1397.17.36 § 1 (part), 2009)



17.12.370  Conditional use permits.



   “Conditional use permits” means legal authorization to undertake a
conditionally permitted use as defined by this title.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.380  Corporate counsel.



   “Corporate counsel” means the attorney of the city of Casa Grande
or any assistant or special counsel of the city.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.390  Council.



   “Council” means the city council of the city of Casa Grande.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.400  Day care.



   “Day care” means the care, supervision and guidance of a child or
children, or an adult or adults, unaccompanied by parent, guardian or
custodian, on a regular basis for periods of less than twenty-four hours per
day, in a place other than the child's or children's, or an adult’s or
adults’,  own home or homes.



(Ord. 1397.17.36 § 2 (part), 2009: Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.410  Day care center.



   “Day care center” means any facility in which day care is regularly
provided for compensation for five or more children or adults not related to
the proprietor.



(Ord. 1397.17.36 § 2 (part), 2009: Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.415  Deferred presentment company.



   “Deferred presentment company" means a business that makes
transactions pursuant to a written agreement in which the licensee holds a
person's check for at least five calendar days before presentment for payment
or deposit. This service is commonly known as payday loans. Deferred
presentment companies are principally permitted in business zones, subject to
the following conditions:



   A.   Deferred presentment companies shall not be located within
thirteen hundred and twenty (1,320) feet of another deferred presentment
company. This distance shall be measured by a straight line, in any
direction, from the outside building wall of a proposed deferred presentment
company to the location of the nearest outside building wall of the existing
deferred presentment company, without regard to any intervening uses.



   B.   These requirements shall also apply to deferred presentment
companies which are ancillary to another existing or permitted use.



   C.   The minimum separation required for the above uses shall apply
regardless of whether the other use is located within the incorporated area
of the city of Casa Grande or another jurisdiction.



(Ord. 1397.17.35 § 1, 2009)



17.12.420  Density, gross.



   “Density, gross” means the number of  residential dwelling units
per unit of land.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.430  Density, net residential.



   “Density, net residential” means the number of residential dwelling
units per unit of land, excluding any land used or to be used as arterial
street rights-of-way or private nonresidential uses except parks, open space
and recreational areas. For calculating net residential density, the formula
shall apply:



             du



      D =   A-(c+i+s+a)



Where:



      D =    Residential density



      du=   Total number of dwelling units in project



      A =    Total site area (acres)



      c =   Total commercial land area (acres)



      i =    Total industrial land area (acres)



      s =    Reserved but undedicated school sites or other public
sites (acres)



      a =    Arterial rights-of-way (acres)



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.440  Development.



   “Development” means any manmade change to improve or alter real
estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.450  Development disability.



   “Development disability” shall include autism, cerebral palsy,
epilepsy or cognitive disability.



(Ord. 1397.17.36 § 2 (part), 2009: Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.460  Drive access.



   “Drive access” means that area between the curb of a street, or
edge of the traveled portion of a street when no curb exists, and the
right-of-way/property line over which the city will permit vehicular travel
from the traveled portion of a street to an individual property, or
off-street parking space(s).



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.470  Drive-in business.



   “Drive-in business” means any business in which people are provided
a service or a product, where a sale is made without the customer being
required to leave the vehicle. Such businesses include, but are not limited
to, the following: drive-in theater, drive-in bank, drive-in laundry or
drycleaning pickup station, drive-in restaurant, and any business offering
“take-home” food services.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.480  Duplex.



   See Section 17.12.530.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.490  Dwelling.



   “Dwelling” means a building, or portion thereof, used primarily for
residential occupancy, including single-family, two-family, multiple-family
dwellings and group homes, but not including hotels, motels, or tourist homes.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.500  Dwelling, attached.



   “Dwelling, attached” means a dwelling that has a wall, roof and/or
floor in common with any other dwelling.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.510  Dwelling, detached.



   “Dwelling, detached” means city dwelling that does not have a wall
roof and/or floor in common with any other dwelling.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.520  Dwelling, single-family.



   “Dwelling, single-family” means a building used for residential
occupancy by one family.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.530  Dwelling, two-family.



   “Dwelling, two-family” means a building or portion thereof, used
for occupancy by two or more families living independently of each other,
with the units completely separated by a common wall, floor and/or ceiling.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.540  Dwelling, multiple (multi-family).



   “Dwelling, multiple (multi-family)” means a building or portion
thereof, used for occupancy by three or more families living independently of
each other, with the units completely separated by a common wall, floor
and/or ceiling.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.550  Dwelling unit.



   “Dwelling unit” means a dwelling, or portion of a dwelling, used by
one household for residential purposes.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.560  Family.



   “Family” means any number of individuals customarily living
together as a single housekeeping unit and using common cooking facilities as
distinguished from a group occupying a hotel, motel, club, fraternity,
sorority, lodging house, or nursing home.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.570  Fence.



   “Fence” means a barrier constructed of materials erected for the
purpose of protection, confinement, enclosure or privacy.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.580  Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).



   “Flood Insurance Rate Map” means the official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and risk premium zones applicable to the community.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.590  Flood Insurance Study.



   “Flood Insurance Study” means the official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles as well as the
Flood Boundary Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.600  Floodplain.



   “Floodplain” means that area encompassing the floodway area and the
floodway fringe.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.610  Floodproofing.



   “Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and
nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to properties and structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to lands, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and contents of buildings.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.620  Floodway, one-hundred-year.



   “Floodway, one-hundred-year” means the channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas which must be kept free of
encroachment in order to carry out and discharge a flood of one- hundred-year
magnitude without substantial increases in flood height.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.630  Floodway fringe, one-hundred year.



   “Floodway fringe, one-hundred-year” means the area between the
floodway and the one-hundred- year flood boundary.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.640  Garage, private.



   “Garage, private” means a detached accessory building, or portion
of a main building, used for the storage of self-propelled vehicles where the
capacity does not exceed three vehicles per family housed in the building to
which such garage is accessory and not more than one-third of the total
number of vehicles stored in such garage shall be commercial vehicles.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.650  Garage, public.



   “Garage, public” means any building or premises, except those
defined herein as a private garage, used for the storage or care of motor
vehicles; or where such vehicles are equipped for operation, repaired, or
kept for rental, hire, or sale.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.660  General plan.



   “General plan” means the city of Casa Grande general plan.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.670  Grade.



   “Grade” means the average level of the finished ground surfaces
surrounding a building.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.680  Greenhouse.



   “Greenhouse” means a building or structure constructed chiefly of
glass, glass-like translucent material, cloth, lath or similar materials
which is devoted to the protection or cultivation of flowers and other plants.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.690  Ground floor area.



   “Ground floor area” means the square foot area of a building within
its largest outside dimension computed on a horizontal plane at the ground
floor level, exclusive of open porches, breezeways, terraces, garages,
exterior stairways, and secondary stairways.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.700  Group home.



   “Group home” means a single, residential structure having common
kitchen facilities occupied by more than six persons having physical, mental,
emotional, or social problems and living together for the purpose of
training, observation, and/or common support on a twenty-four hour per day
basis, except that a residential facility shall not be included in the
definition of group home.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.710  Habitable floor.



   “Habitable floor” means any floor usable for living purposes, which
includes working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation, or a combination
thereof.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.720  Home occupation or profession.



   “Home occupation or profession” means any use conducted entirely
within a dwelling and carried on solely by the occupants thereof, which use
is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for
residential purposes and which meets the requirements of this title.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.730  Hospital.



   “Hospital” means an institution for the diagnosis, treatment, or
other cure of human ailments and includes sanitarium or clinic, provided such
institution is operated by, or treatment is given, under direct supervision
of a physician licensed to practice by the state of Arizona.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.740  Hotel or motel.



   “Hotel or motel” means a building or portion thereof, or a group of
buildings, in which lodging is provided and offered to transient guests for
compensation; shall not include a lodging house.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.750  Incidental.



   “Incidental” means any action or use of less importance, or
secondary to, any other action or use.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.760  Junkyard.



   “Junkyard” means any place at which personal property is or may be
salvaged for reuse, resale, or reduction or similar disposition and is owned,
possessed, collected, accumulated, dismantled or sorted, including but not
limited to: use of salvaged base metal or metals, their compounds or
combinations; use of salvaged rope, bags, rags, glass, rubber, lumber,
millwork, brick, automobiles, and similar property which are used, owned, or
possessed for the purpose of wrecking or salvaging parts therefrom.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.770  Kennel.



   “Kennel” means any lot or premises on which three or more dogs,
cats, or small animals over the age of eight weeks are kept. A noncommercial
kennel at, in, or adjoining a private residence where hunting or other dogs
are kept for the hobby of the householder (i.e., hunting, tracking, or
exhibiting) or for guarding or protecting the householder's property is
permitted in residential zoning districts, provided the number of dogs, cats
or small animals over the age of eight weeks does not exceed four.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.771  Large multiple use shopping center.



   A “large multiple use shopping center” shall mean any grouping of
two or more retail uses, whether on a single lot or on abutting lots under
multiple or single ownership and whether contained in one building or
multiple buildings where the aggregate square footage of building coverage
primarily devoted to, or intended for, the sale or display of goods and
merchandise for consumption by the general public, including any outdoor
sales and display area(s) and storage/stockroom area(s), but excluding any
outdoor area for the sale of cars, trucks, boats, recreational vehicles, or
manufactured homes is in excess of two-hundred fifty thousand (250,000)
square feet.



(Ord. 1397.17.29 § 1 (part), 2001)



17.12.772  Large single retail use.



   A “large single retail use” shall mean any single use building,
whether stand alone or within a multi-building development, wherein said
single use building occupies at least one-hundred thousand (100,000) square
feet of building coverage primarily devoted to, or intended for, the sale or
display of goods and merchandise for consumption by the general public,
including any outdoor sales and display area(s) and storage/stockroom
area(s), but excluding any outdoor area for the sale of cars, trucks, boats,
recreational vehicles, or manufactured homes. For the purposes of this
definition, calculation of such building area(s) shall include all other
indoor and outdoor sales areas or customer service area(s) that may be
incidental to, but nevertheless share customer walking aisles or store
entrances with the large single retail use operator, whether or not such
area(s) are under the same management as the large single retail use operator.



(Ord. 1397.17.29 § 1 (part), 2001)



17.12.780  Loading and unloading bays.



   “Loading and unloading bays” means the off-street area required for
the receipt of or distribution, by vehicles, of material or merchandise.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.790  Lodging house.



   “Lodging house” means a building with more than two but not more
then ten guest rooms where lodging with or without meals is provided for
compensation.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.800  Lot.



   “Lot” means a piece, parcel, plot, tract, or area of land occupied
or capable of being occupied by one or more principal buildings, and the
accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to them, and including the
open spaces required under this title, and having its principal lot frontage
on a street.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.810  Lot area.



   “Lot area” means the total horizontal area within the boundary
lines of a lot.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.820  Lot, corner.



   “Lot, corner” means a lot at a junction of and fronting on two or
more intersecting streets.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.830  Lot, interior.



   “Lot, interior” means a lot other than a corner or through lot.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.840  Lot, through.



   “Lot, through” means a lot having frontage on two parallel or
approximately parallel streets.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.850  Lot coverage.



   “Lot coverage” means the percentage of the lot area covered by
buildings.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.860  Lot depth.



   “Lot depth” means the horizontal distance of a line measured at a
right angle to the front lot line and running between the front lot line and
rear lot line of a lot.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.870  Lot, ground level.



   “Lot, ground level” means, for buildings having walls fronting on
only one street, the elevation at the front lot line at the center of a wall
fronting on the street; for buildings having walls fronting on more than one
street, the average of the elevation of the lot lines at the center of all
walls fronting on the streets; for buildings having no walls fronting on a
street, the average level of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the
building.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.880  Lot line, front.



   “Lot line, front” means, in the case of an interior lot, a line
separating the lot from the street, in the case of a corner lot, a line
separating the narrowest street frontage of the lot from the street and in
the case of a through lot, a line separating the lot from the street from
which a drive access may be permitted by the city.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.890  Lot line, rear.



   “Lot line, rear” means a lot line which is opposite and most
distant from the front lot line and, in the case of an irregular or
triangular shaped lot, a lot line ten feet in length within the lot, parallel
to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.900  Lot line, side.



   “Lot line, side” means any lot boundary line not a front lot line
or a rear lot line.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.910  Lot width.



   “Lot width” means the distance as measured in a straight line,
between side lot lines at the points of intersection with the front building
line.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.920  Manufactured home.



   “Manufactured home” see Section 17.12.1010.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.930  Manufacturing.



   “Manufacturing” means the creation of products either with
machinery or by and according to an organized plan and with the division of
labor.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.940  Manufacturing, light.



   “Manufacturing, light” means fabrication of and/or assembly of
goods from previously prepared materials.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.941  Medical marijuana.



   “Medical marijuana” means all parts of the plant genus cannabis,
whether growing or not, and the seed of such plants, that may be administered
to treat or alleviate a qualifying patient’s debilitating medical
condition, or symptoms associated with the patient’s debilitating medical
condition.



(Ord. 1397.17.37 § 1 (part), 2011)



17.12.942  Medical marijuana cultivation facility.



   “Medical marijuana cultivation facility” shall mean a building,
structure, or premises used for the cultivation or storage of medical
marijuana that is physically separate and off-site from a medical marijuana
dispensary.  This includes any building, structure, or premises used for
cultivation by either a qualifying patient or a designated caregiver, other
than those accessory uses permitted pursuant to Table 17.16.030(A).



(Ord. 1397.17.37 § 1 (part), 2011)



17.12.943  Medical marijuana dispensary.



   “Medical marijuana dispensary” means a nonprofit medical marijuana
dispensary, duly registered and certified pursuant to A.R.S. § 36-2804, that
sells, distributes, transmits, gives, dispenses, or otherwise provides
medical marijuana to qualifying patients.  A “medical marijuana
dispensary” as defined herein shall not cultivate or infuse marijuana
onsite.



(Ord. 1397.17.37 §1 (part), 2011)



17.12.944  Medical marijuana dispensary cultivation facility.



   “Medical marijuana dispensary cultivation facility” shall mean a
building, structure or premises where marijuana will be cultivated for sale
at a nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary duly registered and certified
pursuant to A.R.S. § 36-2804.



(Ord. 1397.17.37 § 1 (part), 2011)



17.12.945  Medical marijuana infusion facility.



   “Medical marijuana infusion facility” means a facility that
incorporates medical marijuana (cannabis) into consumable/ edible goods by
the means of cooking, blending, or any other type of incorporation.



(Ord. 1397.17.37 § 1 (part), 2011)



17.12.946  Medical marijuana uses.



   “Medical marijuana uses” shall include collectively medical
marijuana cultivation facilities, medical marijuana dispensaries, medical
marijuana dispensary cultivation facilities, and medical marijuana infusion
facilities.



(Ord. 1397.17.37 § 1 (part), 2011)



17.12.947  Qualifying patient/caregiver cultivation location.



   “Qualifying patient/caregiver cultivation location” means any
building, structure, or premises used for the cultivation of marijuana by
either a qualifying patient and/or qualified caregivers who meet the
following requirements:



   1.   The cultivator is either:



   a.   A qualifying patient pursuant to A.R.S. § 36-2801(13) who has
received his/her registry identification card from the Arizona Department of
Health Services; or



   b.   A designated caregiver pursuant to A.R.S. § 36-2801(5) who has
received his/her registry identification card from the Arizona Department of
Health Services.



   2.   The cultivation is done only at the address approved by the
Arizona Department of Health Services; and



   3.   The building, structure, or premises used for the cultivation
is at least twenty-five  miles from the nearest medical marijuana dispensary.



(Ord. 1397.17.37 § 1 (part), 2011)



17.12.950  Mining.



   “Mining” means the extraction of sand, gravel, or other material
from the land in the amount of four hundred cubic yards or more and the
removal thereof from the site without processing.



(Ord. 1397.16.2 §§ 1 (part), 2 (part), 1994)



17.12.960  Mobile homes.



   “Mobile homes (also manufactured home)” means a factory-assembled
structure or structures, exceeding eight feet in width, originally equipped
with the necessary service connections and originally made so as to be
readily movable as a unit or units on its (their) own running gear and
designed to be used as a dwelling unit(s) without a permanent foundation,
whether or not the running gear has been removed.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.970  Mobile home park.



   “Mobile home park” means any plot of ground upon which two or more
mobile homes, occupied or intended to be occupied for dwelling or sleeping
purposes, are located.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.980  Mobile home space.



   “Mobile home space” means a plot of ground within a mobile home
park designed for the accommodation of one mobile home.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.990  Mobile home stand.



   “Mobile home stand” means that portion of an individual mobile home
space which has been reserved for the placement of a mobile home and
structures or additions appurtenant to the mobile home.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1000  Mobile office.



   “Mobile office” means a factory-assembled structure or structures
exceeding eight feet in width, originally equipped with the necessary service
connections, and originally made so as to be readily movable as a unit or
units on its (their) own running gear and designed to be used as an office
without a permanent foundation, whether or not the running gear has been
removed.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1010  Model home.



   “Model home” means a home constructed to display a builder's for
sale or lease units but which does not serve as a dwelling unit.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1020  Modular or sectional home.



   “Modular or sectional home” means a dwelling unit mass-produced in
a factory, designed and constructed for transportation to a site for
occupancy when connected to the required utilities and when permanently
anchored to a permanent foundation, and whether intended for use as an
independent, individual unit or in combination with other units to form a
larger building.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1030  New construction.



   “New construction” means structures for which the “start of
construction” commenced on or after the effective date of this title.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1040  Noxious matter or material.



   “Noxious matter or material” means material capable of causing
injury to living organisms by chemical reaction or capable of causing
detrimental effects on the physical or economic well-being of individuals.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1050  Nonconforming use.



   See Section 17.12.1570.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1060  Nursing home.



   See Section 17.12.700.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1070  Offices.



   “Offices” means structures, or portions of structures, in which
commercial activities take place but where goods are not produced, sold, or
repaired. These include: banks; general and professional offices;
governmental offices; insurance offices; real estate offices; taxicab
offices; but not taxi stands; travel agency or transportation ticket offices;
telephone exchange; utility offices; radio broadcasting and similar uses.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1080  One-hundred-year flood.



   “One-hundred-year flood” means the highest level of flooding that,
on the average, is likely to occur once every one hundred years (i.e., that
has a one percent chance of occurring in any given year).



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1090  Open sales (or rental) lot.



   “Open sales (or rental) lot” means any land used or occupied for
the purpose of buying, selling, or renting for use away from the premises,
any goods, materials, or merchandise, and for the exterior storing of same
prior to sale or rental.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1100  Overlay zone.



   “Overlay zone” means a zone superimposed upon an underlying zone
which establishes special requirements in addition to, or in lieu of, those
of the underlying zone. Development or use of land or structures must conform
to the requirements of both zones or the more restrictive of the two, if in
conflict.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1110  Parking area, public.



   “Parking area, public” means an open area, other than a street or
alley designated for use, or used, as a temporary parking for four or more
vehicles when available for public use, whether free or for compensation or
as an accommodation for clients or customers.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1120  Parking space, off-street.



   “Parking space, off-street” means a space designated for the
temporary parking of a motor vehicle not on the right-of-way or alley but
accessible from a street or alley.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1130  Party wall.



   “Party wall” means a wall of a building or structure which is
common to two or more buildings.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1140  Paved parking space or surface.



   “Paved parking space or surface” means an area covered by an
impervious dust free surface of asphalt or concrete designed to
specifications of the city engineer.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1150  Personal and convenience services.



   “Personal and convenience services” means businesses offering
services such as barber shops, beauty shops, laundromats, laundry and dry
cleaning pickup and delivery stations, and similar uses.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1160  Persons.



   “Persons” means and includes any individual or group of
individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, or any other organized
group of persons, including state and local governments and agencies thereof.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1170  Plant nursery.



   “Plant nursery” means facilities for commercial development, growth
and sale of plants and/or for the utilization of and storage of equipment for
landscaping operation and wholesale and/or retail or commercial supplies.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1180  Property, personal.



   “Property, personal” means property, other than real property,
consisting of things temporal and movable.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1190  Property, real.



   “Property, real” means property consisting of buildings and/or land.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1200  Recreational vehicle.



   “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicular type portable structure
without permanent foundation, which can be towed, hauled or driven primarily
designed as a temporary living accommodation for recreational, camping and
travel use and including but not limited to travel trailers, truck campers,
camping trailers and self-propelled motor homes.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1210  Recreational vehicle park.



   “Recreational vehicle park” means a plot of ground upon which two
or more sites are located, established or maintained for occupancy by the
general public as temporary living quarters for recreation, education or
vacation purposes.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1215   Recycling center.



   "Recycling center" means a facility for the collection and temporary
storage of empty household product containers, such as, but not limited to,
aluminum cans, glass and plastic bottles, plastic, glass, cardboard, paper,
aluminum, and similar recyclable materials discarded from residential
dwelling units. The term "acceptable recyclable materials" does not include
equipment and/or mechanical components.  All recycling activities, including
compacting and packaging necessary to transport the materials, must occur
within an enclosed building or buildings. Outside storage of the materials
either prior to processing or after processing is permissible only in
enclosed containers.



(Ord. 1397.17.19  1, 1998)



17.12.1220  Research laboratory.



   “Research laboratory” means an establishment or facility for
carrying on investigation in the natural, physical or social sciences, or
engineering and development as an extension of investigation with the
objective of creating products.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1230  Residential facility.



   “Residential facility” means a single residential structure having
common kitchen facilities, occupied by six or fewer persons having a
physical, emotional, social or developmental disability, and living together
for the purpose of residential training, observation, and/or common support,
in which care is provided on a twenty-four hour per day basis. The limitation
of six or fewer persons does not include the operator of a residential
facility, members of the operator's family or persons employed as staff,
except that the total number of all persons living at the residential
facility shall not exceed eight.



(Ord. 1397.17.36 § 2 (part), 2009: Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1240  Restaurant.



   “Restaurant” means any restaurant (except a drive-in restaurant or
a convenience food restaurant as defined in this section), coffee shop,
cafeteria, short-order cafe, luncheonette, tavern, sandwich stand, drugstore,
and soda fountain serving food, and all other eating and drinking
establishments provided that at least one-half of the total sales are derived
from the sale of food.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1250  School.



   “School” means any pre-primary, primary or grammar, public,
parochial or private school, high school; prepatory school or academy, public
or founded, or owned or conducted by or under the sponsorship of a religious
or charitable organization; private prepatory school or academy furnishing
courses of instruction substantially equivalent to the courses offered by
public high schools for preparation of admission to college or universities
which award B.A. or B.S. degrees; junior college or university, public or
founded or conducted by or under the sponsorship of a religious or charitable
organization; or private school when not conducted as a commercial enterprise
for the profit of individual owners or stockholders.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1260  Screening.



   “Screening” means a solid or nearly solid barrier (i.e., wall,
fence, plantings) constructed or installed for the purpose of visual
separation.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1270  Setback.



   “Setback” means the horizontal distance between the front line of a
building and the street right- of-way line or lot line.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1280  Setback line.



   “Setback line” means that line that is the required minimum
distance from the street right-of-way line or any other lot line that
establishes the area within which the principal structure must be placed.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1290  Sewer, public.



   “Sewer, public” means any sanitary sewer line owned and maintained
by the city, whether or not installed by the city.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1300  Sewer system, community.



   “Sewer system, community” means any sanitary sewer system, whether
treatment plant, septic tank or lagoon designed with a sewer collection
system to be used by a legally constituted association of property owners.
The system may or may not be a public system.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1305  Sexually oriented business.



   “Sexually oriented business” means an adult arcade, adult bookstore
or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture
theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, sexual encounter
center, or any combination of the foregoing. (See definitions in the
ordinance adopted by reference in Section 5.24.010.)



(Ord. 1397.16.2 § 2 (part), 1994)



17.12.1310  Shopping center.



   “Shopping center” means any grouping of two or more principal
retail uses, whether on a single lot or on abutting lots under multiple or
single ownership and whether contained in one building or multiple buildings.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1320  Sign.



   “Sign” means any device providing identification, advertising or
directional information for a specific business, service, product, person,
organization, place or building. Included in this definition are graphic
devices such as logos, attention attracting media such as banners or logo
sculpture and obtrusive colored fascia or architectural elements.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1330  Sign, free-standing.



   “Sign, free-standing” means any nonmovable sign not affixed to a
building.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1340  Sign, nonaccessory.



   “Sign, nonaccessory” means a sign which directs attention to a
business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted sold or offered at a
location other than the premises on which the sign is located.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1350  Sign, wall.



   “Sign, wall” means a sign fastened to or painted on the wall of a
building or structure in such manner that the wall becomes the supporting
structure for, or forms the background surface of, the sign and which does
not project more than twelve inches from such building or structure.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1360  Site plan.



   “Site plan” means a drawing to scale not less than one inch equals
one hundred feet showing the accurate location of all structures, streets,
alleys, and parking areas existing and proposed on subject property or any
other information as may be required by this title.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1370  Stable, private.



   “Stable, private” means any building located on a lot which is
designed, arranged, used or intended to be used for not more than four horses
for the private use of the owner of the lot, but shall not exceed six
thousand square feet in area.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1380  Stable, public.



   “Stable, public” means a stable where horses are kept for
remuneration, hire or sale.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1390  Start of construction.



   A.   “Start of construction” means the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure (other than a mobile home) on a site,
such as the pouring of slabs or footings or any work beyond the stage of
excavation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of
streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does
it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not as part of the main
structure.



   B.   For a structure (other than a mobile home) without a basement
or poured footings, the “start of construction” includes the first
permanent framing or assembly of the structure or any part thereof on its
piling or foundation.



   C.   For mobile homes not within a mobile home park or mobile home
subdivision, “start of construction” means the affixing of the mobile
home to its permanent site. For mobile homes within mobile home parks or
mobile home subdivisions, “start of construction” is the date on which
the construction of facilities for servicing the site on which the mobile
home is to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the construction of streets,
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and installation
of utilities) is completed.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1400  Street.



   “Street” means a right-of-way other than an alley, dedicated or
otherwise legally established for public use, usually affording the principal
means of access to abutting property.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1410  Street, arterial.



   “Street, arterial” means a street with access control, signals at
important intersections and stop signs on the side streets and restricted
parking designed to primarily distribute traffic.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1420  Street, collector.



   “Street, collector” means a street which carries (collects) traffic
from local streets and connects with minor or major arterial streets.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1430  Street, local.



   “Street, local” means a street designed to provide vehicular access
to abutting properties and to discourage through traffic.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1440  Street frontage.



   “Street frontage” means any property line separating a lot from a
street; the front lot line.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1450  Street, public.



   “Street, public” means any street which has been dedicated or is
otherwise publicly owned by the city. Any street not a public street shall be
deemed a private street.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1460  Structure.



   “Structure” means anything constructed or erected which requires
location on the ground.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1470  Structural alteration.



   “Structural alteration” means any change in the supporting members
of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, or
girders, or any change in the exterior walls or roof.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1480  Substantial improvement.



   A.   “Substantial improvement” means any repair, reconstruction,
or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty
percent of the market value of the structure either:



   1.   Before the improvement or repair is started; or



   2.   If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before
the damage occurred.



   B.   For the purposes of this definition “substantial
improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether
or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The
term does not, however, include either:



   1.   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or



   2.   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register
of Historic Places.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1500  Townhouse.



   “Townhouse” means a single-family dwelling constructed as part of a
series of dwellings, all of which are either attached to the adjacent
building and/or buildings by party walls, or are located immediately adjacent
thereto without any visible separation between walls or roof; all of which
may be located on individual and separate lots, if individually owned, or
upon a single lot, if under common ownership.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1510  Townhouse cluster.



   “Townhouse cluster” means a building consisting of two or more
noncommunicating, attached one-family units placed side by side and/or back
to back having a common wall between each two adjacent dwelling units.



(Ord. 1397.17.23 § 1, 1999; Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1520  Truck stop.



   A.   “Truck stop” means a facility for the servicing of diesel
powered trucks and tractor trailers. A truck stop shall mean any one or more
of the following:



   1.   Four or more diesel fuel dispensers;



   2.   Two or more bays for truck washing;



   3.   Facilities for diesel engine repair.



   B.   Other uses present at the same facility such as convenience
markets or restaurants shall not be determinative of whether or not the
facility is a truck stop.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1530  Truck washing establishment.



   “Truck washing establishment” means a facility designed to
primarily serve to semitrailer and tractor travel as a place to have such
vehicles cleaned.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1540  Use.



   “Use” means the employment or occupation of a building, structure
or land for a person's service, benefit, or enjoyment.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1550  Use, accessory.



   See Section 17.12.020.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1560  Use, conditionally permitted.



   “Use, conditionally permitted” means either a public or private use
as listed herein which, because of its unique characteristics, cannot be
properly classified as a permitted use in a particular district. After
consideration in each case of the impact of such use upon neighboring land
and of the public need for the particular use at the particular location, a
permit for such conditional use may or may not be granted, with or without
conditions, in addition to any condition specifically stated in this title
for any particular conditional use, including time limits, pursuant to the
requirements of this title. A  conditional use may be a principal use or an
accessory use.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1570  Use, nonconforming.



   “Use, nonconforming” means an existing use of land or building
which was legal prior to the effective date of this title but which fails to
comply with the requirements set forth in this title applicable to the zone
in which such use is located.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1580  Use, permitted.



   “Use, permitted” means a use which is lawfully established in a
particular district or districts and which conforms with all requirements,
regulations, and performance standards of such district. A permitted use may
be a principal use or an accessory use.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1590  Use, principal.



   “Use, principal” means a use or structure which determines the
predominant or major use of the lot on which it is located. The principal use
shall be that use which establishes the character of the property relative to
surrounding or adjacent properties. A principal use may be either a permitted
or a conditional use.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1600  Use, temporary.



   “Use, temporary” means a use established for a fixed period of time
with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time
period.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1610  Variance.



   “Variance” means a modification or variation of the provisions of
this title as applied to a specific piece of property. Dimensional variances
only may be allowed; no variance regarding use of property shall be
permitted; no variance decreasing lot area requirements shall be allowed.
Variance may be permitted only by the board of adjustment.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1620  Variance, dimensional.



   “Variance, dimensional” means departure from the terms of the
zoning regulations pertaining to height or width of structures and size of
yard and open spaces where such departure will not be contrary to the public
interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property because of
its size, shape or topography, and not as a result of the action of the
applicant, the literal enforcement of the zoning regulations would result in
unnecessary and undue hardship.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1630  Warehouse.



   “Warehouse” means an enclosed building designed and used primarily
for the storage of goods and materials.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1640  Warehouse, residential storage (mini-warehouse).



   “Warehouse, residential storage (mini-warehouse)” means a building
or group of buildings in a controlled access and fenced or screened compound
that contains relatively small storage spaces of varying sizes and/or spaces
of varying sizes and/or spaces for recreational vehicles or boats, having
individual, compartmentalized and controlled access for the dead storage of
excess personal property of an individual or family generally stored in
residential accessory structures, when such building or group of buildings
are not located on the lot of the residence.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1645  Wireless telecommunication facilities.



   “Wireless telecommunication facilities” means any facility or
structure used for the reception or transmission of radio, telephone,
television or similar-type signals. Included in this definition are
transmission and reception towers of commercial and private radio and
television broadcasting and re- broadcasting stations, cable television
facilities, cellular and other telephone facilities, paging and personal
communication facilities, and public and private utility facilities including
attachments.



(Ord. 1397.17.14 § I, 1996)



17.12.1650  Wrecking yard.



   “Wrecking yard” means a place, lot or area where the primary
function is that of dismantling, storage, abandonment or sale of goods and
materials as parts or scraps.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1660  Yard.



   “Yard” means a space on the same lot with a principal building,
which is open and unoccupied other than by steps, walks, terraces, driveways,
lamp posts and similar structures, and unobstructed by structures, except as
otherwise provided in this title.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1670  Yard, corner side.



   “Yard, corner side” means a yard on a corner lot the area of which
is bounded by a line extending from the front of the principal building (the
front building line) to a point intersecting the side street right-of-way
line (side lot line), then along the side lot line to a point intersecting
the rear lot line, then along the rear lot line to a point intersecting the
line formed by extending the wall of the nearest principal building
paralleling the side lot line.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1680  Yard, front.



   “Yard, front” means a yard extending across the full width of the
lot between two side lot lines the depth of which is the least distance
between the street right-of-way and the front building line.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1690  Yard, rear.



   “Yard, rear” means a yard extending across the full width of the
lot between the two side lot lines and between the rear line and a parallel
line tangent to the rear of the principal building and the depth of which is
the least distance between the rear lot line and the parallel line.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



17.12.1700  Yard, side.



   “Yard, side” means a yard extending between the front building line
and the rear building line, the width of which is the least distance between
the side lot line and the nearest part of the principal building.



(Ord. 1178 § 3.1 (part), 1987)



Chapter 17.14
FEES



Sections:



17.14.010   Purpose of fees.



17.14.020   Application fees.



17.14.010  Purpose of fees.



   It is the intent of this title to require petitioners to pay a portion
of the public services that are necessary for processing their request. While
the city is not expecting one hundred percent recovery of all costs, it does
feel that all required publication and mailing costs, plus a portion of
administrative costs, should be borne by the petitioner.



(Ord. 1178 § 8.2.1, 1987)



17.14.020  Application fees.



   A.   Fees for matters pertinent to the administration of this title
will be set from time to time by ordinance of the city council, including
fees for:



   1.   Zoning text amendments, no charge;



   2.   Rezonings/P.A.D. amendment, $350.00/+ $30.00/per acre;



   3.   General Plan amendment, $350.00/+ $30.00/per acre;



   4.   Pre-plats, $350.00/+ $3.00/lot;



   5.   Final plats, $350.00/+ $3.00/lot;



   6.   Replats, $100.00;



   7.   Major site plan reviews, $100.00;



   8.   Variances, owner-occupied residential uses, $100.00;



   9.   Variances, all other, $350.00;



   10.   Conditional use permit, $350.00;



   11.   Special temporary use permit, $100.00;



   12.   Appeals, $200.00;



   13.   Amendments to previously approved site plans, $100.00



   B.   For purposes of this title, the first site plan filed for a
site developed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
title or for a site developed prior to annexation shall be considered an
amendment to a previously approved site plan.



   C.   Filing fee may be waived by the city council for any
application filed by any agency or department of the city of any government
organized under the laws of the state of Arizona or of the United States. The
exception shall not apply to nongovernmental leases of government land.



   D.   The city council may waive fees to avoid duplication of charges
or undue hardship.



(Ord. 1397.01.1 § 5, 1992; Ord. 1178 § 8.2.2, 1987)



Chapter 17.16
ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES



Sections:



17.16.010   Zone classifications designated.



17.16.020   Zone boundaries interpreted.



17.16.030   Permitted uses in specific zones.



17.16.010  Zone classifications designated.



   A.   For the purpose of this title, the city shall be divided into
the following zones:



   1.   UR — Urban Ranch Zone;



   2.   R-1 — Single-Family Residential Zone;



   3.   R-1a — Single-Family Residential Zone;



   4.   R-2 — Multi-Family Residential Zone;



   5.   R-3 — Multi-Family Residential Zone;



   6.   R-4 — Mobile Home Residential Zone;



   7.   B-1 — Neighborhood Business Zone;



   8.   B-2 — General Business Zone;



   9.   B-3 — Central Business Zone;



   10.   B-4 — Community Service Zone;



   11.   I-1 — Garden Industrial Zone;



   12.   I-2 — General Industrial Zone;



   13.   PAD — Planned Area Development;



   14.   Neighborhood Conservation District Zone;



   15.   Planned Area Development — Recreational Vehicle Park Overlay
Zoning District;



   16.   CO — Commercial Office Zone;



   17.   RR — Rural Ranch;



   18.   SH — Suburban Homestead.



   B.   The boundaries of the zones are established as shown on a map
entitled “Zoning Map of Casa Grande, Arizona,” which has been recommended
and certified by the city council with the signature of the mayor affixed
thereto and is made a part of this title.



(Ord. 1397.17.34 § 1, 2009: Ord. 1397.17.33 § 1, 2006: Ord. 1397.17.17 §
1, 1997: Ord. 1397.17.15 § 7, 1997: Ord. 1397.16.2 § 2 (part), 1994; Ord.
1178 § 4.1, 1987)



17.16.020  Zone boundaries interpreted.



   Where uncertainty exists with respect to any of the boundaries of the
zones as shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:



   A.   Where zone boundaries are indicated as approximately following
the center lines of street, highway, or railroad rights-of-way or such lines
extended, such center lines or such lines extended shall be construed to be
such boundaries;



   B.   Where zone boundaries are indicated as approximately following
the corporate limit line of the city, such corporate limit line shall be
construed to be such boundaries;



   C.   Where zone boundaries are indicated as approximately following
property lines or such lines extended, such property lines or such lines
extended shall be construed to be such boundaries;



   D.   Where zone boundaries are indicated as approximately following
the center line of stream beds or river beds, such center lines or such lines
extended shall be construed to be such boundaries;



   E.   No zone boundary line shall hereinafter be established to
divide one lot into two or more zones unless the size of the lot in question
is such that division is determined to be essential by the planning and
zoning commission and the city council.



(Ord. 1178 § 4.2, 1987)



17.16.030  Permitted uses in specific zones.



   A.   Principally Permitted Uses. Refer to Principally Permitted Uses
in Tables 17.16.030 A and 17.16.030 B codified at the end of this chapter.



   B.   Conditionally Permitted Uses. Refer to Conditionally Permitted
Uses in Table 17.16.030 A and 17.16.030 B for the specific zone
classification in question.



   C.   Permitted Accessory Uses. Refer to Permitted Accessory Uses in
Table 17.16.030 A and 17.16.030 B for the specific zone in question.



(Ord. 1178.32 attachment A, 1990: Ord. 1178 §§ 4.3.1, 4.3.2, 1987)



 


 
UR
 
RR
 
SH
 
R-1
 
R-1a
 
R-2
 
R-3
 
R-4




A.   Principally Permitted Uses
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Single-family dwelling unit
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
 
o


Mobile home
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
o


Two family structure
 
 
 
 
 
o
 
o
 
 
o


Three family structure
 
 
 
 
 
 
o
 
o
 


Four family structure
 
 
 
 
 
 
o
 
o
 


Multiple family structure
 
 
 
 
 
 
o
 
o
 


Residential facility
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
 


Townhouse cluster, not to exceed four (4) units or 120 feet in length
 
 
 
 
 
 
o
 
o
 


Townhouse cluster with four or more units, but not to exceed 160 feet in
length
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
o
 


Public parks
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o


Commercial Agricultural Uses Including:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


-Field crops, truck gardening, berry or bush crops, tree crops, flower
gardening, plant nurseries and green houses, orchards, aviaries, and apiaries.
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
 
 
 
 


-Raising and marketing of poultry, rabbits, and small animals, but not
slaughtering of other than such raised on the premises.
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
 
 
 
 


-The grazing and raising of livestock and horses except that not more than
three (3) hogs shall be kept or maintained on any parcel, lot or tract under
one ownership within 500' of any more restrictive zone.
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
 
 
 
 


-Fruit, vegetable or agricultural products packing or processing plant,
provided the same is located on a site of not less than 10 acres and any
buildings located thereon occupy not more than 30% of the site area.
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
 
 
 
 


-Livestock sales yard or auction yard, provided the site where located is not
less than one-half mile (as the crow flies) from a more restrictive
residential zone or within one-half mile of any exterior boundary of a more
restrictive zone. Further, that the site is not less than twenty acres in
area and applicant shall provide the Planning Director with written consent
of 51% of the owners by number and area of property within 300 hundred feet
of proposed site.
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
 
 
 
 


-A stand of not more than 200 square feet in area for the sale of farm
products grown or produced on the premises, provided said stand is not more
than 10 feet to any street right-of-way line and not closer than 20 feet to
any other lot line.
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
 
 
 
 


-Public riding stables and boarding stables, providing the site contains not
less than 10 acres and the buildings housing animals set back from all lot
lines a distance of not less than 100 feet.
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
 
 
 
 


-Wireless telecommunication facilities (28 feet height or under)
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
 
 
 
 


B.   Conditionally Permitted Uses
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Bed & breakfast establishments (tourist home)^
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o^
 
o^
 
o^
 
o^
 
o^


Cemeteries
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
 
 
 


Charity dining facilities, homeless shelters, and similar services
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o


Churches
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o


Day care centers^^
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o


Electrical sub-stations
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o


Gas regulating stations
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o


Golf courses
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o


^Bed and breakfast establishments (tourist homes) are conditionally permitted
in these zoning districts only if they are located within a historical
district or historical landmark as designated pursuant to Section 17.62.050
of this code.


^^Day care centers involving the care of minor children shall meet the
requirements set forth in Section 17.24.030.D.


Group homes
 
 
 
 
o
 
 
o
 
o
 


Mobile homes
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
 
 
 
 


Model homes, temporary
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o


Public/quasi-public buildings and uses (all buildings to be located at least
50' from property lines)
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o


Recreational vehicles within a mobile home park
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
o


Recreational vehicle storage areas
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
o


Schools
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o


Sewer lift station
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o


Temporary sales and office buildings, buildings incidental to construction
work
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o


Water pump station
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o


Water tower
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o


Wireless telecommunication facilities (over 28 feet)
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
 
 
 
 


C.    Permitted Accessory Uses
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Fences
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o


Greenhouse
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o


Home occupations
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o


Private garage
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o


Private or jointly owned community center, recreational facilities, pools,
tennis courts, spas
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o


Qualified patient/caregiver cultivation location as defined by and subject to
the provisions of Section 17.12.947
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o


Tool sheds, for storage of domestic supplies
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o
 
o




 



 




Table 17.16.030B
Business and Industrial Zone Uses



 

B-1

 

B-2

 

B-4

 

I-1

 

I-2




B-3



A.   Principally Permitted Uses
 


 


 


 


 




Animal hospital, clinic and kennel providing the establishment and animal
runs are completely enclosed in the building
 


 


 

o

 

o

 




Appliance sales, service
 


 

o

 

o

 


 




Appliance repair
 


 


 

o

 


 




Athletic clubs
 


 

o

 

o

 

o

 




Automobile, boat or recreational vehicle sales, maintenance and rental
 


 

o

 

o

 

o

 




Automobile repair service (major)
 


 


 


 

o

 




Automobile repair service (minor)
 


 


 


 

o

 




Bakery, Commercial
 


 


 


 

o

 

o



Bakery, Retail
 

o

 

o

 

o

 


 




Banks and other savings and lending institutions
 

o

 

o

 

o

 


 




Barber shop
 

o

 

o

 

o

 


 




Beauty parlor
 

o

 

o

 

o

 


 




Blueprint shop and photo processing
 


 

o

 

o

 

o

 

o



Bottling plant
 


 


 


 

o

 

o



Bowling alley
 


 


 

o

 

o

 




Building material sales yard, including sand and gravel
 


 


 

o

 

o

 




Bus terminals
 


 


 

o

 

o

 




Business and office machine sales, service and repair shop
 


 

o

 

o

 

o

 




Business, technical or vocational school
 


 


 

o

 

o

 

o



Cabinet shop and furniture manufacture
 


 


 


 

o

 

o



Candy and ice cream store
 

o

 

o

 


 


 




Cigar and tobacco store
 

o

 

o

 


 


 




Clothing and costume rental shop
 


 

o

 

o

 


 




Commercial recreation
 


 


 

o

 


 




Community center or meeting hall
 


 

o

 

o

 


 




Contractors storage yard
 


 


 

o

 

o

 

o



Convenience food store with four or less pumps^^^
 

o

 

o

 

o

 


 




Costume dressmaking, furrier, millinery or tailor shop employing five persons
or less
 


 

o

 

o

 


 




Dancing or theatrical studio
 


 

o

 

o

 


 




Deferred presentment company as defined in Section 17.12.415
 

o

 

o

 

o

 


 




Delicatessen and catering establishment
 


 

o

 

o

 


 




Dry cleaning and laundry establishment
 

o

 

o

 

o

 

o

 




Electrical, electronic or electromechanic machinery manufacture
 


 


 


 

o

 

o



Equipment rental or storage yard
 


 


 

o

 

o

 




Essential public service or utility installation
 

o

 

o

 

o

 

o

 

o



Exterminator shop
 


 


 

o

 

o

 

o



Exterior storage of goods and materials provided that all goods and materials
are screened from view from adjacent properties and rights-of-way
 


 


 

o

 

o

 

o



Feed store, including yard
 


 


 

o

 

o

 

o



Fertilizer manufacture, subject to Section 17.36.030(Q)
 


 


 


 


 

o



Florist
 

o

 

o

 

o

 


 




Food processing, not including meat packing
 


 


 


 

o

 

o



Frozen food locker
 


 


 

o

 

o

 




Game rooms, pool halls
 


 

o

 

o

 


 




Garden supply store
 


 

o

 

o

 

o

 




General service uses including business, personal and professional service
establishments
 


 

o

 

o

 


 




General retail businesses engaged in direct sales to the ultimate consumer
 


 

o

 

o

 


 




Grainery, elevator storage
 


 


 


 


 

o



Greenhouse
 


 


 

o

 

o

 




Hospital
 


 

o

 

o

 


 




Hotel or motel
 


 

o

 

o

 


 




Ice and cold storage plant
 


 


 

o

 

o

 

o



Interior decorator's shop
 


 

o

 

o

 


 




Impound yard
 


 


 

o

 

o

 

o



Laundromat, self service
 

o

 

o

 


 


 




Liquefied petroleum gas storage and similar storage areas pursuant to uniform
building and fire codes as adopted
 


 


 

o

 

o

 

o



Liquor store
 

o

 

o

 

o

 


 




Lock and key shop
 


 

o

 

o

 


 




Machine shop
 


 


 

o

 

o

 

o



Mail order catalog store
 


 

o

 

o

 


 




Manufacture of pharmaceutical products and food products including soft
drinks, but not including production of fish or meat products, sauerkraut,
vinegar or rendering or refining of fats or oils
 


 


 


 

o

 




Manufacturing
 


 


 


 


 

o



Manufacturing, light
 


 


 

o

 

o

 

o



Medical, dental or health clinic
 


 

o

 

o

 


 




Medical marijuana dispensaries within the overlay area defined by § 17.52.610
 


 

o

 

o

 


 




Medical marijuana uses
 
 
 
 
o#
 
o#


Monument sales and engraving shop
 


 


 

o

 

o

 




Mortuary
 


 

o

 

o

 


 




Museum
 


 

o

 

o

 

o

 




Music studio
 


 

o

 

o

 


 




Newsstand
 

o

 

o

 


 


 




Offices
 

o

 

o

 

o

 


 




Optician
 


 

o

 

o

 


 




Pawn shop
 


 

o

 

o

 


 




Photographic studio
 


 

o

 

o

 


 




Printing and publishing house (including newspapers)
 


 


 

o

 

o

 

o



Private club, fraternity, sorority or lodge
 


 

o

 

o

 


 




Product development and product testing activities
 


 


 


 

o

 

o



Public buildings
 

o

 

o

 

o

 

o

 

o



Public utility service yard
 


 


 

o

 

o

 

o



Radio and television studio
 


 

o

 

o

 

o

 




Recycling center
 


 


 

o

 

o

 

o



Restaurant, greater than 3,500 square feet
 


 

o

 

o

 


 




Restaurants of not more than 3,500 square feet, excluding convenience food
restaurant
 

o

 

o

 

o

 


 




Sexually oriented businesses subject to licensing requirements of Chapter 5.24
 


 

o

 

o

 

o

 

o



Shoe repair and shoe shine shop
 


 

o

 

o

 


 




Swap meet, flea market
 


 


 

o

 

o

 




Tavern, bar or lounge
 


 

o

 

o

 

o

 




Taxidermist
 


 

o

 

o

 

o

 

o



Theatre, excluding drive-in theatre
 


 

o

 

o

 


 




Theatre, drive-in
 


 


 

o

 


 




Tire sales, repair and mounting
 


 


 

o

 

o

 




Truck repairing and overhauling
 


 


 

o

 

o

 




Truck stop
 


 


 

o

 

o

 




Truck washing establishment
 


 


 

o

 

o

 




Trucking yard terminal
 


 


 

o

 

o

 




Upholstery shop
 


 


 

o

 

o

 




Video arcade
 


 


 

o

 


 




Video sales and rental
 


 

o

 

o

 


 




Warehousing
 


 


 


 

o

 

o



Warehousing, limited (not to cover more than 40% of floor area)
 


 


 

o

 

o

 

o



Watch repair shop
 


 

o

 

o

 


 




Wireless telecommunication facilities (See note below for height limitations)
 
 
 
o*
 
o**
 
o***


Large Single Retail Use and Large Multiple Use Shopping Centers, shall only
be permitted at locations specified, and when developed in accordance with
Section 17.40.020 of this Code.


#Medical marijuana uses are subject to the restrictions set forth in Chapter
17.52, Article VII.


^^^Convenience stores with four or less gas pumps shall meet the requirements
set forth in Section 17.24.030.B.




 



Conditionally Permitted Uses. Refer to conditionally permitted uses for the
specific zone classification in question.



Permitted Accessory Uses. Refer to permitted accessory uses for the specific
zone in question.



*   Height is 35 feet or less.



**   Height limit is 35 feet or less.



*** The maximum height of any facility shall be 55 feet, except that
buildings over 35 feet in height must be approved by the city and shall be
subject to additional fire protection precautions as determined by the city
fire department.



(Ord. 1397.17.45 § 2, 2014; Ord. 1397.17.37 §§ 2-4, 2011: Ord. 1397.17.36
§ 3, 2009: Ord. 1397.17.35 § 2, 2009:  Ord. 1397.17.34 § 2, 2009: Ord.
1397.17.33 § 2, 2006: Ord. 1397.17.29 § 1 (part), 2001: Ord. 1397.17.28 §
1, 2001: Ord. 1397.17.21 § 1, 1999: Ord. 1397.17.20 § I, 1998: Ord.
1397.17.16 § III, 1997: Ord. 1397.17.14 §§ II, III, IV, 1996: Ord.
1397.17.12, 1994: Ord. 1397.17.11 § 3, 1994: Ord. 1397.16.2 §§ 1 (part), 2
(part), 1994: Ord. 1397.17.8 § 1, 1993: Ord. 1178.44 § 2, 1991: Ord.
1178.32 attachment A, 1990: Ord. 1178 § 4.3.2, 1987)



Chapter 17.20
RESIDENTIAL ZONES



Sections:



Article I. Urban Ranch Residential (UR) Zone



17.20.010   Purpose of provisions.



17.20.020   Principally permitted uses.



17.20.030   Conditionally permitted uses.



17.20.040   Permitted accessory uses.



17.20.050   Lot area and dimensions.



17.20.060   Setbacks, yards and heights.



17.20.070   Permitted encroachment into required setbacks.



17.20.080   Additional building and performance standards.



17.20.090   Property in floodplains to comply with certain requirements.



Article II. Single-Family Residential (R-1) Zone



17.20.100   Purpose of provisions.



17.20.110   Principally permitted uses.



17.20.120   Conditionally permitted uses.



17.20.130   Permitted accessory uses.



17.20.140   Lot area and dimensions.



17.20.150   Setbacks, yards and heights.



17.20.160   Permitted encroachment into required setbacks.



17.20.170   Additional building and performance standards.



17.20.180   Property in floodplains to comply with certain requirements.



Article III. Single-Family Residential (R-1a) Zone



17.20.190   Purpose of provisions.



17.20.200   Principally permitted uses.



17.20.210   Conditionally permitted uses.



17.20.220   Permitted accessory uses.



17.20.230   Lot area and dimensions.



17.20.240   Setbacks, yards and heights.



17.20.250   Permitted encroachment into required setbacks.



17.20.260   Additional building and performance standards.



17.20.270   Property in floodplains to comply with certain requirements.



Article IV. Multi-Family Residential (R-2) Zone



17.20.280   Purpose of provisions.



17.20.290   Principally permitted uses.



17.20.300   Conditionally permitted uses.



17.20.310   Permitted accessory uses.



17.20.320   Lot area and dimensions.



17.20.330   Schedule of allowances.



17.20.340   Setbacks, yards and heights.



17.20.350   Multi-family accessory buildings.



17.20.360   Required distance between buildings.



17.20.370   Additional building and performance standards.



17.20.380   Property in floodplains to comply with certain requirements.



Article V. Multi-Family Residential (R-3) Zone



17.20.390   Purpose of provisions.



17.20.400   Principally permitted uses.



17.20.410   Conditionally permitted uses.



17.20.420   Permitted accessory uses.



17.20.430   Lot area and dimensions.



17.20.440   Schedule of allowances.



17.20.450   Setbacks, yards and heights.



17.20.460   Accessory buildings.



17.20.470   Required distance between buildings.



17.20.480   Additional building and performance standards.



17.20.490   Property in floodplains to comply with certain requirements.



Article VI. Mobile Home Residential (R-4) Zone



17.20.500   Purpose of provisions.



17.20.510   R-4 Zone established.



17.20.520   Principally permitted uses.



17.20.530   Conditionally permitted uses.



17.20.540   Permitted accessory uses.



17.20.550   Lot area and dimensions.



17.20.560   Setbacks, yards and heights.



17.20.570   Permitted encroachment into required setbacks.



17.20.580   Required street and right-of-way widths.



17.20.590   Required maintenance of property.



17.20.600   Required inspections—Authority.



17.20.610   Additional building and performance standards.



17.20.620   Property in floodplains to comply with certain requirements.



Article VII. Rural Ranch (RR) Residential Zone



17.20.630   Purpose of provisions.



17.20.640   Principally permitted uses.



17.20.650   Conditionally permitted uses.



17.20.660   Permitted accessory uses.



17.20.670   Lot area and dimensions.



17.20.680   Setbacks, yards and heights.



17.20.690   Permitted encroachment into required setbacks.



17.20.700   Additional building and performance standards.



17.20.710   Property in floodplains to comply with certain requirements.



Article VIII. Suburban Homestead (SH) Residential Zone



17.20.720   Purpose of provisions



17.20.730   Principally permitted uses



17.20.740   Conditionally permitted uses



17.20.750   Permitted accessory uses



17.20.760   Lot areas and dimensions



17.20.770   Setbacks, yards and heights



17.20.780   Permitted encroachments into required setbacks



17.20.790   Additional building and performance standards



17.20.800   Property in floodplains to comply with certain requirements



Article I. Urban Ranch Residential (UR) Zone



17.20.010  Purpose of provisions.



   A.   The purpose of the Urban Ranch Residential (UR) Zone is to
provide principally for the development of single family detached dwelling
units at very low densities and to provide for the establishment and/or
maintenance of a wide range of agricultural uses. The primary purpose of
requiring larger minimum lot sizes is to assure an adequate area for the very
low density residential lifestyles that currently exist within the city
limits, and to continue to allow for the various forms of agricultural
activities for indefinite periods of time.



   B.   This zone shall be applied to those city areas which are not
only generally rural in character, but also those areas which may undergo
more intensive development. In which case, the same zoning district shall be
considered as a “holding” classification.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.1.1, 1987)



17.20.020  Principally permitted uses.



   For principally permitted uses in the UR Zone, see Table 17.16.030 A in
Chapter 17.16 of this code.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.1.2, 1987)



17.20.030  Conditionally permitted uses.



   For conditionally permitted uses in the UR Zone, see Table 17.16.030 A
in Chapter 17.16 in Chapter 17.16 of this code.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.1.3, 1987)



17.20.040  Permitted accessory uses.



   For permitted accessory uses in the UR Zone, see Table 17.16.030 A in
Chapter 17.16 of this code.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.1.4, 1987)



17.20.050  Lot area and dimensions.



   Lot area and dimensions for the UR Zone are as set out in Table
17.20.050 codified at the end of this chapter.



(Ord. 1397.17.25 § 1, 2000; Ord. 1178 § 5.1.5, 1987)



17.20.060  Setbacks, yards and heights.



   Setbacks, yards and heights for the UR Zone are as set out in Table
17.20.060 codified at the end of this chapter.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.1.6, 1987)



17.20.070  Permitted encroachment into required setbacks.



   Permitted encroachments into required setbacks in the UR Zone are as
follows:



   A.   Open steps and decks shall be permitted to extend into the
required front and side yard setbacks a distance of not more than five feet.



   B.   Covered patios, decks, porches or carports shall not be
permitted encroachments in any required front or side yard setbacks.



   C.   Normal roof projections (eaves) into required side yards: A
house or garage roof may not be constructed within three feet of a side
property line.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.1.7, 1987)



17.20.080  Additional building and performance standards.



   Development of any portion of land within the UR Zone shall be subject
to all applicable requirements of Chapters 17.52 through 17.64 of this title.
Furthermore, if the proposed uses include more than just the normal farming
operations (i.e. packing, processing, sales and/or auction yards, etc.) the
planning director shall require all necessary fencing, and/or screening of
the proposed uses (see Articles III. and V. of Chapter 17.52 of this title)
if it is deemed to be in the best interests of the surrounding land uses
and/or development pattern.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.1.8, 1987)



17.20.090  Property in floodplains to comply with certain requirements.



   Any property located in the UR Zone and any floodplain as designated in
Chapter 15.40 of this code and must comply with Chapter 15.40 requirements.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.1.9, 1987)



Article II. Single-Family Residential (R-1) Zone



17.20.100  Purpose of provisions.



   The purpose of the R-1 Zone is to provide for the development of
single-family detached dwellings and directly related complementary uses at a
low density. The R-1 Zone is intended to be strictly residential in character
with a minimum of disturbances due to traffic or overcrowding.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.2.1, 1987)



17.20.110  Principally permitted uses.



   For principally permitted uses in the R-1 Zone, see Table 17.16.030 A
in Chapter 17.16 of this code.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.2.2, 1987)



17.20.120  Conditionally permitted uses.



   For conditionally permitted uses in the R-1 Zone, see Table 17.16.030 A
in Chapter 17.16 of this code.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.2.3, 1987)



17.20.130  Permitted accessory uses.



   For permitted accessory uses in the R-1 Zone, see Table 17.16.030 A in
Chapter 17.16 of this code.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.2.4, 1987)



17.20.140  Lot area and dimensions.



   Lot area and dimensions for the R-1 Zone are as set out in Table
17.20.140 codified at the end of this chapter.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.2.5, 1987)



17.20.150  Setbacks, yards and heights.



   Setback, yard and height requirements for the R-1 Zone are as set out
in Table 17.20.150 codified at the end of this chapter.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.2.6, 1987)



17.20.160  Permitted encroachment into required setbacks.



   For permitted encroachments into required setbacks in the R-1 Zone see
Section 17.20.070 of this chapter.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.2.7, 1987)



17.20.170  Additional building and performance standards.



   Development of any parcel of land within the R-1 Zone shall be subject
to all applicable requirements of Chapters 17.52 through 17.64 of this title.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.2.8, 1987)



17.20.180  Property in floodplains to comply with certain requirements.



   Any property located in the R-1 Zone and any floodplain as designated
in Chapter 15.40 of this code, must comply with Chapter 15.40 requirements.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.2.9, 1987)



Article III. Single-Family Residential (R-1a) Zone



17.20.190  Purpose of provisions.



   The purpose of the R-1a Zone is to provide for the development of
single-family dwellings and directly related complementary uses at a moderate
density. The R-1a Zone is intended to be strictly residential in character
with a minimum of disturbances due to traffic or overcrowding.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.3.1, 1987)



17.20.200  Principally permitted uses.



   For principally permitted uses in the R-1a Zone, see Table 17.16.030 A
in Chapter 17.16 of this code.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.3.2, 1987)



17.20.210  Conditionally permitted uses.



   For conditionally permitted uses in the R-1a Zone, see Table 17.16.030
A in Chapter 17.16 of this code.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.3.3, 1987)



17.20.220  Permitted accessory uses.



   For permitted accessory uses in the R-1a Zone, see Table 17.16.030 A in
Chapter 17.16 of this code.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.3.4, 1987)



17.20.230  Lot area and dimensions.



   Lot area and dimensions in the R-1a Zone are as set out in Table
17.20.230 codified at the end of this chapter.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.3.5, 1987)



17.20.240  Setbacks, yards and heights.



   Setback, yard and height requirements in the R-1a Zone are as set out
in Table 17.20.240 codified at the end of this chapter.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.3.6, 1987)



17.20.250  Permitted encroachment into required setbacks.



   For permitted encroachment into required setbacks in the R-1a Zone, see
Section 17.20.070 of this chapter.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.3.7, 1987)



17.20.260  Additional building and performance standards.



   Development of any parcel of land within the R-1a Zone shall be subject
to all applicable requirements of Chapters 17.52 through 17.64 of this title.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.3.8, 1987)



17.20.270  Property in floodplains to comply with certain requirements.



   Any property located in the R-1a Zone and any floodplain as designated
in Chapter 15.40 of this code, must comply with Chapter 15.40 requirements.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.3.9, 1987)



Article IV. Multi-Family Residential (R-2) Zone



17.20.280  Purpose of provisions.



   The purpose of the R-2 Zone is to provide for medium density housing in
multiple-family structures and directly related complementary uses. The R-2
Zone is designed to allow economical use of land while creating an
attractive, functional and safe residential environment.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.4.1, 1987)



17.20.290  Principally permitted uses.



   For principally permitted uses in the R-2 Zone, see Table 17.16.030 A
in Chapter 17.16 of this code.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.4.2, 1987)



17.20.300  Conditionally permitted uses.



   For conditionally permitted uses in the R-2 Zone, see Table 17.16.030 A
in Chapter 17.16 of this code.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.4.3, 1987)



17.20.310  Permitted accessory uses.



   For permitted accessory uses in the R-2 Zone, see Table 17.16.030 A in
Chapter 17.16 of this code.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.4.4, 1987)



17.20.320  Lot area and dimensions.



   In determining minimum lot area and minimum lot dimensions in the R-2
Zone, use Table 17.20.320 codified at the end of this chapter.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.4.5, 1987)



17.20.330  Schedule of allowances.



   The minimum areas per unit in Table 17.20.320 may be adjusted according
to the following, except allowance shall not be made for two or three family
dwellings.



   A.   For each parking stall in or under the residence, or otherwise
completely underground, subtract four hundred square feet from the total
minimum lot area.



   B.   For each unit with a balcony or patio greater than forty square
feet, subtract one hundred square feet from the outdoor living area.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.4.6, 1987)



17.20.340  Setbacks, yards and heights.



   For setbacks, yards and heights in the R-2 Zone see Table 17.20.340
codified at the end of this chapter.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.4.7, 1987)



17.20.350  Multi-family accessory buildings.



   A.   Accessory buildings shall observe the same setback requirements
established for the multiple residence building except that accessory
buildings located within the rear yard of the multiple-residence building may
be located to within five feet of the rear or interior side property line.
The city council may require common walls for accessory buildings on the same
lot where common walls will eliminate unsightly and hazardous areas.
Accessory buildings on the same lot shall otherwise be separated by a
distance of not less than ten feet.



   B.   Exteriors of accessory buildings shall have an exterior finish
compatible to the main structure. Compatibility shall be determined by the
city based on type and use of building materials.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.4.8, 1987)



17.20.360  Required distance between buildings.



   When two or more principal buildings are located on one lot, the
minimum separation between any two adjacent principal buildings shall be a
distance not less than twenty feet.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.4.9, 1987)



17.20.370  Additional building and performance standards.



   Development of any parcel of land within the R-2 Zone shall be subject
to all applicable requirements of Chapters 17.52 through 17.64 of this title.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.4.10, 1987)



17.20.380  Property in floodplains to comply with certain requirements.



   Any property located in the R-2 Zone and any floodplain as designated
in Chapter 15.40, must comply with Chapter 15.40 requirements.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.4.11, 1987)



Article V. Multi-Family Residential (R-3) Zone



17.20.390  Purpose of provisions.



   The purpose of the R-3 Zone is to provide for high density housing in
multiple-family structures and directly related complementary uses. The R-3
Zone is designed to allow highly economical use of land while creating an
attractive, functional and safe residential environment.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.5.1, 1987)



17.20.400  Principally permitted uses.



   For principally permitted uses in the R-3 Zone, see Table 17.16.030 A
in Chapter 17.16 of this code.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.5.2, 1987)



17.20.410  Conditionally permitted uses.



   For conditionally permitted uses in the R-3 Zone, see Table 17.16.030 A
in Chapter 17.16 of this code.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.5.3, 1987)



17.20.420  Permitted accessory uses.



   For permitted accessory uses in the R-3 Zone, see Table 17.16.030 A in
Chapter 17.16 of this code.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.5.4, 1987)



17.20.430  Lot area and dimensions.



   In determining minimum lot area and minimum lot dimensions in the R-3
Zone, Table 17.20.430 codified at the end of this chapter shall be used.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.5.5, 1987)



17.20.440  Schedule of allowances.



   The minimum areas per unit in Section 17.20.430 above may be adjusted
in accordance with Section 17.20.330 of the R-2 Zone.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.5.6, 1987)



17.20.450  Setbacks, yards and heights.



   Minimum setbacks from property line in the R-3 Zone shall be as set out
in Table 17.20.450 codified at the end of this chapter.



(Ord. 1397.17.31 § 1, 2002; Ord. 1178 § 5.5.7, 1987)



17.20.460  Accessory buildings.



   For accessory buildings in the R-3 Zone, see Section 17.20.350 of this
title.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.5.8, 1987)



17.20.470  Required distance between buildings.



   For required distance between buildings in the R-3 Zone, see Section
17.20.360 of this title.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.5.9, 1987)



17.20.480  Additional building and performance standards.



   Development of any parcel of land within the R-3 Zone shall be subject
to all applicable requirements of Chapters 17.52 through 17.64 of this title.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.5.10, 1987)



17.20.490  Property in floodplains to comply with certain requirements.



   Any property located in the R-3 Zone and any floodplain as designated
in Chapter 15.40, must comply with Chapter 15.40 requirements.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.5.11, 1987)



Article VI. Mobile Home Residential (R-4) Zone



17.20.500  Purpose of provisions.



   The purpose of the R-4 Zone is to promote affordable housing and make
economical use of the land by allowing the development of mobile home
communities at medium densities.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.6.1, 1987)



17.20.510  R-4 Zone established.



   No R-4 Zone may be established unless the site contains at least ten
acres of land.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.6.2, 1987)



17.20.520  Principally permitted uses.



   For principally permitted uses in the R-4 Zone, see Table 17.16.030 A
in Chapter 17.16 of this code.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.6.3, 1987)



17.20.530  Conditionally permitted uses.



   For conditionally permitted uses in the R-4 Zone, see Table 17.16.030 A
in Chapter 17.16 of this code.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.6.4, 1987)



17.20.540  Permitted accessory uses.



   For permitted accessory uses in the R-4 Zone, see Table 17.16.030 A in
Chapter 17.16 of this code.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.6.5, 1987)



17.20.550  Lot area and dimensions.



   Lot area and dimension requirements in the R-4 Zone shall be as set out
in Table 17.20.550 codified at the end of this chapter.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.6.6, 1987)



17.20.560  Setbacks, yards and heights.



   Setback, yard and height requirements for the R-4 Zone are as set out
in Table 17.20.560 codified at the end of this chapter.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.6.7, 1987)



17.20.570  Permitted encroachment into required setbacks.



   For permitted encroachment into required setbacks in the R-4 Zone, see
Section 17.20.070.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.6.8, 1987)



17.20.580  Required street and right-of-way widths.



   All streets in a R-4 District shall be public unless approved as
private as part of a Planned Area Development.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.6.9, 1987)



17.20.590  Required maintenance of property.



   Required maintenance of property in the R-4 Zone shall be as follows:



   A.   There shall be no occupancy of any mobile home until an
occupancy permit is issued; no occupancy permit shall be issued unless the
mobile home is connected to public sewer and water lines;



   B.   No mobile home may be parked on a roadway for more than
twenty-four hours;



   C.   No abandoned, burned, or wrecked mobile home may be kept within
the R-4 Zone for more than thirty days;



   D.   Each mobile home must bear an insignia which attests that the
construction of mobile home meets regulation A119.1 of the American National
Standards Institute (adopted by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Developments);



   E.   Standard mobile home skirting must be provided around the
entire perimeter of the mobile home between the bottom of the body and the
mobile home and the ground;



   F.   Each mobile home must be securely anchored to a permanent
concrete pad acceptable to the city;



   G.   There shall be no exposed outdoor storage of furniture (except
lawn furniture), household goods, tools, equipment, or building materials or
supplies.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.6.10, 1987)



17.20.600  Required inspections—Authority.



   A.   The city zoning administrator or agent is authorized to make
inspections as are necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with this
title and shall have the authority to enter at reasonable times upon any
private or public real property for the purpose of inspection and
investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this title.



   B.   It shall be the duty of the owners of mobile home parks or
persons in charge thereof, or owners or occupants of a lot in a mobile home
subdivision, to allow the city zoning administrator or his agent free access
to such premises at reasonable times for the purpose of inspections.



   C.   It shall be the duty of every occupant of a mobile home park to
allow the owner thereof, or his agents or employees, access to any part of
the mobile home park at reasonable times for the purpose of making repairs or
alterations as may be necessary to effect compliance with this title or with
any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this title.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.6.11, 1987)



17.20.610  Additional building and performance standards.



   Development of any parcel of land within the R-4 Zone shall be subject
to all applicable requirements of Chapters 17.52 through 17.64 of this title.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.6.12, 1987)



17.20.620  Property in floodplains to comply with certain requirements.



   Any property located in the R-4 Zone and any floodplain as designated
in Chapter 15.40, must comply with Chapter 15.40 requirements.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.6.13, 1987)



Article VII. Rural Ranch (RR) Residential Zone



17.20.630  Purpose of provisions.



   A.   The purpose of the Rural Ranch (RR) Residential Zone is to
provide principally for the development of single-family detached dwelling
units at very low densities, and to provide for the establishment and/or
maintenance of a wide range of agricultural uses. The primary purpose of
requiring larger minimum lot sizes is to assure an adequate area for the very
low density residential lifestyles that currently exist within the city
limits, to continue to allow for various forms of agricultural activities,
and to preserve the rich history of a rural nature within the city.



   B.   This zone may be applied both to those city areas which are
generally rural in character or to those areas which may undergo more
intensive development. In the latter case, the same zoning district shall be
considered as a “holding” classification.



(Ord. 1397.17.33 § 4 (part), 2006)



17.20.640  Principally permitted uses.



   For principally permitted uses in the RR Zone, see Table 17.16.030A,
Section A., in Chapter 17.16 of this code.



(1397.17.33 § 4 (part), 2006)



17.20.650  Conditionally permitted uses.



   For conditionally permitted uses in the RR Zone, see Table 17.16.030A,
Section B., in Chapter 17.16 of this code.



(Ord. 1397.17.33 § 4 (part), 2006)



17.20.660  Permitted accessory uses.



   For permitted accessory uses in the RR Zone, see Table 17.16.030A,
Section C., in Chapter 17.16 of this code.



(Ord. 1397.17.33 § 4 (part), 2006)



17.20.670  Lot area and dimensions.



   Lot area and dimensions for the RR Zone are as set out in Table
17.20.670 codified at the end of this chapter.



(Ord. 1397.17.33 § 4 (part), 2006)



17.20.680  Setbacks, yards and heights.



   Setbacks, yards and heights for the RR Zone are as set out in Table
17.20.680 codified at the end of this chapter.



(Ord. 1397.17.33 § 4 (part), 2006)



17.20.690  Permitted encroachment into required setbacks.



   Permitted encroachments into required setbacks in the RR Zone are as
follows:



   A.   Open steps and decks shall be permitted to extend into the
required front and side yard setbacks a distance of not more than five feet.



   B.   Covered patios, decks, porches or carports shall not be
permitted encroachments in any required front or side yard setbacks.



   C.   Normal roof projections (eaves) into required side yards. A
house or garage roof may not be constructed within three feet of a side
property line.



1397.17.33 § 4 (part), 2006)



17.20.700  Additional building and performance standards.



   Development of any portion of land within the RR Zone shall be subject
to all applicable requirements of Chapters 17.52 through 17.64 of this title.
Furthermore, if the proposed uses include more than just normal farming
operations (i.e., packing, processing, sales and/or auction yards, etc.), the
planning director shall require all necessary fencing and/or screening of the
proposed uses (see Articles III and V of Chapter 17.52 of this title), if it
is deemed to be in the best interests of the surrounding land uses and/or
development pattern.



(Ord. 1397.17.33 § 4 (part), 2006)



17.20.710  Property in floodplains to comply with certain requirements.



   Any property located in the RR Zone, and any floodplain as designated
in Chapter 15.40 of this code, and must comply with Chapter 15.40
requirements.



(Ord. 1397.17.33 § 4 (part), 2006)



Article VIII. Suburban Homestead (SH) Residential Zone



17.20.720  Purpose of provisions.



   A.   The purpose of the Suburban Homestead (SH) Residential Zone is
to provide principally for the development of single-family detached dwelling
units at very low densities, and to provide for the establishment and/or
maintenance of a wide range of agricultural uses. The primary purpose of
requiring larger minimum lot sizes is to assure an adequate area for the very
low density residential lifestyles that currently exist within the city
limits, to continue to allow for various forms of agricultural activities,
and to preserve the rich history of a rural nature within the city.



   B.   This zone may be applied both to those city areas that are
generally rural in character, or to those areas that may undergo more
intensive development. In the latter case, the same zoning district shall be
considered as a “holding” classification.



(Ord. 1397.17.34 § 4 (part), 2009)



17.20.730  Principally permitted uses.



   For principally permitted uses in the SH Zone, see Table 17.16.030A,
Section A, in Chapter 17.16 of this code.



(Ord. 1397.17.34 § 4 (part), 2009)



17.20.740  Conditionally permitted uses.



   For conditionally permitted uses in the SH Zone, see Table 17.16.030A,
Section B, in Chapter 17 of this code.



(Ord. 1397.17.34 § 4 (part), 2009)



17.20.750  Permitted accessory uses.



   For permitted accessory uses in the SH Zone, see Table 17.16.030A,
Section C, in Chapter 17.16 of this code.



(Ord. 1397.17.34 § 4 (part), 2009)



17.20.760  Lot area and dimensions.



   Lot area and dimensions for the SH Zone are as set out in Table
17.20.760 codified at the end of this chapter.



(Ord. 1397.17.34 § 4 (part), 2009)



17.20.770  Setbacks, yards and heights.



   Setbacks, yards and heights for the SH Zone are as set out in Table
17.20.770 codified at the end of this chapter.



(Ord. 1397.17.34 § 4 (part), 2009)



17.20.780  Permitted encroachments into required setbacks.



   Permitted encroachments into required setbacks in the SH Zone are as
follows:



   A.   Open steps and decks shall be permitted to extend into the
required front and side yard setbacks a distance of not more than five feet.



   B.   Covered patios, decks, porches or carports shall not be
permitted encroachments in any required front or side yard setbacks.



   C.   Normal roof projections (eaves) into required side yards: a
house or garage roof may not be constructed within three feet of a side
property line.



(Ord. 1397.17.34 § 4 (part), 2009)



17.20.790  Additional building and performance standards.



   Development of any portion of land within the SH Zone shall be subject
to all applicable requirements of Chapters 17.52 through 17.64 of this title.
Furthermore, if the proposed uses include more than just normal farming
operations (i.e., packing, processing, sales and/or auction yards, etc.), the
planning director shall require all necessary fencing and/or screening of the
proposed uses (see Articles III and V of Chapter 17.52 of this title), if it
is deemed to be in the best interests of the surrounding land uses and/or
development pattern.



(Ord. 1397.17.34 § 4 (part), 2009)



17.20.800  Property in floodplains to comply with certain requirements.



   Any property located in the SH Zone and any floodplain, as designated
in Chapter 15.40 of this code, must comply with Chapter 15.40 requirements.



(Ord. 1397.17.34 § 4 (part), 2009)



Chapter 17.20 - Tables



Table 17.20.050
Urban Ranch Zone Lot Area and Lot Dimensions



 



A. Required Lot Area:


Use
 
Minimum Lot Area
 


Single-family dwelling units
 
54,450 square feet1


Other Permitted Uses
 
54,450 square feet (minimum) unless otherwise specified in chart outlined in
Table 17.16.030


1 This may be calculated as an average lot size for lots within a given
subdivision, provided no lot is less than 30,400 square feet in size and that
not more than ten percent of the lots are less than 32,000 square feet in
size.


B. Required Lot Dimensions:


Use
 
Minimum Lot Width
 
Minimum Lot Depth


Single-family dwelling units
 
100 feet
 
150 feet


Other permitted uses
 
Lot dimensions to be determined by building area, parking requirements and
required setbacks.


C. Density
 
 


There shall not be more than one (1) single-family dwelling unit on any one
(1) lot.




 



Table 17.20.060
Urban Ranch Zone



 

A. Minimum Setbacks From Property Line:


Use
 

Front

 

Interior
Side

 

Corner
Side

 

Rear
Yard



Single-family dwelling
 

20'

 

10'

 

50'

 

50'



Schools, civic, cultural and religious institutions (including their
accessory use structures over 675 square feet) and all
commercial-agricultural uses
 

50'

 

50'

 

50'

 

50'



Structures accessory to single-family dwellings
 

50'

 

3'

 

50'

 

3'



Structures for all other principal, conditional or accessory uses
 

50'

 

50'

 

50'

 

50'



B. Maximum Building Height: 28 feet
 


 


 


 





 



(Ord. 1397.17.36 § 4 (part), 2009)



Table 17.20.140
R-1 Zone



 



A.   Required Lot Area:
 
 


Use
 
Minimum Lot Area
 


Single-family dwelling units
 
7,000 square feet1
 


Other Permitted Uses
 
Minimum area to be determined by building area, parking requirements, and
required setbacks.


1 This may be calculated as an average lot size for lots within a given
subdivision, provided no lot is less than 6,600 square feet in size and that
not more than 10 percent of the lots are less than 7,000 square feet in size


B.   Required Lot Dimensions:
 
 


Use
 
Minimum Lot Width
 
Minimum Lot Depth


Single-family dwelling
 
70 feet
 
100 feet


Other permitted uses
 
Lot dimensions to be determined by building area, parking requirements and
required setbacks.


C.   Density: There shall not be more than one (1) single-family dwelling
unit on any one lot.




 



Table 17.20.150
R-1 Zone



 




A.    Minimum Setbacks From Property Line:



Use
 

Front

 

Interior Side

 

Corner Side

 

Rear Yard



Single-family dwelling
 

20'

 

5'/10'*

 

20'

 

20'



Schools, civic, cultural and religious institutions (including their
accessory use structures over 675 square feet)
 

50'

 

50'

 

50'

 

50'



Structures accessory to single-family residences
 

20'

 

3'

 

20'

 

3'



Structures for all other principal, conditional or accessory uses
 

20'

 

10'

 

20'

 

20'



* No side shall be less than five feet; at least one side yard shall be ten
feet.


B.    Maximum Building Height: 28 feet.




 



(Ord. 1397.17.36 § 4 (part), 2009)



Table 17.20.230
R-1a Zone



 



A.    Required Lot Area:


Use
 

Minimum Lot Area

 




Single-family dwelling units
 
5,000 square feet
 


Other Permitted Uses
 
Minimum area to be determined by building area, parking requirements, and
required setbacks


1 This may be calculated as an average lot size for lots within a given
subdivision, provided no lot is less than 4,500 square feet in size and that
not more than 10 percent of the lots are less than 5,000 square feet in size.


B.    Required Lot Dimensions:
 




Use
 

Minimum Lot Width

 

Minimum Lot Depth



Single-family dwelling units
 

45 feet

 

100 feet



Other Permitted Uses
 
Lot dimensions to be determined by building area, parking requirements and
required setbacks.


C.    Density: There shall not be more than one (1) single-family dwelling
unit on any one (1) lot.




 



Table 17.20.240
R-1a Zone



 




A.    Minimum Setbacks From Property Line:



Use
 

Front

 

Interior Side

 

Corner Side

 

Rear Yard



Single-family dwelling
 

20'

 

10'*

 

20'

 

20'



Schools, civic, cultural and religious institutions (including their
accessory use structures over 675 square feet)
 

50'

 

50'

 

50'

 

50'



Structures accessory to single-family residences
 

20'

 

3'

 

20'

 

3'



Structures for all other principal, conditional or accessory uses
 

20'

 

10'

 

20'

 

20'



* At least one side yard shall be ten feet; the setback for the remaining
side may be less than ten feet, provided principal building separations are
at least ten feet, and that, in the case of detached units, the other side
yard is at least three feet.


Zero lot line development may be permitted which may result in the creation
of a two-family residential structure; however, individual lots must be
retained.


B.    Maximum Building Height: 28 feet.




 



(Ord. 1397.17.36 § 4 (part), 2009)



Table 17.20.320
R-2 Zone



 



Use
 

Minimum Area Per Unit

 

Minimum Lot Dimensions1

 

Outdoor Living Area2



Single-family dwelling
 

5,000 sq. ft.

 

Width: 45'



Depth: 90'

 

600 sq. ft./



dwelling unit



Two-family
dwelling
 

3,000 sq. ft.

 

Width: 70'



Depth: 90'

 

600 sq. ft./



dwelling unit



Three-family dwelling
 




3,000 sq. ft.

 

Width: 80'



Depth: 90'

 

500 sq. ft./



dwelling unit



Four-family
dwelling
 

3,000 sq. ft

 

Width: 80'



Depth: 90'

 

400 sq. ft./



dwelling unit



Townhouse cluster
 

3,000 sq. ft.3

 

Width: 90'



Depth: 90'

 

400 sq. ft./



dwelling unit



Other Permitted Uses
 

Minimum area and lot dimensions to be determined by building area, parking
requirements and required setbacks.



1 These dimensions apply to the initial lot size per structure. Initial lots
may be divided to accommodate individual ownership of the structures'
dwelling units.


2 Outdoor Living Area in the minimum amount specified above must be provided
on any lot occupied by the multiple residence or townhouse building. This
space must be easily accessible for daily recreational use by the occupants
of the building. Driveways, parking areas, ornamental landscaped areas
(having a width of less than 20 feet), and required side or front yards shall
not be considered as an Outdoor Living Area, except in the case of interior
townhouse units where said unit is less than 20 feet in width, in which case
the minimum width of the outdoor living area shall be the width of the lot.


3 May be calculated as average lot size per unit per structure.




 



Table 17.20.340
R-2 Zone



 



A.    Minimum Setbacks From Property Line:
 


 


 




Use
 

Front

 

Interior Side

 

Corner Side

 

Rear



Single-family dwelling structure
 

20'

 

5'/10'*

 

20'

 

20'



Two-family dwelling structure
 

20'

 

10'

 

20'

 

20'



Three-family dwelling structure
 

20'

 

10'

 

20'

 

20'



Four-family dwelling structure
 

20'

 

10'

 

20'

 

20'



Townhouse cluster structure
 

20'

 

10'

 

20'

 

20'



Schools, civic, cultural and religious institutions (including their
accessory use structures over 675 square feet)
 

50'

 

50'

 

50'

 

50'



Structures accessory to two-family dwelling structures
 

20'

 

3'

 

20'

 

3'



Structures for all other principal accessory or conditional uses
 

20'

 

10'

 

20'

 

20'



* No side shall be less than five feet; at least one side yard shall be ten
feet.


B.    Maximum Building Height: 35 feet




 



(Ord. 1397.17.36 §§ 4 (part) and 5 (part), 2009)



Table 17.20.430
R-3 Zone



 

Use
 

Minimum Area Per Unit 2,000 sq. ft./unit 2,000 sq. ft./unit

 

Minimum Lot Dimensions1

 

Multi-family structure
 


Width: 90'



Depth: 90'

 




Townhouse cluster
 



 

Width: 90'



Depth: 90'

 Other Permitted Uses





 
Outdoor Living Area2

300 sq. ft. of open space/unit

400 sq. ft. of open space/unit


 

Minimum area and lot dimensions to be determined by building area, parking
requirements and required setbacks.



1 These dimensions apply to the initial lot size per structure. Initial lots
may be divided to accommodate individual ownership of the structures'
dwelling units.


2 Outdoor Living Area in the minimum amount specified above must be provided
on any lot occupied by the multiple residence or townhouse building. This
space must be easily accessible for daily recreational use by the occupants
of the building. Driveways, parking areas, ornamental landscaped areas
(having a width of less than 20 feet), and required side or front yards shall
not be considered as Outdoor Living Area, except in the case of interior
townhouse units where said unit is less than 20 feet in width, in which case
the minimum width of the outdoor living area shall be the width of the lot.


3 May be calculated as average lot size per unit per structure.



 



Table 17.20.450
R-3 Zone



 



A.    Minimum Setbacks From Property Line:


Use
 

Front

 

Interior Side

 

Corner Side

 

Rear



Single-family dwelling
 

20'

 

5'/10'

 

20'

 

20'



Three and Four-Family Structure
 

20'

 

15'

 

20'

 

20'



Townhouse cluster
 

20'

 

15'

 

20'

 

20'



Multi-Family Structure
 

20'

 

20'

 

20'

 

20'



Schools, civic, cultural and religious institutions (including their
accessory use structures over 675 square feet)
 

50'

 

50'

 

50'

 

50'



Structure accessory to multi-family residences
 

20'

 

3'

 

20'

 

3'



Structures for all other principal or accessory conditional uses
 

20'

 

10'

 

20'

 

20'



B.    For apartment buildings (five or more multi-family structures),
parking of motor vehicles shall not be allowed within the required front or
corner side setbacks, unless such parking is screened from public view by a
3-1/2 foot earth berm or block wall, or its equivalent, as determined by the
city.


C.    Maximum Building Height: 35 feet.




 



(Ord. 1397.17.36 §§ 4 (part) and 5 (part), 2009)



Table 17.20.550
R-4 Zone



 



A.    Required Location:
 


Use
 
Minimum Lot Area


Mobile homes to 16' width
 
3,500 square feet.


Mobile homes over 16' width
 
4,500 square feet.


Single-family dwelling
 
5,000 square feet.


Recreational vehicles*
 
3,500 square feet.


Other Permitted Uses
 
Minimum area to be determined by building areas, parking requirements and
required setbacks.


* Designated spaces within the mobile home community may be set aside for
recreational vehicle use, subject to minor site plan review. These spaces are
not to exceed ten percent (10%) of the total number of the spaces within the
mobile home community, unless a conditional use permit allowing a greater
percentage is obtained. In no case shall a mobile home be allowed on a space
designed for a recreational vehicle.


B.   Required Lot Dimensions: to be determined by building area, parking
requirements, and required setbacks.




 



Table 17.20.560
R-4 Zone



 



A.    Minimum Setbacks From Property Line:


Use
 

Front

 

Interior
Side

 

Corner
Side

 

Rear



Mobile home to 16' in width
 

10'

 

5'

 

10'

 

10'



Mobile home over 16' in width
 

10'

 

5'

 

10'

 

10'



Single-family dwelling
 

10'

 

5'

 

10'

 

10'



Recreational vehicle located on a mobile home space
 

10'

 

5'

 

10'

 

10'



Schools, civic, cultural and religious institutions (including their
accessory use structures over 675 square feet)
 

50'

 

50'

 

50'

 

50'



Structure accessory to mobile homes and single-family dwellings
 

20'

 

3'

 

20'

 

3'



Structures for all other principal, conditional, or accessory uses
 

20'

 

10'

 

10'

 

20'



B.   Maximum Building Height: 30 feet. Height may be increased to 45 feet
if building is set back at least 200 feet from park property lines.


C.   If a mobile home or other recreational vehicle features a carport,
patio cover, awning, or other extension, setbacks and/or separations shall be
measured from the extension's leading edge.




 



(Ord. 1397.17.36 § 6 (part), 2009)



Table 17.20.670
Rural Ranch Zone Lot Area and Lot Dimensions



 



A.   Required Lot Area:


Use
 
Minimum Lot Area
 


Single-family dwelling units
 
144,000 square feet


Other permitted uses
 
144,000 square feet (minimum) unless otherwise specified in chart outlined in
Table 17.16.030


B.   Required Lot Dimensions:


Use
 
Minimum Lot Width
 
Minimum Lot Depth


Single-family dwelling units
 
300 feet
 
450 feet


Other permitted uses
 
Lot dimensions to be determined by building area, parking requirements and
required setbacks.


C.   Density


There shall not be more than one (1) single-family dwelling unit on any one
(1) lot.




 



(Ord. 1397.17.33 § 5 (part), 2006)



Table 17.20.680
Rural Ranch Zone



 

A.   Minimum Setbacks From Property Line:


Use
 
Front
 
Interior Side
 
Corner Side
 
Rear Yard


Single-family dwelling
 
20'
 
10'
 
50'
 
50'


Schools, civic, cultural and religious institutions (including their
accessory use structures over 675 square feet) and all
commercial-agricultural uses
 
50'
 
50'
 
50'
 
50'


Structures accessory to single-family dwellings
 
50'
 
3'
 
50'
 
3'


Structures for all other principal, conditional or accessory uses
 
50'
 
50'
 
50'
 
50'


B.   Maximum Building Height: 28 feet



 



(Ord. 1397.17.36 § 4 (part), 2009: Ord. 1397.17.33 § 5 (part), 2006)



Table 17.20.760
Suburban Homestead Zone Lot Area and Lot Dimensions



 



A.   Required Lot Area:
 
 


Use
 
Minimum Lot Area
 


Single-family dwelling units
 
87,120 square feet


Other permitted uses
 
87,120 square feet (minimum) unless otherwise specified in chart outlined in
Table 17.16.030


B.   Required Lot Dimensions:


Use
 
Minimum Lot Width
 
Minimum Lot Depth


Single-family dwelling units
 
100 feet
 
250 feet


Other permitted uses
 
Lot dimensions to be determined by building area, parking requirements and
required setbacks.


C.   Density
 
 


There shall not be more than one (1) single-family dwelling unit on any one
(1) lot.




 



(Ord. 1397.17.34 § 5 (part), 2009)



Table 17.20.770
Suburban Homestead Zone



 

A.   Minimum Setbacks From Property Line:


Use
 
Front
 
Interior Side
 
Corner Side
 
Rear Yard


Single-family dwelling
 
30'
 
10'
 
50'
 
40'


Schools, civic, cultural and religious institutions, and all
commercial-agricultural uses (including their accessory use structures over
675 square feet)
 
50'
 
50'
 
50'
 
50'


Structures accessory to single-family dwellings
 
60'
 
4'
 
50'
 
4'


Structures for all other principal, conditional or accessory uses
 
60'
 
50'
 
50'
 
50'


B.   Maximum Building Height: Main building: 30 feet



 



(Ord. 1397.17.36 § 6 (part), 2009: Ord. 1397.17.34 § 5 (part), 2009)



Chapter 17.24
BUSINESS ZONES



Sections:




Article I. Neighborhood Business (B-1) Zone




17.24.010   Purpose of provisions.



17.24.020   Principally permitted uses.



17.24.030   Conditionally permitted uses.



17.24.040   Permitted accessory uses.



17.24.050   Access requirements.



17.24.060   Setbacks and height requirements.



17.24.070   Lot width and area requirements.



17.24.080   Additional building and performance standards.



17.24.090   Property in floodplains to comply with certain requirements.




Article II. General Business (B-2) Zone




17.24.100   Purpose of provisions.



17.24.110   Principally permitted uses.



17.24.120   Conditionally permitted uses.



17.24.130   Permitted accessory uses.



17.24.140   Access requirements.



17.24.150   Setbacks and height requirements.



17.24.160   Lot width and area requirements.



17.24.170   Additional building and performance standards.



17.24.180   Property in floodplains to comply with certain requirements.




Article III. Central Business (B-3) Zone




17.24.190   Purpose of provisions.



17.24.200   Principally permitted uses.



17.24.210   Conditionally permitted uses.



17.24.220   Permitted accessory uses.



17.24.230   Access requirements.



17.24.240   Setback and height requirements.



17.24.250   Lot width and area requirements.



17.24.260   Parking requirements.



17.24.270   Additional building and performance standards.



17.24.280   Property in floodplains to comply with certain requirements.



Article I. Neighborhood Business (B-1) Zone



17.24.010  Purpose of provisions.



   The purpose of the B-1 Zone is to provide for the establishment of
local centers for convenient retail or service outlets which deal directly
with the consumer for whom the goods or services are intended. These centers
are to provide services and goods primarily for the surrounding neighborhood
and are not intended to draw customers from the entire community.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.7.1, 1987)



17.24.020  Principally permitted uses.



   For principally permitted uses in the B-1 Zone, see Table 17.16.030B in
Chapter 17.16 of this code.



(Ord. 1397.16.2 §§ 1 (part), 2 (part), 1994)



17.24.030  Conditionally permitted uses.



   Conditionally permitted uses in the B-1 Zone are as follows:



   A.   Churches;



   B.   Convenience store with  more than four gas pumps:



   1.   Pump stands shall be set back not less than twenty-five feet
from any street right-of-way, not less than forty feet from any non-street
property line, and not less than one hundred feet from any residential
district boundary;



   2.   Interior curbs of not less than six inches in height shall be
constructed to separate driving surfaces from sidewalks, landscaped areas and
street rights-of-way; and



   3.   Site improvements such as buildings or structures (permanent or
temporary) shall be separated from any residential zone by at least fifty
feet. Parking areas shall be separated from any residential zone by at least
fifteen feet.



   C.   Schools;



   D.   Day care center.



   1.   Day care centers involved in the care of minor children shall
provide the following:



   a.   A minimum of seventy-five square feet of outdoor play space per
child shall be provided, from which at least fifty square feet of fenced-in
play space per child shall be provided. Fenced-in outdoor play space shall
not include driveways, parking areas or land unsuited, by virtue of other
usage or natural features, for children's play space;



   b.   At least two hundred and fifty square feet of lot area per
child shall be provided;



   E.   Model homes, temporary;



   F.   Video arcades;



   G.   Mortuary;



   H.   Museum;



   I.   Photographic studio;



   J.   Shoe repair and shoe shine shop;



   K.   Tavern, bar or lounge;



   L.   Video sales and rental;



   M.   Charity Dining Facilities, Homeless Shelters and Similar
Services.



   1.   New facilities and services should be located in a manner that
is compatible with area uses.



   2.   Facilities and services shall be designed in such a way and
operated in such a manner which treats all participants with dignity and
respect through the provision of a sanitary, healthy and safe environment
including rest rooms, drinking water and seating areas.



   3.   Service providers shall provide a written plan to the city
including operational policies and procedures. This plan shall include, as
applicable, whether facility is a permanent or temporary location, hours/days
of operation, sanitation/health considerations, loitering control, safty
provisions and other pertinent information. An operational guideline is
available for assistance in preparation of this plan.



   4.   Shelters offering overnight sleeping facilities shall provide
at least thirty square feet of usable open space per each bed. This open
space must be enclosed by appropriate screening.



   5.   Facilities shall contain rest rooms meeting requirements set
forth in Appendix C of the Uniform Building Code.



   6.   Facilities shall provide rest rooms within the facilities with
at least one rest room for men and one for women.



   7.   Service providers providing food shall serve such meals within
buildings or enclosed areas. When meals are served outside, screening shall
be provided that separates the eating area from public view, i.e., wall,
fencing, landscaping consistent with existing neighborhood standards.



   8.   Service providers which frequently have people waiting outside
for services shall provide an adequate waiting area which shall be screened
from public view, i.e. wall, fencing, landscaping consistent with existing
neighborhood standards.



   9.   All service providers shall require participants and others to
wait or sleep in designated and approved areas;



   N.   Bed and breakfast establishments that are located within a
historical district or historical landmark as designated pursuant to Section
17.62.050 of this code.



(Ord. 1397.17.36 §§ 7 (part), 9 (part), 12 (part), 2009; Ord. 1397.17.11 §
2, 1994; Ord. 1178.32 § 2 (part), 1990; Ord. 1178 § 5.7.3, 1987)



17.24.040  Permitted accessory uses.



   Permitted accessory uses in the B-1 Zone are as follows:



   A.   Business signs, consistent with Section 17.58.050 of this title;



   B.   Trash receptacles, consistent with Section 17.58.050 of this
title;



   C.   Accessory buildings as per Article II. of Chapter 17.52 and as
approved by the planning and zoning commission;



   D.   Temporary buildings incidental to construction work.



   E.   Accessory residential uses, single family, when occupied by the
owner or lessee, or watchman employed on the premises, and when such
occupancy is directly associated to a developed and occupied permitted use,
and is located within, or attached to, the principal building(s) of the
permitted use. (No freestanding building, manufactured or mobile home, or
recreational vehicle shall be permitted for such use.)



(Ord. 1397.17.18 § 2, 1997; Ord. 1397.16.2 §§ 1 (part), 2 (part), 1994;
Ord. 1178 § 5.7.4, 1987)



17.24.050  Access requirements.



   Access requirements in the B-1 Zone shall be as follows:



   A.   Access to commercial activities shall be allowed only from
arterial streets or a street specifically designed for such development and
shall meet the requirements of Sections 17.56.080 — 17.56.100 of this title;



   B.   Commercial development which may not be able to meet the
requirements of Sections 17.56.080 — 17.56.100, and are requesting
deviations from the noted standards, shall submit to the city engineer an
engineer's report certified by a professional engineer addressing the
following site conditions both present and future:



   1.   Traffic volumes;



   2.   Turning movements;



   3.   Traffic controls;



   4.   Site design;



   5.   Site distances;



   6.   Location and alignment of other access points.



   C.   Based upon the above data, the city engineer shall determine
whether a deviation from the required standards is justified, and if so, what
alternative requirements will be necessary.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.7.5, 1987)



17.24.060  Setbacks and height requirements.



   For setback and height requirements for the B-1 Zone, see Table
17.24.060 codified at the end of this chapter.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.7.6, 1987)



17.24.070  Lot width and area requirements.



   Lot width and area requirements for the B-1 Zone are as follows:



   A.   The minimum lot width shall be one hundred feet;



   B.   Minimum lot area shall be determined by building area, parking
requirements and required setbacks.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.7.7, 1987)



17.24.080  Additional building and performance standards.



   Development of any parcel of land within the B-1 Zone shall be subject
to all applicable requirements of Chapters 17.52 through 17.64 of this title.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.7.8, 1987)



17.24.090  Property in floodplains to comply with certain requirements.



   Any property located in the B-1 Zone and any floodplain as designated
in Chapter 15.40, must comply with Chapter 15.40 requirements.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.7.9, 1987)



Article II. General Business (B-2) Zone



17.24.100  Purpose of provisions.



   The purpose of the B-2 Zone is to provide for low intensity, retail or
service outlets which deal directly with the consumer for whom the goods or
services are intended. The uses allowed in this district are to provide goods
and services on a community market scale and located in areas which are
served by arterial street facilities.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.8.1, 1987)



17.24.110  Principally permitted uses.



   For principally permitted uses in the B-2 Zone, see Table 17.16.030 B
in Chapter 17.16 of this code.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.8.2, 1987)



17.24.120  Conditionally permitted uses.



   Conditionally permitted uses in the B-2 Zone are as follows:



   A.   Automobile repair services (major and minor):



   1.   Site improvements such as buildings or structures (permanent or
temporary) shall be separated from any residential zone by at least fifty
feet. Parking areas shall be separated from any residential zone by at least
fifteen feet;



   2.   Interior curbs of not less than six inches in height shall be
constructed to separate driving surfaces from sidewalks, landscaped areas,
and street rights-of-way;



   3.   Any outdoor storage of vehicles, boats, parts or accessories
shall be in an enclosed area in the rear yard, and shall be screened from
view by a six-foot-high opaque wall or fence; and



   4.   The number of vehicles or boats undergoing repair or that are
inoperable which may be stored outside of the building is limited to one
vehicle or boat per four hundred square feet of floor area;



   B.   Automobile washing establishments:



   1.   Automobile washing establishments shall be subject to the same
limitations and conditions as specified in subsections A(1—6) above;



   2.   Sufficient off-street area to provide space for not less than
ten automobiles waiting to be washed or three waiting spaces per washing
stall, whichever is greater, shall be provided. A space twenty feet by nine
feet shall be deemed adequate for each required space;



   3.   All wash-water, disposal facilities including sludge, grit
removal and disposal equipment shall be subject to the approval of the city
engineer and shall conform with all city ordinances regarding sewage and
health and shall be designed so as not to detrimentally affect the city sewer
system;



   C.   Churches;



   D.   Convenience-food restaurants:



   1.   Convenience food restaurants shall be subject to the same
limitations and conditions as are specified in subsections A(1), (5) and (6)
above;



   E.   Convenience store with more than four gas pumps:



   1.   Pump stands shall be set back not less than twenty-five feet
from any street right-or-way, not less than forty feet from any non-street
property line, and not less than one hundred feet from any residential
district boundary;



   2.   Interior curbs of not less than six inches in height shall be
constructed to separate driving surfaces from sidewalks, landscaped areas and
street rights-of-way; and



   3.   Site improvements such as buildings or structures (permanent or
temporary) shall be separated from any residential zone by at least fifty
feet. Parking areas shall be separated from any residential zone by at least
fifteen feet;



   F.   Day care center.



   1.   Day care centers involved in the care of minor children shall
provide the following:



   a.   A minimum of seventy-five square feet of outdoor play space per
child shall be provided,  from  which  at least  fifty square feet of
fenced-in play space per child shall be provided. Fenced-in outdoor play
space shall not include driveways, parking areas or land unsuited, by virtue
of other usage or natural features, for children's play space;



   b.   At least two hundred fifty square feet of lot area per child
shall be provided;



   G.   Model homes, temporary;



   H.   Automobile parking lot or garage (public or private), subject
to site plan review procedures;



   I.   Animal hospital, clinic or kennel providing the establishment
and animal runs are completely enclosed in the building;



   J.   Exterminator shop;



   K.   Garden supply store;



   L.   Commercial recreation;



   M.   Printing and publishing house (including newspapers);



   N.   Upholstery shop;



   O.   Bus terminals;



   P.   Business, technical or vocational school;



   Q.   Swap meet, flea market;



   R.   Liquefied petroleum gas storage and dispensing; provided, that
the aggregate capacity of any one installation shall not exceed five hundred
gallons of water capacity and subject to Uniform Building and Fire Codes as
adopted;



   S.   Tire sales, repair and mounting;



   T.   Bed and breakfast establishments that are located within a
historical district or historical landmark as designated pursuant to Section
17.62.050 of this code;



   U.   Charity dining facilities, homeless shelters and similar
services subject to provisions of Section 17.24.030.M.



(Ord. 1397.17.36 §§ 7 (part), 9 (part), 10 (part), 12 (part), 2009; Ord.
1397.17.17 § 2, 1997: Ord. 1397.17.11 § 4 (part), 1994; Ord. 1397 §§ 1
(part), 2 (part), 1994; Ord. 1397.17.4 § 1, 1992; Ord. 1178.44 § 1, 1991;
Ord. 1178.32 § 2 (part), 1990; Ord. 1178.31, 1990; Ord. 1178 § 5.8.3, 1987)



17.24.130  Permitted accessory uses.



   Permitted accessory uses for the B-2 Zone are as follows:



   Those accessory uses permitted under Section 17.24.040 of the B-1 Zone.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.8.4, 1987)



17.24.140  Access requirements.



   Access requirements for the B-2 Zone shall be as follows:



   A.   Access to commercial activities shall be allowed only on
arterial streets or a street specifically designed for such development and
shall meet the requirements of Sections 17.56.080 through 17.56.100 of this
code.



   B.   Commercial developments which may not be able to meet the
requirements of Sections 17.56.080 through 17.56.100 and are requesting
deviations from the noted standards, shall submit to the city engineer an
engineer's report certified by a professional engineer addressing the
following site conditions, both present and future:



   1.   Traffic volumes;



   2.   Turning movements;



   3.   Traffic controls;



   4.   Site design;



   5.   Site distances;



   6.   Location and alignment of other access points.



   C.   Based upon the above data, the city engineer shall determine
whether a deviation from the requirement standards is justified and, if so,
what alternative requirements will be necessary.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.8.5, 1987)



17.24.150  Setbacks and height requirements.



   Setback and height requirements for the B-2 Zone shall be as out in
Table 17.24.150 codified at the end of this chapter.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.8.6, 1987)



17.24.160  Lot width and area requirements.



   Lot width and area requirements for the B-2 Zone shall be as follows:



   A.   The minimum lot width shall be one hundred and fifty feet
except that corner lots shall have a minimum width of two hundred feet.



   B.   Minimum lot area shall be determined by building area, parking
requirements and required setbacks.



(Ord. 1397.17.9 § 2 (part), 1993)



17.24.170  Additional building and performance standards.



   Development of any parcel of land within the B-2 Zone shall be subject
to all applicable requirements of Chapters 17.52 through 17.64 of this code.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.8.8, 1987)



17.24.180  Property in floodplains to comply with certain requirements.



   Any property located in the B-2 Zone and any floodplain as designated
in Chapter 15.40, must comply with Chapter 15.40 requirements.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.8.9, 1987)



Article III. Central Business (B-3) Zone



17.24.190  Purpose of provisions.



   The purpose of the B-3 Zone is to provide for high intensity, retail or
service outlets which deal directly with the consumer for whom the goods or
services are intended. The uses allowed in this district are to provide goods
and services on a community market scale.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.9.1, 1987)



17.24.200  Principally permitted uses.



   For principally permitted uses in the B-3 Zone, see Table 17.16.030 B
in Chapter 17.16 of this code.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.9.2, 1987)



17.24.210  Conditionally permitted uses.



   Conditionally permitted uses in the B-3 Zone are as follows:



   A.   Automobile repair services (minor):



   1.   Site improvements such as buildings or structures (permanent or
temporary) shall be separated from any residential zone by at least fifty
feet.  Parking areas shall be separated from any residential zone by at
least fifteen feet;



   2.   Interior curbs of not less than six inches in height shall be
constructed to separate driving surfaces from sidewalks, landscaped areas,
and street rights-of-way;



   3.   Any outdoor storage of vehicles, boats, parts or accessories
shall be in an enclosed area in the rear yard, and shall be screened from
view by a six-foot-high opaque wall or fence; and



   4.   The number of vehicles or boats undergoing repair or that are
inoperable which may be stored outside of the building is limited to one
vehicle or boat per four hundred square feet of floor area;



   B.   Automobile washing establishments:



   1.   Automobile washing establishments shall be subject to the same
limitations and conditions specified in subsection 17.24.210.D. for
convenience food stores with more than four gas pumps;



   2.   Sufficient off-street area to provide space for not less than
ten automobiles waiting to be washed or three waiting spaces per washing
stall, whichever is greater, shall be provided. A space twenty feet by nine
feet shall be deemed adequate for each required space;



   3.   All wash-water, disposal facilities including sludge, grit
removal and disposal equipment shall be subject to the approval of the city
engineer and shall conform with all city ordinances regarding sewage and
health and shall be designed so as not to detrimentally affect the city sewer
system;



   C.   Convenience-food restaurants:



   1.   Convenience-food restaurants shall be subject to the same
limitations and conditions as are specified heretofore in subsection
17.24.210.D. for convenience food stores with more than four gas pumps;



   D.   Convenience store with more than four pumps:



   1.   Pump stands shall be set back not less than twenty-five feet
from any street right-or-way, not less than forty feet from any non-street
property line, and not less than one hundred feet from any residential
district boundary;



   2.   Interior curbs of not less than six inches in height shall be
constructed to separate driving surfaces from sidewalks, landscaped areas and
street rights-of-way; and



   3.   Site improvements such as buildings or structures (permanent or
temporary) shall be separated from any residential zone by at least fifty
feet.  Parking areas shall be separated from any residential zone by at
least fifteen feet;



   E.   Day care center:



   1.   Day care centers involved in the care of minor children shall
provide the following:



   a.   A minimum of seventy-five square feet of outdoor play space per
child shall be provided, from which at least fifty square feet of fenced-in
play space per child shall be provided. Fenced-in outdoor play space shall
not include driveways, parking areas or land unsuited, by virtue of other
usage or natural features, for children's play space;



   b.   At least two hundred and fifty square feet of lot area per
child shall be provided;



   F.   Residential dwelling units;



   G.   Animal hospital, clinic and kennel providing the establishment
and animal runs are completely enclosed in the building;



   H.   Exterminator shop;



   I.   Garden supply store;



   J.   Commercial recreation;



   K.   Printing and publishing house (including newspapers);



   L.   Upholstery shop;



   M.   Bus terminal;



   N.   Business, technical or vocational school;



   O.   Swap meet, flea market;



   P.   Tire sales, repair and mounting;



   Q.   Bed and breakfast establishments that are located within a
historical district or historical landmark as designated pursuant to Section
17.62.050 of this code;



   R.    Charity dining facilities, homeless shelters, and similar
services subject to provisions of Section 17.24.030(M)



   S.   Churches.



(Ord. 1397.17.36 §§ 7 (part), 8, 9 (part), 11, 12 (part), 2009; Ord.
1397.17.11 § 4 (part), 1994; Ord. 1397.17.4 § 2, 1992; Ord. 1178.32 § 2
(part), 1990; Ord. 1178 § 5.9.3, 1987)



17.24.220  Permitted accessory uses.



   Permitted uses for the B-3 Zone are as follows:



   A.   Those accessory uses permitted under Section 17.24.040 of the
B-1 Zone.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.9.4, 1987)



17.24.230  Access requirements.



   Access requirements for the B-3 Zone shall be as follows:



   A.   Access to commercial activities shall be allowed only on
arterial streets or a street specifically designed for such development and
shall meet the requirements of Sections 17.56.080 through 17.56.100 of this
title.



   B.   Commercial developments which may not be able to meet the
requirements of Sections 17.56.080 through 17.56.100, and are requesting
deviations from the noted standards, shall submit to the city engineer an
engineer's report certified by a professional engineer addressing the
following site conditions, both present and future:



   1.   Traffic volumes;



   2.   Turning movements;



   3.   Traffic controls;



   4.   Site design;



   5.   Site distances;



   6.   Location and alignment of other access points.



   C.   Based upon the above data, the city engineer shall determine
whether a deviation from the requirement standards is justified and, if so,
what alternative requirements will be necessary.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.9.5, 1987)



17.24.240  Setback and height requirements.



   Setback and height requirements for the B-3 Zone shall be as set out in
Table 17.24.240 codified at the end of this chapter.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.9.6, 1987)



17.24.250  Lot width and area requirements.



   Lot width and area requirements in the B-3 Zone shall be as follows:



   A.   The minimum lot width shall be twenty-five feet;



   B.   Minimum lot area shall be determined by building area, parking
requirements and required setbacks.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.9.7, 1987)



17.24.260  Parking requirements.



   Parking requirements within the B-3 Zone shall comply with all
off-street parking requirements of this title except that on-street parking
can be used to meet the required number of spaces or alternative means of
providing parking can be approved by the city, such as off-street parking
improvement districts.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.9.8, 1987)



17.24.270  Additional building and performance standards.



   Development of any parcel of land within the B-3 Zone shall be subject
to all applicable requirements of Chapters 17.52 through 17.64 of this title.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.9.9, 1987)



17.24.280  Property in floodplains to comply with certain requirements.



   Any property located in the B-3 Zone and any floodplain as designated
in Chapter 15.40 of this code, must comply with Chapter 15.40 requirements.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.9.10, 1987)



Chapter 17.24 - Tables



Table 17.24.060
B-1 Zone



 



A.   The minimum building setback from any B-1 Zone boundary or public
street right-of- way shall be set forth in this table.


Setbacks
 

Feet



Building Setbacks
 




Front
 

35



Interior side and rear
 

15



Corner side
 

15



Residential Zone Boundary
 

45



Parking Lots
 




Front
 

4



Interior side and rear
 

3



Corner side
 

4



Residential Zone boundary
 

3



B.    The maximum height of structures shall be 30 feet.




 



Table 17.24.150
B-2 Zone



 



A.    The minimum building setback from any lot line or public
right-of-way shall be as set forth in this table.


Setbacks
 

Feet



Building Setbacks
 




Front

Rear

Interior side

Corner side

Residential Zone boundary
 

35



15



Aggregate of 15*



25



45



*Both side yard setbacks, when added together must total 15 feet.


Parking Lots
 




Front
 

4



Interior side and rear
 

3



Corner side
 

4



Residential Zone boundary
 

3



B.    The maximum height of a structure shall be 35 feet.




 



Table 17.24.240
B-3 Zone



 



A.    The minimum building setback from lot line or public right-of-way
shall be as set forth in this table.


Setbacks
 

Feet



Building Setbacks
 




Front
 

0



Interior side and rear
 

0



Corner side
 

0



Residential Zone boundary
 

20



Parking Lots
 




Front
 

4



Interior side and rear
 

3



Corner side
 

4



Residential Zone boundary
 

3



B.    A structure may be erected to a height over 45' provided buildings
over 35 feet in height shall be subject to additional fire protection as
determined by the city fire chief.




 



Chapter 17.28
COMMUNITY SERVICES ZONE



Sections:



17.28.010   Purpose of provisions.



17.28.020   Principally permitted uses.



17.28.030   Conditionally permitted uses.



17.28.040   Permitted accessory uses.



17.28.050   Access requirements.



17.28.060   Setback and height requirements.



17.28.070   Lot width and area requirements.



17.28.080   Additional building and performance standards.



17.28.090   Property in floodplains to comply with certain requirements.



17.28.010  Purpose of provisions.



   The purpose of the B-4 Community Services Zone is to provide for land
intensive retail, service, or manufacturing operations. These services should
be located in concentrated service areas with good accessibility to the
public but should be carefully buffered from other uses and visibly buffered
from arterial streets.



(Ord. 1178.32 § 2 (part), 1990: Ord. 1178 § 5.10.1, 1987)



17.28.020  Principally permitted uses.



   For principally permitted uses in the B-4 Zone, see Table 17.16.030 B.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.10.2, 1987)



17.28.030  Conditionally permitted uses.



   Conditionally permitted uses in the B-4 Zone are as follows:



   A.   Convenience store with more than four gas pumps:



   1.   Pump stands shall be set back not less than twenty-five feet
from any street right-or-way, not less than forty feet from any non-street
property line, and not less than one hundred feet from any residential
district boundary;



   2.   Interior curbs of not less than six inches in height shall be
constructed to separate driving surfaces from sidewalks, landscaped areas and
street rights-of-way; and



   3.   Site improvements such as build- ings or structures (permanent
or temporary) shall be separated from any residential zone by at least fifty
feet.  Parking areas shall be separated from any residential zone by at
least fifteen feet;



   B.   Automobile washing establishment as per Section 17.24.120(B) of
this title;



   C.   Automobile repair services (major and minor):



   1.   Site improvements such as buildings or structures (permanent or
temporary) shall be separated from any residential zone by at least fifty
feet.  Parking areas shall be separated from any residential zone by at
least fifteen feet;



   2.   Interior curbs of not less than six inches in height shall be
constructed to separate driving surfaces from sidewalks, landscaped areas,
and street rights-of-way;



   3.   Any outdoor storage of vehicles, boats, parts or accessories
shall be in an enclosed area in the rear yard, and shall be screened from
view by a six-foot-high opaque wall or fence; and



   4.   The number of vehicles or boats undergoing repair or that are
inoperable which may be stored outside of the building is limited to one
vehicle or boat per four hundred square feet of floor area;



   D.   Mini-warehouses:



   1.   Minimum site size shall be one acre;



   2.   On-site circulation, drives and park- ing:



   a.   Each mini-warehouse site shall pro- vide a minimum of two exits,



   b.   All one-way driveways shall pro- vide for one ten-foot parking
lane and one fifteen-foot travel lane. Traffic direction and parking shall be
designated by signing or painting,



   c.   All two-way driveways shall provide for one ten-foot parking
lane and two twelve-foot travel lanes,



   d.   The parking lanes may be eliminated when the driveway does not
serve storage cubicles,



   e.   At least one parking space for each ten storage cubicles,
equally distributed throughout the storage area shall be provid- ed,



   f.   All driveways, parking, loading, and circulation areas shall be
paved with concrete, asphalt or asphaltic concrete;



   3.   Fencing and screening:



   a.   Fencing shall be required around the perimeter of the property
and constructed of decorative concrete block or chain link fence with slats,
as is approved by the planning and zoning commission,



   b.   All outdoor storage shall be limited to recreational vehicles
and shall be screened from view from surrounding prop- erties;



   4.   Setbacks:



   a.   Any side of a building providing doorways to storage areas
shall be set back from the property line not less than twenty-five feet; side
and rear yard setbacks otherwise may be zero; provided, the building is of
the same material and structure as the fencing. If not of the same material,
the rear yard setback shall be at least fifteen feet;



   5.   Masonry trash enclosures shall be installed subject to the
approval of the planning and zoning commission;



   6.   No auctions, commercial sales, garage sales or similar
activities shall be conducted on the premises;



   E.   Churches;



   F.   Charity dining facilities, homeless shelters and similar
services subject to provisions of Section 17.24.030.M;



   G.   Wireless telecommunication facilities with a height greater
than thirty-five feet;



   H.   Bed and breakfast establishments that are located within a
historical district or historical landmark as designated pursuant to Section
17.62.050 of this code;



   I.   Day care center.



   1.   Day care centers involved in the care of minor children shall
provide the following:



   a.   A minimum of seventy-five square feet of outdoor play space per
child shall be provided, from which at least fifty square feet of fenced-in
play space per child shall be provided.  Fenced-in outdoor play space shall
not include driveways, parking areas or land unsuited, by virtue of other
usage or natural features, for children's play space; and



   b.    At least two hundred and fifty square feet of lot area per
child shall be provided.



(Ord. 1397.17.36 §§ 7 (part), 9 (part), 10 (part), 13, 2009: Ord.
1397.17.17 § 3, 1997: Ord. 1397.17.14 § V, 1996: Ord. 1397.17.11 § 4
(part), 1994; Ord. 1397.16.2 § 2 (part), 1994; Ord. 1178.32 § 2 (part),
1990; Ord. 1178 § 5.10.3, 1987)



17.28.040  Permitted accessory uses.



   Permitted accessory uses in the B-4 Zone are as follows:



   A.   Those accessory uses permitted under Section 17.24.040 of the
B-1 Zone;



   B.   Caretaker or security guard quarters.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.10.4, 1987)



17.28.050  Access requirements.



   Access requirements for the B-4 Zone shall be as follows:



   A.   Access to general service activities shall be allowed only on
arterial streets or a street specifically designed for such development and
shall meet the requirements of Sections 17.56.080 through 17.56.100 of this
title.



   B.   General service developments which may not be able to meet the
requirements of Sections 17.56.080 through 17.56.100 and are requesting
deviations from the noted standards, shall submit to the town engineer an
engineer's report certified by a professional engineer addressing the
following site conditions, both present and future:



   1.   Traffic volumes;



   2.   Turning movements;



   3.   Traffic controls;



   4.   Site design;



   5.   Site distances;



   6.   Location and alignment of other access points.



   C.   Based upon the above data, the city engineer shall determine
whether a deviation from the requirement standards is justified and, if so,
what alternative requirements will be necessary.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.10.5, 1987)



17.28.060  Setback and height requirements.



   Setback and height requirements for the B-4 Zone shall be as set out in
Table 17.28.060 codified at the end of this chapter.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.10.6, 1987)



17.28.070  Lot width and area requirements.



   Lot width and area requirements for the B-4 Zone are as follows:



   A.   The minimum lot width shall be one hundred fifty feet except
that corner lots shall be two hundred feet in width;



   B.   Minimum lot area shall be determined by building, area, parking
requirements and required setbacks.



(Ord. 1397.17.9 § 2 (part), 1993)



17.28.080  Additional building and performance standards.



   Development of any parcel of land within the B-4 Zone shall be subject
to all applicable requirements of Chapters 17.52 through 17.64 of this title.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.10.8, 1987)



17.28.090  Property in floodplains to comply with certain requirements.



   Any property located in the B-4 Zone and any floodplain as designated
in Chapter 15.40 of this code, must comply with Chapter 15.40 requirements.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.10.9, 1987)



Table 17.28.060
B-4 Zone



 



 




A.    The minimum building setback from any lot line or public street
right-of-way shall be as set forth in this table.


Setbacks
 

Feet



Building Setbacks
 




Front

Rear

Interior side

Corner side

Residential Zone boundary
 

35



15



Aggregate of 15*



25



45



*Both side yard setbacks, when added together must total 15 feet.


Parking Lots
 




Front
 

4



Interior side and rear
 

3



Corner side
 

4



Residential Zone boundary
 

3



B.    The maximum height of a structure shall be 35 feet.




 



Chapter 17.30
COMMERCIAL OFFICE ZONE



Sections:



17.30.010   Purpose of provisions.



17.30.020   Principally permitted uses.



17.30.030   Conditionally permitted uses.



17.30.040   Permitted accessory uses.



17.30.050   Lot development standards.



17.30.060   Additional building and performance standards.



17.30.010  Purpose of provisions.



   The commercial office (CO) zoning district is established to provide
for well-designed and attractive professional, administrative, and business
offices of a residential scale and character on sites in appropriate
locations to serve the nearby residential and commercial areas. The
commercial office zoning district is characterized by low volumes of direct
customer contact, and is designed to provide a transition of development
between residential neighborhoods and more intense land uses, districts, and
heavily traveled transportation routes. The principal uses permitted in this
district are professional, semi- professional, administrative, and business
offices, and branch offices for banks and similar financial institutions.



(Ord. 1397.17.15 § II (part), 1997)



17.30.020  Principally permitted uses.



   Principally permitted uses in the commercial office zone are as follows:



   A.   Professional, semi-professional, administrative and business
offices;



   B.   Banks and similar financial institutions;



   C.   Medical, dental and chiropractic offices, but not including
hospitals or medical facilities;



   D.   Studios for photography, commercial arts, or other professional
work.



   E.   Medical marijuana dispensaries within the overlay area defined
by Section 17.52.610.



(Ord. 1397.17.37 § 5, 2011: Ord. 1397.17.15 § II (part), 1997)



17.30.030  Conditionally permitted uses.



   Conditionally permitted uses in the commercial office zone are as
follows:



   A.   Business, technical or vocational school(s).



(Ord. 1397.17.15 § II (part), 1997)



17.30.040  Permitted accessory uses.



   Permitted accessory uses in the commercial office zone are as follows:



   A.   Accessory residential uses, single-family, when occupied by the
owner or lessee, or a watchman employed on the premises, and when such
occupancy is directly associated to a developed and occupied permitted use,
and is located within, or attached to, the principal building(s) of the
permitted use. (No freestanding building, manufactured or mobile home, or
recreational vehicle shall be permitted for such use.)



   B.   Restaurant, cafes, snack shops, coffee shops, and similar
eating/refreshment establishments; provided, that it is located within, or
attached to, the principal building(s) of the permitted use;



   C.   Day care centers, subject to the provisions of Section
17.24.030(D) (B-1 zoning district — day care center), and provided that it
is located within, or attached to, the principal building(s) of the permitted
use;



   D.   Business signs, consistent with the city sign code, and as
provided below;



   E.   Trash receptacles, consistent with Section 17.58.050 of this
title, and constructed, designed and colored to complement the associated
development.



(Ord. 1397.17.18 § 1, 1997; Ord. 1397.17.15 § II (part), 1997)



17.30.050  Lot development standards.



   A.   Minimum lot width: one hundred fifty feet (corner lots shall be
two hundred feet)



   B.   Minimum lot area shall be determined by building area, parking,
retention, landscaping and setback requirements.



   C.   Setbacks:



   Front:  Thirty-five feet



   Rear:  Fifteen feet



   Side:  Fifteen feet



   Corner side:  Twenty feet



   Residential zone boundary:  Thirty feet



   D.   Maximum height:  Thirty feet



(Ord. 1397.17.15 § II (part), 1997)



17.30.060  Additional building and performance standards.



   A.   All permitted uses, and all activity resulting therefrom, are
restricted to closed buildings, except for pass-through windows, employee and
customer parking, and any necessary loading/unloading of materials and
supplies.



   B.   No exterior display of materials or supplies, or outdoor
storage shall be permitted.



   C.   A six-foot high, decorative screening wall shall be used as a
buffer between any commercial office use and adjacent residential uses or
zoning districts.



   D.   Sign regulations shall be as follows:



   1.   Detached signs: shall be limited to one per public street
frontage, and shall be a low- profile, monument-style sign, no greater than
eight feet in height and thirty-two square feet in size. Landscaping shall be
provided around the base of the sign. The supporting structure shall be
constructed and colored to complement the development.



   2.   Attached signs: shall be limited to a combined area, along any
public street frontage, to one square foot of sign area per two linear feet
of building frontage. Maximum sign area shall be one hundred square feet.



   E.   Landscaping. For purposes of Chapter 17.52, Article VI
(landscaping requirements), the commercial office zone shall be considered a
commercial development.



   F.   Fences. For purposes of Chapter 17.52, Article III (fences and
walls), the commercial office zone shall be considered a business and
industrial district.



   G.   Development of any parcel of land within the commercial office
zone shall be subject to all applicable requirements of chapters 17.52
through 17.64 of this title.



(Ord. 1397.17.15 § II (part), 1997)



Chapter 17.32
GARDEN AND LIGHT INDUSTRIAL ZONE



Sections:



17.32.010   Purpose of provisions.



17.32.020   Principally permitted uses.



17.32.030   Conditionally permitted uses.



17.32.040   Permitted accessory uses.



17.32.050   Access requirements.



17.32.060   Setbacks and height requirements.



17.32.070   Lot width and area requirements.



17.32.080   Additional building and performance standards.



17.32.090   Property in floodplains to comply with certain requirements.



17.32.010  Purpose of provisions.



   The purpose of the I-1 Garden and Light Industrial Zone is to provide
for the accommodation of light manufacturing uses and warehousing in a
comprehensively planned and attractive setting and in a manner which will not
be detrimental to activities in adjacent commercial or residential
neighborhoods by reason of but not limited to excessive noise, odor, smoke,
dust, vibrations, fumes or glare. Retail activity is allowed only as an
accessory use and provided that the retailing is associated with the
principal use at the site.



(Ord. 1178.32 § 2 (part), 1990: Ord. 1178 § 5.11.1, 1987)



17.32.020  Principally permitted uses.



   For principally permitted uses in the I-1 Zone, see Table 17.16.030 B
in Chapter 17.16 of this code.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.11.2, 1987)



17.32.030  Conditionally permitted uses.



   Conditionally permitted uses in the I-1 Zone are as follows:



   A.   Day care centers.



   1.   Day care centers involved in the care of minor children shall
provide the following:



   a.   A minimum of seventy-five square feet of outdoor play space per
child shall be provided, from which at least fifty square feet of fenced-in
play space per child shall be provided.  Fenced-in outdoor play space shall
not include driveways, parking areas or land unsuited, by virtue of other
usage or natural features, for children's play space; and



   b.   At least two hundred and fifty square feet of lot area per
child shall be provided;



   B.   Charity dining facilities, homeless shelters and similar
services subject to the provisions of Section 17.24.030.M;



   C.   Wireless telecommunication facilities with a height greater
than thirty-five feet.



(Ord. 1397.17.36 § 12 (part), 2009: Ord. 1397.17.17 § 4, 1997: Ord.
1397.17.14 § VI, 1996: Ord. 1178.60 § 1, 1995: Ord. 1397.17.11 § 4 (part),
1994; Ord. 1178 § 5.11.2, 1987)



17.32.040  Permitted accessory uses.



   Permitted accessory uses in the I-1 Zone are as follows:



   A.   Personnel service facilities providing services, education,
recreation, entertainment, food and convenience goods primarily for those
personnel employed in the principal use;



   B.   Those accessory uses permitted under Section 17.24.040 of the
B-1 Zone;



   C.   Caretaker or security guard quarters.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.11.4, 1987)



17.32.050  Access requirements.



   Access requirements in the I-1 Zone shall be as follows:



   A.   Access to development shall be allowed only on arterial streets
or streets specifically designed for such development and shall meet the
requirements of Sections 17.56.080 through 17.56.100 of this title.



   B.   Developments which may not be able to meet the requirements of
Sections 17.56.080 through 17.56.100 and are requested deviations from the
noted standards shall submit to the city engineer an engineer's report
certified by a professional engineer addressing the following site conditions
both present and future:



   1.   Traffic volumes;



   2.   Turning movements;



   3.   Traffic controls;



   4.   Site design;



   5.   Site distances;



   6.   Location and alignment of other access points.



   C.   Based upon the above data, the city engineer shall determine
whether a deviation from the requirement standards is justified and, if so,
what alternative requirements will be necessary.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.11.5, 1987)



17.32.060  Setbacks and height requirements.



   Setback and height requirements in the I-1 Zone shall be as set out in
Table 17.32.060 codified at the end of this chapter.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.11.6, 1987)



17.32.070  Lot width and area requirements.



   Lot width and area requirements for the I-1 Zone shall be as follows:



   A.   The minimum lot width shall be one hundred feet.



   B.   Minimum lot area shall be determined by building, area, parking
requirements and required setbacks.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.11.7, 1987)



17.32.080  Additional building and performance standards.



   Development of any parcel of land within the I-1 Zone shall be subject
to all applicable requirements of Chapters 17.52 through 17.64 of this title.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.11.8, 1987)



17.32.090  Property in floodplains to comply with certain requirements.



   Any property located in the I-1 Zone and any floodplain as designated
in Chapter 15.40, must comply with Chapter 15.40 requirements.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.11.9, 1987)



Table 17.32.060
I-1 Zone



 



A.    The minimum building setback from any lot line or public street
right-of-way shall be as set out in this table.


Setbacks
 

Feet



Building Setbacks
 




Front
 

35



Interior side and rear
 

15



Corner side
 

30



Residential Zone boundary
 

45



Parking Lots
 




Front
 

4



Interior side and rear
 

3



Corner side
 

4



Residential Zone boundary
 

3



B.    The maximum height of a structure shall be 35 feet.




 



Chapter 17.36
GENERAL INDUSTRIAL ZONE



Sections:



17.36.010   Purpose of provisions.



17.36.020   Principally permitted uses.



17.36.030   Conditionally permitted uses.



17.36.040   Permitted accessory uses.



17.36.050   Access requirements.



17.36.060   Setback and height requirements.



17.36.070   Lot width and area requirements.



17.36.080   Additional building and performance standards.



17.36.090   Property in floodplains to comply with certain requirements.



17.36.010  Purpose of provisions.



   The purpose of the I-2 General Industrial Zone is to provide for the
development of industries which, because of the nature of their operation,
appearance, traffic generation, or emission, would not be compatible with
land uses in other zoning districts, but which, nevertheless, are necessary
and desirable activities in the city.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.12.1, 1987)



17.36.020  Principally permitted uses.



   For principally permitted uses in the I-2 Zone, see Table 17.16.030 B
in Chapter 17.16 of this code.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.12.2, 1987)



17.36.030  Conditionally permitted uses.



   Conditionally permitted uses in the I-2 Zone shall be as follows:



   A.   Airports, subject to the regulations of the Federal Aviation
Administration;



   B.   (Reserved);



   C.   Automobile reduction yard;



   D.   Excavation of sand, gravel, dirt, ore or minerals;



   E.   Fiberglass manufacturing and processing;



   F.   Heliports, subject to the regulations of the Federal Aviation
Administration;



   G.   Meat packing;



   H.   (Reserved);



   I.   Oil refineries;



   J.   Racetracks;



   K.   Railroad switching yards;



   L.   Scrap metal or used materials processing, handling, and storage
facilities, except recycling centers;



   M.   Sewage treatment plants;



   N.   (Reserved);



   O.   Junkyards;



   P.   Auto dismantling and salvage yards;



   Q.   Any production, testing, processing of goods or products;
provided it conforms with the performance standards set forth in Sections
17.58.010 through 17.58.140 for the emission or creation of noise, vibration,
smoke, dust or other particular matter, toxic or noxious materials, odors,
glare or heat;



   R.   Those uses involving the storage, utilization or manufacture of
volatile or explosive materials or products;



   S.   Conditionally permitted uses as per Section 17.28.030 of this
title;



   T.   Charity dining facilities, homeless shelters and similar
services subject to provisions of Section 17.24.030(M);



   U.   Wireless telecommunication facilities with a height greater
than fifty-five feet.



(Ord. 1397.17.14 § VII, 1996: Ord. 1397.17.11 § 4 (part), 1994; Ord.
1397.16.2 §§ 1 (part), 2 (part), 1994; Ord. 1178 § 5.12.3, 1987)



17.36.040  Permitted accessory uses.



   Permitted accessory uses in the I-2 Zone are as follows:



   A.   Personnel service facilities providing services, education,
recreation, entertainment, food and convenience goods primarily for those
personnel employed in the principal use;



   B.   Those accessory uses permitted under Section 17.24.040 of this
code;



   C.   Caretaker or security guard quarters.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.12.4, 1987)



17.36.050  Access requirements.



   Access requirements in for the I-2 Zone shall be as follows:



   A.   Access to industrial development shall be allowed only on
arterial streets or streets specifically designed for such development and
shall meet the requirements of Sections 17.56.080 — 17.56.100 of this title;



   B.   Industrial developments which may not be able to meet the
requirements of Sections 17.56.080 through 17.56.100, and are requesting
deviations from the noted standards shall submit to the city engineer an
engineer's report certified by a professional engineer addressing the
following site conditions both present and future:



   1.   Traffic volumes;



   2.   Turning movements;



   3.   Traffic controls;



   4.   Site design;



   5.   Site distance;



   6.   Location and alignment of other access points;



   C.   Based upon the above data, the city engineer shall determine
whether a deviation from the required standards is justified and, if so, what
alternative requirements will be necessary.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.12.5, 1987)



17.36.060  Setback and height requirements.



   Setback and height requirements for the I-2 Zone shall be as set out in
Table 17.36.060.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.12.6, 1987)



17.36.070  Lot width and area requirements.



   Lot width and area requirements for the I-2 Zone shall be as follows:



   A.   The minimum lot width shall be one hundred feet;



   B.   Minimum lot area shall be determined by building, area, parking
requirements and required setbacks.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.12.7, 1987)



17.36.080  Additional building and performance standards.



   Development of any parcel of land within this district shall be subject
to all applicable requirements of Chapters 17.52 through 17.64.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.12.8, 1987)



17.36.090  Property in floodplains to comply with certain requirements.



   Any property located in the I-2 Zone and any floodplain as designated
in Chapter 15.40, must comply with Chapter 15.40 requirements.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.12.9, 1987)



Table 17.36.060
I-2 Zone



 



A.    The minimum setback from any lot line or public right-of-way shall
be as set forth in this table.


Setbacks
 

Feet



Building Setbacks
 




Front
 

35



Interior side and rear
 

15



Corner side
 

30



Residential Zone boundary
 

75



Parking Lots
 




Front
 

4



Interior side and rear
 

3



Corner side
 

4



Residential Zone boundary
 

3



B.    The maximum height of any building shall be 55 feet, except that
buildings over 35 feet in height must be approved by the city and shall be
subject to additional fire protection precautions as determined by the city.




 



Chapter 17.40
PLANNED AREA DEVELOPMENT ZONE



Sections:



17.40.010   Purpose of provisions.



17.40.015   Design Standards for Planned Area Developments.



17.40.020   General requirements and standards.



17.40.030   Property in floodplains to comply with certain requirements.



17.40.010  Purpose of provisions.



   A.   As an alternative to conventional zoning and development
approaches and processes, the Planned Area Development (P.A.D.) procedures
and regulations are set forth to enhance the city's development growth in
order that the public health, safety, and general welfare be preserved as
Casa Grande increasingly urbanizes; to encourage innovations in residential,
commercial, and industrial development so that greater opportunities for
better housing, recreation, shopping and employment, may extend to all
citizens and residents of Casa Grande; to reflect changes in the technology
of land development; to encourage a more creative approach in the utilization
of land in order to accomplish a more efficient, aesthetic, and desirable
development which may be characterized by special features of the geography,
topography, size or shape of a particular property, and to provide a
compatible and stable developed environment, in harmony with that of the
surrounding area.



   B.   The P.A.D. may include any development having one or more
principal use or structure on a single parcel of ground or contiguous
parcels. The P.A.D. shall consist of a harmonious selection of uses and
groupings of buildings, parking areas, circulation and open spaces, and shall
be designed as an integrated unit, in such a manner as to constitute a safe,
efficient and convenient urban area development.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.13.1, 1987)



17.40.015  Design Standards for Planned Area Developments.



   That certain document known as “Residential Design Standards For
Planned Area Developments, January/February 2003 edition,” three copies of
which are on file in the office of the city clerk of the City of Casa Grande,
Arizona, which document was made a public record by Resolution No. 2694.2 of
the City of Casa Grande, Arizona, is hereby referred to, adopted and made a
part hereof as if fully set out in this ordinance.



(Ord. 1397.17.22.1 § 1; Ord. 1397.17.22 § 3, 1999)



17.40.020  General requirements and standards.



   General requirements and standards for the P.A.D. zone shall be as
follows:



   A.   Ownership. The tract shall be a development of land under
unified control at the time of application and planned and scheduled to be
developed as a whole.



   B.   Conformance With General Plan. The land uses and design of the
proposed P.A.D. shall be consistent with the city general plan.



   C.   P.A.D. Regulations.



   1.   The minimum total P.A.D. shall be no less than five acres
unless the applicant can show that the minimum P.A.D. requirements should be
waived because the waiver would be in the public interest and that one or
more of the following conditions exist:



   a.   Unusual physical features of the property itself or of the
surrounding area are such that development under the standard provisions of
this title would not be appropriate in order to conserve a physical or
terrain feature of importance to the neighborhood or community;



   b.   The property is adjacent to or across the street from property
which has been developed under the provisions of this section and will
contribute to the amenities of the area;



   c.   The use of the P.A.D. concept will encourage the use of
otherwise undevelopable property, particularly in the case of small
undeveloped parcels surrounded or partially surrounded by developed property.



   D.   Uses in a P.A.D.



   1.   Recreational vehicle parks, per Chapter 17.48; and



   2.   Any use may be allowed in a P.A.D. provided it is consistent
with the general plan. 



   3.   Medical marijuana uses shall not be allowed on any property
zoned P.A.D. unless either: a) the use is specifically allowed by the P.A.D.
Guide that governs said property; or b) the property is within a P.A.D. that
primarily allows I-1 and/or I-2 land uses. Medical marijuana dispensaries may
also be allowed within a P.A.D. that meets the requirements of Section
17.52.610.



   E.   Residential Density in P.A.D.s.



   1.   Residential development in a P.A.D. may provide for a variety
of housing types allowed in any one of the basic residential zoning
districts. In addition, the number of dwelling units allowed may be flexible
relative to the number of dwelling units per acre that would be permitted by
the zoning regulations otherwise applicable to the site. However, the total
number of dwelling units and the resulting density allowed in a P.A.D. shall
be consistent with the land use plan of the city's general plan;



   2.   In determining the reasonableness of the densities in a P.A.D.,
the planning and zoning commission and city council shall consider increased
efficiency in the provision of public facilities and services based, in part,
upon:



   a.   The location, amount and proposed use of common open space,



   b.   The location, design and type of dwelling units,



   c.   The physical characteristics of the site,



   d.   Particular distinctiveness and excellence in siting, design,
and landscaping.



   F.   Front, Rear and Side Yard Building Setback Regulations.
Building setbacks from all property lines which form the perimeter of the
P.A.D. shall be no less than twenty feet, except as noted in the design
standards adopted in Section 17.40.015, above and subsections S, below.



   G.   More Than One Building Per Lot. More than one building may be
placed on one platted or recorded lot in any P.A.D. Areas for single-family
detached dwellings and other housing types providing privately owned lots
must comply with Title 16 of this code in all respects not specifically noted
in this section as appropriate variances or waivers.



   H.   One Housing Type Not Inconsistent With Intent. A P.A.D. which
only involves one housing type such as all detached or all attached units
shall not be considered inconsistent with the stated purposes and objectives
of this section and shall not be the sole basis for denial or approval.



   I.   Architecture. Building architecture shall not solely be a basis
for denial or approval of a plan, except as noted in the desing standards
adopted in Section 17.40.015, above and subsection S, below. The overall
appearance, diversity, sustainability, and compatibility of individual
buildings to other site elements and surrounding development will be primary
considerations during P.A.D. review by the Planning and Zoning Commission and
Council. Locational criteria shall be a primary consideration as related to
Large Single Retail Uses or Large Multiple Use Shopping Centers.



   J.   Phasing of Development.



   1.   Any P.A.D. plan proposed to be constructed in phases shall
include full details relating thereto, and the city council may approve or
modify, where necessary, any such proposals;



   2.   The phasing shall include the time for beginning and completion
of each phase. Such timing may be modified by the city on the showing of good
cause by the developer;



   3.   The land owner or developer shall make such easements,
covenants, and other arrangements and shall furnish such financial guarantees
as may be determined by the city to be reasonably required to assure
performance in accordance with the plan and to protect the public.



   K.   Street Utilities, Services and Public Facilities. The
uniqueness of each proposal for a P.A.D. may allow specifications and
standards for streets, utilities and services to be subject to minor
modifications of the specifications and standards established in this and
other city ordinances governing their construction. The city may, therefore,
waive or modify the specifications or standards where it is found that they
are not required in the interests of the residents of the P.A.D. or the city.
The plans and profiles of all streets, utilities and services shall be
reviewed, modified if necessary, and approved by the city prior to the final
approval of the P.A.D. All P.A.D.s shall be served by public or community
water and sewer systems.



   L.   Open Space Provision. Depending upon the proposed land uses
within P.A.D., a minimum of seven to fifteen percent of the total P.A.D.
shall be set aside for open space.  Open space allocation and design shall
conform to the design standards adopted in Section 17.40.015, above except
Large Single Retail Uses or Large Multiple Use Shopping Center, which shall
be governed by subsection S, below.



   M.   Operating and Maintenance Requirements for Planned Area
Development Common Facilities. In the event that certain land areas or
structures are provided within the P.A.D. for private recreational use or as
service facilities, the owner of such land and buildings shall establish an
arrangement to assure the city of a continued standard of maintenance. These
common areas may be placed under the ownership of one of the following,
depending which is more appropriate:



   1.   Dedicated to public where a community-wide use would be
anticipated;



   2.   Landlord control;



   3.   Landowners association, provided all of the following
conditions are met:



   a.   The landowners association must be established prior to any
sale,



   b.   Membership must be mandatory for each owner and any successive
buyer,



   c.   The open space restriction must be permanent or tied to a
long-term agreement (e.g. ninety-nine years),



   d.   The association must be responsible for liability insurance and
the maintenance of recreational, service, and other facilities as deemed
necessary by the city,



   e.   Landowners must pay their pro rata share of the cost and the
assessment levied by the association that can become a lien on the property
in accordance with Arizona Statutes,



   f.   The association must be required to adjust its assessment to
meet changing needs,



   g.   The association must be required to, at minimum, adjust its
assessment on an annual basis by a percentage not less than the previous
year's increase in the Consumer Price Index.



   N.   Building Height and Setbacks. In general, a building's setback
from property adjacent to the P.A.D. site shall approximate its height.



   O.   Landscaping. Landscaping and/or fencing shall be provided
according to a plan approved by the city and shall include a detailed
planting list with sizes indicated.



   P.   Utilities. All utilities, including electricity (except lines
exceeding thirteen KV capacity) and telephone, which are on the site of the
development property, including those on land which will be dedicated to
public use as part of the development, and those utilities lines which must
be extended to provide such utility services to the development property from
an end point outside the development property lines except those lines along
arterial or collector streets, shall be installed underground.



   Q.   Additional Standards. Development within a P.A.D. shall conform
to all conditions and standards agreed upon by the applicant and the city at
the time of P.A.D. approval.



   R.   Residential Design Standards for Planned Area Developments. 
Development within a P.A.D. shall conform to the standards adopted in Section
17.40.015, above.



   S.   Locational Criteria and Development Standards for Large Single
Retail Use and Large Multiple Use Shopping Center.



   a.   Location Criteria: Large Single Retail Use and Large Multiple
Use Shopping Centers shall only be located on property zoned as Planned Area
Development for such use in accordance with Chapter 17.40 of this Code. Any
proposal to expand an existing retail use, which subsequently brings the
total building coverage thresholds over that defined under Sections 17.12.771
and 17.12.772, shall also require conformance with all of the following
standards, for the entire site development. The City Council may approve
departure from these standards upon finding that such departure is warranted,
based upon consideration of mitigating circumstances, design innovation, or
other meritorious feature(s).



   i.   The building(s) or shopping center shall be located at the
intersection of two arterial roadways or have frontage on an arterial roadway
and be immediately adjacent to an Interstate highway. The City Council may
also consider arterial and collector roadway intersection locations on a
case-by-case basis; however, a comprehensive traffic impact analysis approved
by the City Engineer must show that the potential traffic impacts of the
proposed site development will be adequately mitigated before the City
Council will consider arterial and collector roadway intersection locations.



   ii.   A minimum distance of one hundred (100) feet, as measured on a
straight line, shall be required from the nearest property line of any parcel
currently developed, zoned or designated by the City’s General Plan for
residential use, to the exterior building wall of a Large Single Retail Use
or Large Multiple Use Shopping Center. The separation distance shall be
increased by a ratio of one foot for each additional one thousand (1,000)
square feet of building coverage area, whether within a single store or
multiple stores, over one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet.



   iii.   A minimum distance of five hundred (500) feet, as measured on
a straight line, shall be required from the nearest property line of any
parcel currently developed, zoned or designated by the City’s General Plan
for a private or public school use, to the exterior building wall of a Large
Single Retail Use or Large Multiple Use Shopping Centers center. The
separation distance shall be increased by a ratio of one foot for each
additional one thousand (1,000) square feet of building coverage area,
whether within a single store or multiple stores, over one hundred thousand
(100,000) square feet. A Large Single Retail Use building or Large Multiple
Use Shopping Center shall not be located across from or immediately adjacent
to any parcel currently developed, zoned or designated by the City’s
General Plan for a private or public school use.



   iv.   A Large Single Retail Use or Large Multiple Use Shopping
Center may be located within a mixed use Planned Area Development, but only
when said use has been expressly identified for such use as part of the
Planned Area Development zoning application and Planned Area Development
Guide and is in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.40 of this
Code. If such use has not been expressly identified as part of an approved
Planned Area Development, but is requested, a major change amendment to the
Planned Area Development is required in accordance with Section 17.68.330 of
this Code.



   b.   Site Development Standards: In addition to the site development
and landscaping standards found elsewhere in this Code, a Large Single Retail
Use building or Large Multiple Use Shopping Center shall also be subject to
conformance with the following additional standards. Council may approve
departure from these standards upon finding that such departure is warranted,
based upon consideration of mitigating circumstances, design innovation, or
other meritorious feature(s).



   i.   Major Site Plan review and approval by the Planning and Zoning
Commission is required.



   ii.   A thirty-foot wide landscape buffer is required along all
frontages, broken only by approved driveways. A sixty-foot wide landscape
buffer shall be provided along all property lines that abut any parcel
currently developed, zoned or designated by the City’s General Plan for
residential use. With the exception of increased setbacks required under
Section 17.40.020 S of this Code, B-4 (Community Business) minimum building
setbacks and maximum building heights shall be used.



   iii.   Minimum tree sizes shall be twenty- four inch (24") box with
a minimum height of eight feet and minimum caliper size of one and one-half
inches at ground level. Palm trees shall have a minimum fifteen foot trunk
height measured from the base of the trunk to the base of the fronds. Minimum
shrub and accent plant sizes shall be five gallon. Minimum groundcover plant
size shall be one gallon. Berming and boulders shall be used to create a
varied and enhanced topography. Landscape plans shall be prepared by a
registered landscape architect.



   iv.   Landscaped walkways within the parking lots are required to
reduce the impacts of parking areas and increase pedestrian accessibility.
Emphasis on landscaping must be placed at the driveway entrances. Landscaped
planters must be located along the walkways in front of the building.



   v.   Decorative masonry screen walls, minimum three feet in height,
are required to screen all parking areas. Columns and horizontal staggers are
required to reduce the linear appearance.



   vi.   Loading docks and building service areas must be oriented away
from streets and residential areas to mitigate visual and noise impacts.
Loading docks and building service areas must be screened from public view
with a combination of landscaping and decorative masonry screen walls.
Delivery and loading operations shall not be conducted between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any site that is adjacent to a residential zoning
district, unless adequate noise abatement and mitigation measures are taken.



   vii.   A Comprehensive Sign Plan shall be required as part of the
PAD. Lower profile detached signs and the consolidation of detached signs is
required.



   viii.   An outdoor lighting plan is required. The plan must show
that the requirements of the City’s Light Control Ordinance are met and how
the negative impacts of outdoor lighting on adjacent residential properties
or zones will be mitigated. Low pressure sodium lighting shall be
predominantly used when buildings are adjacent to residential properties or
zones.



   ix.   A Traffic Impact Analysis, prepared by a professional traffic
engineer and meeting the approval of the City Engineer, must be submitted.
Traffic impacts on public streets and recommended mitigation measures and
plans must be included in the analysis.



   x.   Primary entry drives shall be aligned with any point of access
to an arterial street that provides full turning movements, as approved by
the City Engineer. Said entry drives shall include a landscaped median to
separate entry/exiting movements.



   xi.   The site shall use elements that will enhance the pedestrian
scale and accessibility. Pedestrian plazas, including covered seating areas,
shade trees, bike racks, and trash receptacles, must be provided near the
store. Sidewalks in front of the stores must be at least ten feet wide. All
other sidewalks on the site shall be at least six feet wide.



   xii.   All outdoor sales must be conducted within areas specifically
designated and designed for such use. Products and services displayed
outdoors must be those that are customary, accessory, or incidental to those
sold and displayed in the primary business being conducted in the building.
Outdoor sales and displays must not interfere with pedestrian walkways, fire
lanes, vehicular circulation, parking areas, landscaping, or driveway
visibility.



   xiii.    The building’s exterior building materials and colors
used must add to the building’s sustainability, durability, character, and
aesthetic appearance. Predominate exterior materials must include split-face
masonry block and stucco. Stone or other accentuating features shall be
provided for additional character. Tilt-up concrete panels and smooth-faced
masonry block are acceptable only when used with prominent quantities of
split-face block and stone materials.  Prefabricated steel panels must not
be used for exterior building materials. Low reflective (50 percent or less)
building colors must be utilized on the main exterior walls.



   xiv.    Emphasis must be placed on providing well-defined highly
visible public entrances, covered walkways, and adding design elements that
will improve the scale of the building(s) and provide visual interest
consistent with the community’s identity, character, and scale. The
architecture of the building(s) shall demonstrate visual interest on all
exterior sides through the use of such techniques, without limitation, as
wall plane changes, color and material changes, pop-outs, reveal lines,
scoring, varied roof lines and slopes, recessed features, articulated
customer entrances, canopies, colonnades, and other elements, all of which
effectively integrate the building(s) mass with its surroundings, and bring
proportion to its horizontal and vertical dimensions.



   xv.   Roofs will be reviewed to ensure architectural variation and
reduction of scale. Parapets with three-dimensional cornice treatments or
similar architectural treatments, shall be used to conceal flat roofs and
rooftop equipment. Roofs and/or parapets must have at least two planes.



   xvi.    Steps must be taken to reduce the area dedicated for parking
between the front facade of the building(s) and the abutting street, while
still meeting City Code parking space requirements.  Emphasis shall be made
on presenting the architecture of the buildings as part of the streetscape.



   xvii.   Any area used for shopping cart containment as may be
provided adjacent to the building(s) shall be fully enclosed and screened by
a decorative masonry wall. An adequate number of durable, permanent cart
corrals shall be provided within parking areas.



   xviii.   Portable storage containers shall be prohibited on the site
of the development. All storage shall be contained within the principal
building(s), unless additional screened storage areas are approved as part of
the Planned Area Development application.



   xix.   All vending machines shall be kept within the building(s), or
if kept outside, be completely screened from the view of parking areas,
roadways, and neighboring properties by a decorative masonry wall.



   xx.   Overnight parking of recreational vehicles anywhere within the
site development shall be prohibited.



(Ord. 1397.17.37 § 6, 2011: Ord. 1397.17.29 § 1 (part), 2001: Ord.
1397.17.22 § 4 (part), 1999: Ord. 1397.17.17 § 5, 1997: Ord. 1397.15.11 §
2, 1997; Ord. 1178 § 5.13.2, 1987)



17.40.030  Property in floodplains to comply with certain requirements.



   Any property located in a P.A.D. Zone and any floodplain as designated
in Chapter 15.40, must comply with Chapter 15.40 requirements.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.13.3, 1987)



Chapter 17.44
NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICT



Sections:



17.44.010   Purpose of provisions.



17.44.020   Process to initiate plan.



17.44.030   Preparation of plan—Requirements.



17.44.040   Process to establish.



17.44.010  Purpose of provisions.



   The NC District is intended as a means for property owners to initiate
and to implement programs for the conservation or revitalization of their
residential or commercial neighborhoods. The district takes affect through
the adoption of a precise plan and set of regulations, called the
neighborhood conservation plan, specifically intended, in each case, to
facilitate maintenance and upgrading of the neighborhood, to encourage
development of vacant or under-used lots, to minimize the adverse effects of
incompatible mixtures of uses, and to encourage residents and owners to take
positive steps for the improvement of their neighborhood area.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.14.1, 1987)



17.44.020  Process to initiate plan.



   A.   In General. In any NC District the regulations governing the
uses of land and structures, the height of buildings and requirements for lot
area, width and yards, shall be as set forth in the underlying zoning
district except as may be expressly modified by the neighborhood conservation
plan for that district. There will be a separate and specific neighborhood
conservation plan for each NC District.



   B.   Initiation of an NC District.  A petition requesting
establishment of the district, bearing the signatures of the owners of not
less than thirty percent of the property within the area proposed to be
included in the NC District, may be submitted to the planning and zoning
commission. The petition shall set forth the preliminary boundaries of the
area proposed to be included.



   C.   Public Hearing. Upon initiation of proceedings as set forth in
subsection B above, the planning and zoning commission shall call a public
hearing for the purpose of explaining the purposes and operation of an NC
District and to determine the degree of interest in the establishment of such
district, as well as to receive any suggestions regarding the content of the
neighborhood conservation plan or the boundaries of the NC District.



   D.   Planning and Zoning Commission Recommendation. Following the
public hearing, the planning and zoning commission may recommend to the city
council that the planning department, or the neighborhood under the auspices
of the planning department, proceed with the preparation of a neighborhood
conservation plan as set forth herein, and the planning and zoning commission
shall recommend to the city council the boundaries of the proposed district;
or it may recommend termination of the proceedings if it determines that the
plan will not serve the purposes for which the district is intended.



   E.   The city council may, without further hearing, concur in the
recommendation of the planning and zoning commission or make such
recommendations that they may desire and so instruct the planning department.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.14.3, 1987)



17.44.030  Preparation of plan—Requirements.



   When so instructed by the city council, the planning department, or the
neighborhood under the auspices of the planning department, shall prepare a
neighborhood conservation plan which shall consist of a detailed plan of land
uses and related regulations in a substantial conformity with the Casa Grande
general plan and any other prevailing, adopted plans. A neighborhood
conservation plan shall:



   A.   Indicate proposed changes, if any, to permitted land uses
within the NC District;



   B.   Contain a schedule of proposed changes, if any, to density,
coverage, height, and other requirements applicable to buildings or
structures;



   C.   Contain specific regulations for the remodeling of existing
buildings and structures, application of performance standards and
application of site plan review procedures;



   D.   Contain proposals for social services, if any, to be furnished
in the area and plans for capital improvements, if any, by all public
agencies and utilities in the area.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.14.3, 1987)



17.44.040  Process to establish.



   Upon completion of the neighborhood conservation plan, the planning
department shall notify the planning and zoning commission which shall:



   A.   Set a date for a public hearing on the plan and establishment
of the district as provided for in Articles VIII. and IX. of Chapter 17.68;



   B.   Reproduce, and make available, the plan in the proposed
district at least thirty days prior to the established public hearing date.



(Ord. 1178 § 5.14.4, 1987)



Chapter 17.48
PLANNED AREA DEVELOPMENT (P.A.D.)—RECREATIONAL VEHICLE  (RV) PARK OVERLAY
ZONING DISTRICT



Sections:



17.48.010   Purpose of provisions.



17.48.020   Recreational vehicle park overlay zoning district as a planned
area development.



17.48.030   Minimum area required to establish.



17.48.040   Principally permitted uses.



17.48.050   Permitted accessory uses.



17.48.060   Recreational vehicle park overlay zoning district development
and design regulations.



17.48.070   Considerations and guidelines in recreational vehicle park
development.



17.48.010  Purpose of provisions.



   The purpose of the recreational vehicle park overlay zoning district is
to accommodate recreational vehicle park development at higher residential
densities with sufficient open space provided for park users. The planned
area development—recreational vehicle park overlay zoning district is
designed to allow for an economical use of land while creating an attractive,
functional and safe environment that is compatible with surrounding
properties. Ideal locations will feature accessibility from an arterial
street, available utilities, and close proximity to services which will meet
the needs of anticipated users.



(Ord. 1397.17.17 § 6 (part), 1997)



17.48.020  Recreational vehicle park overlay zoning district as a planned
area development.



   Due to the residential/quasi-commercial nature of a recreational
vehicle park, all proposed recreational vehicle parks shall be processed and
zoned as a planned area development (P.A.D.), pursuant to Chapter 17.40
(P.A.D. Zone), Chapter 17.68, Article V (Procedures for P.A.D. approval), and
the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 1397.17.17 § 6 (part), 1997)



17.48.030  Minimum area required to establish.



   No recreational vehicle park overlay zoning district may be established
unless the intended land area contains at least ten acres of land (gross).



(Ord. 1397.17.17 § 6 (part), 1997)



17.48.040  Principally permitted uses.



   Principally permitted uses in the recreational vehicle park overlay
zoning district are as follows



   A.   Recreational vehicles, including park models.



(Ord. 1397.17.17 § 6 (part), 1997)



17.48.050  Permitted accessory uses.



   A.   Management offices and living quarters;



   B.   Recreation facilities, such as swimming pools, activity
buildings, tennis courts and similar uses;



   C.   Service buildings, including bathing, laundry, storage and
utility,



   D.   Security guard house(s) at the park entrance(s);



   E.   Retail and service uses intended primarily for park users;



   F.   Signs, as provided in Section 17.48.060(Q);



   G.   Recreational vehicle storage and storage buildings, but not the
outdoor storage of materials, household goods or appliances. Recreational
vehicle storage on any individual lot/space is limited to one, one hundred
twenty square foot building per lot/space.



(Ord. 1397.17.17 § 6 (part), 1997)



17.48.060  Recreational vehicle park overlay zoning district development and
design regulations.



   A.   Minimum Lot (Space) Area: The minimum area for a recreational
vehicle park lot (space) shall be one thousand five hundred square feet.



   B.   Setbacks: The setbacks within the recreational vehicle park
overlay zoning district are as follows:



   1.   Perimeter: All recreational vehicle and accessory buildings and
uses (except detached signs) shall be set back from the perimeter screening
wall of the recreational vehicle park a distance not less than ten feet.



   2.   Lot/Space Setbacks: All recreational vehicles (and any detached
individual storage building) shall maintain the following lot/space setbacks
(measurements are taken from the leading edge of any carport, patio cover,
awning or other extension):



      Front                  10'



      Side                  5'



      Rear                  5'



      Corner side               10'



      Perimeter screening wall         10'



      Distance between recreational vehicles   10'



NOTE: No detached individual storage buildings are allowed within the front
or corner side yard areas.



   3.   Distance Between Buildings and Recreational Vehicles: The
minimum distance between a recreational vehicle unit and any building (other
than a detached individual storage building) shall be ten feet. The minimum
distance between a recreational vehicle unit and an individual detached
storage building is five feet.



   C.   Height: The maximum height of any building shall be thirty
feet. However, if a structure is located at least two hundred feet from any
property line, it may be increased to forty-five feet.



   D.   Landscaping: All landscaping within a recreational vehicle park
is to conform with the city landscaping code (Chapter 17.52, Article VI.
Recreational vehicle parks shall be considered for the purposes of
landscaping as multiple-family residential use. In addition, the plant
quantities are as follows:



   1.   Lot/space: one tree and three shrubs are to be placed on each
lot.



   2.   Frontage: two trees and five shrubs for each twenty feet of
street frontage area, and vegetative ground cover occupying a minimum of
sixty percent of the street frontage landscaped area. The street frontage
area includes any unused right-of-way, plus the twenty feet screening wall
setback area.



   3.   Screening: All recreational vehicle parks that have a required
screening wall placed adjacent to any residential development shall install,
within the perimeter screening wall setback, one tree for every thirty linear
feet of wall.



   4.   Interior: In addition to individual lot landscaping, all areas
not used for parking, drive, lot or building are to be landscaped, with a
plant ratio of one tree and three shrubs for each two hundred fifty square
feet of area. This shall also apply to any interior retention or open space
areas.



   E.   Open Space: A minimum of seven percent of the site, or an area
equal to one hundred fifty square feet per recreational vehicle lot/space,
whichever is greater, is to be provided as open space or recreation area
within the park. Parking, drive, building and lot setback areas shall not be
considered as part of the open space area. Open space shall be either private
or public.



   F.   Screening: A six feet high, decorative screening wall is to be
placed around the perimeter of the recreational vehicle park, except at any
driveway or pedestrian access points. The screening wall is to be placed no
closer than twenty feet from any property line that runs adjacent or parallel
to any existing or planned public street, and is to be placed along the
property line that does not front or parallel any nonpublic street.



   G.   Parking: Parking within a recreational vehicle park is to be
provided with the following ratios:



   1.   On-lot (space): At least one parking space (on a dust-free
surface) is to be provided on each lot (space).



   2.   Guest: Paved parking (off any interior drives) is to be
provided within the recreational vehicle park at the ratio of one space for
every five lots (spaces).



   H.   Retention: All recreational vehicle parks are to comply with
city requirements for on-site retention. Developers of recreational vehicle
parks are encouraged to use the street frontage areas for retention.



   I.   Interior Drive Standards: All interior drives are to be
private, are to be paved to city standards, and have a minimum width of
twenty-five feet and a minimum turning radius of fifty feet. All cul-de-sacs
shall provide for adequate turnaround for emergency vehicles, and in no case
shall a cul-de-sac exceed six hundred feet in length.



   J.   Utilities: All utility lines, except electrical power lines
greater than thirteen KV capacity, shall be installed underground.



   K.   Access: All access to individual lots (spaces) shall be from
the interior of the park only.



   L.   Fire Hydrants: Locations and capacities of fire hydrants, mains
and other facilities shall be determined by the fire department.



   M.   Trash Enclosures: All trash enclosures are to meet city
standards, and are to be colored and treated to complement the development.



   N.   Hitches: All hitches on any fifth-wheel, travel trailer or
similarly-styled recreational vehicles shall be shrouded by a covered cloth,
canvas or similar material to screen, conceal and protect the hitch when such
units are located within the park.



   O.   Laundry: Outdoor laundry drying areas are prohibited.



   P.   Furniture: There shall be no exposed outdoor storage of
furniture (except lawn furniture), household goods, tools, equipment, or
building materials or supplies.



   Q.   Signage:



   1.   Detached signs shall be limited to one per public street
frontage, and shall be a low- profile, monument-style sign, no greater than
eight feet in height and thirty-two square feet in size. The supporting
structure shall be constructed and colored to complement the development.
Signs mounted to the required screening wall shall be considered detached
signs, with the size limit of thirty-two square feet.



   2.   Attached signs shall be allowed to be placed on interior
buildings (such as guard and office buildings) only, and are limited to a
total of two such signs per frontage, with no single attached sign exceeding
twenty square feet in size.



   3.   Address signs for each individual lot/ space is required, with
one address sign per lot/space and limited to one square foot in size per
sign. Said address sign is to be placed so as to be visible from the adjacent
interior drive and may be internally illuminated.



   4.   Directional and similar type signs shall conform to the city's
sign code.



   R.   Mobile Homes: Placement of mobile or manufactured homes on
recreational vehicle lots (spaces) is prohibited.



   S.   Maintenance: Provisions for the private maintenance of
recreational vehicles, recreational vehicle lots (spaces), buildings,
screening walls, interior streets, signage and any common/open space areas to
be provided.



   T.   Miscellaneous: Development of a recreational vehicle park shall
conform to all applicable city requirements for grading, drainage, retention,
outdoor lighting, and the installation of street-lights and street signs
(where deemed necessary).



(Ord. 1397.17.17 § 6 (part), 1997)



17.48.070  Considerations and guidelines in recreational vehicle park
development.



   The following is a list of general guidelines and other criteria which
both the applicant and the city should consider in developing and approving a
recreational vehicle park overlay zoning district. Additional detail is
listed under Policy 1.1.11 of the city of Casa Grande General Plan Update:



   A.   Impacts on the city's infrastructure and services (sewer,
police and fire, etc.);



   B.   Ratio of recreational vehicles to conventional dwellings
throughout the city;



   C.   Economic impacts;



   D.   Environmental, aesthetic and view-shed considerations in site
design;



   E.   Traffic impacts, interior circulation;



   F.   Drainage and retention;



   G.   Building aesthetics and arrangement;



   H.   Layout of the park in consideration of emergency and service
accessibility;



   I.   Screening of mechanical and utility equipment;



   J.   Creation, maintenance, or interruption of neighborhood patterns;



   K.   Impact on neighboring development patterns;



   L.   Impact and relationship to pedestrian and bicycle routes;



   M.   Safety and security;



   N.   Developer responsibilities;



   O.   Arrangement of open space;



   P.   Entry features;



   Q.   Buffers to adjacent developments necessitated by layout,
traffic or arrangement of buildings or recreational facilities;



   R.   Lighting;



   S.   Handicapped accessibility;



   T.   Signage;



   U.   Development agreements.



(Ord. 1397.17.17 § 6 (part), 1997)



Chapter 17.52
GENERAL BUILDING AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS



Sections:



17.52.010   Purpose of provisions.




Article I. Use of Lands, Buildings and Structures




17.52.020   Conformity with certain use designations required.



17.52.030   Conformity with height limitations required.



17.52.040   Conformity with yard and setback regulations required.



17.52.050   Single yard not to fulfill requirement for multiple sites.



17.52.060   Recreational vehicle parking restricted.



17.52.070   Dwelling unit restrictions.




Article II. Accessory Buildings, Uses and Equipment




17.52.080   General considerations—Restrictions.



17.52.090   Covered patios and walkways.



17.52.100   Detached accessory structures, uses and equipment.



17.52.110   Swimming pools.



17.52.120   Miscellaneous structures.




Article III. Fences and walls




17.52.130   Permit required.



17.52.140   Location requirements.



17.52.150   Construction, maintenance and height requirements.



17.52.160   Residential fences.



17.52.170   Business and industrial district fences.



17.52.180   Special purpose fences.



17.52.190   Fences in all districts.



17.52.200   Outdoor storage areas.




Article III. Signs




17.52.210   Signs to comply with provisions.




Article IV. Setback and Height Encroachments, Limitations and Exceptions




17.52.220   Require ments in any yards.



17.52.230   Requirements in side and rear yards.



17.52.240   Reserved



17.52.250   Height requirements.



17.52.260   Side and rear setbacks—Zero lot line provision.




Article V. Screening




17.52.270   Requirements.




Article VI. Landscaping Requirements




17.52.280   Purpose and intent.



17.52.290   Definitions.



17.52.300   Scope.



17.52.310   Compliance.



17.52.320   Variances.



17.52.330   Enforcement and notice of violations.



17.52.340   Penalties.



17.52.350   Landscape inspections.



17.52.360   Required landscaped maintenance.



17.52.370   Landscape plan.



17.52.380   Preliminary landscape plan.



17.52.390   Final landscape plan.



17.52.400   Installation of landscape improvements prerequisite to
certificate of occupancy; bond to secure installation.



17.52.410   Low water use plants, minimum size of trees, shrubs, etc. and
substitution of cover for shrubs.



17.52.420   Natural topping of landscaped areas.



17.52.430   Landscaped areas along street frontage.



17.52.440   Irrigation standards.



17.52.450   Obstructions to visibility.



17.52.460   Protection of landscaped areas from vehicular damage.



17.52.470   Use of landscaped areas from other vehicular damage.



17.52.480   On-site landscaped areas.



17.52.490   Street right-of-way landscaping.



17.52.500   Parking area landscaping.



17.52.510   Street frontages.



17.52.520   Multiple-family residential developments.



17.52.530   Industrial developments.



17.52.540   Commercial and other developments.



17.52.550   Street frontage landscaping.



17.52.560   Cumulative totals.



Article VII. Medical Marijuana Uses



17.52.570   Application to this article.



17.52.580   Days and hours of operation.



17.52.590   Development standards.



17.52.600   Distance requirements.



17.52.610   Medical Marijuana Dispensary Overlay Zone.



17.52.620   Prohibitions.



17.52.010  Purpose of provisions.



   The purpose of this chapter is to establish general development
standards. These standards are intended and designed to assure compatibility
of uses; to prevent urban blight, deterioration and decay; and to enhance the
health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the community.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.1, 1987)



Article I. Use of Lands, Buildings and Structures



17.52.020  Conformity with certain use designations required.



   No building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered, or
enlarged for a use, nor shall any existing building, structure or part
thereof, or land, be used for a purpose or in a manner that is not in
conformity with the uses listed as permitted uses for the zone in which such
buildings, structure, or land is situated subject to the provisions of
Chapters 17.20 through 17.48 of this title, except that any land, building or
structure may be erected or used for a purpose listed as a conditional use in
such zone provided that a conditional use permit therefore is secured in
accordance with the provisions of Article II. of Chapter 17.68.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.2.1, 1987)



17.52.030  Conformity with height limitations required.



   No building, or part thereof, or structure shall be erected,
reconstructed, or structurally altered to exceed in height the limit herein
designated for the district in which such building is located, except as is
specified in Chapter 17.54 of this code.



(Ord. 1397.16.2 §§ 1 (part), 2 (part), 1994)



17.52.040  Conformity with yard and setback regulations required.



   No building or part thereof, or structure shall be erected, nor shall
any existing building be altered, enlarged, or rebuilt or moved into any
zone, nor shall any open space be encroached upon or reduced in any manner,
except in conformity to the yard and setback regulations designed for the
zone in which such building or open space is located, except as specified in
Chapter 17.54 of this code.



(Ord. 1397.16.2 §§ 1 (part), 2 (part), 1994)



17.52.050  Single yard not to fulfill requirement for multiple sites.



   No yard provided around any building for the purpose of complying with
provisions of this title shall be considered providing a yard for any other
building, and no yard for one building site shall be considered as providing
a yard for a building on any other building site.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.2.4, 1987)



17.52.060  Recreational vehicle parking restricted.



   No person shall park or occupy any recreational vehicle or mobile home
on the premises of any occupied dwelling or on any lot which is not a part of
the premises of any occupied dwelling, either of which is situated outside of
any approved mobile home park or mobile home subdivision except that: the
parking of only one unoccupied recreational vehicle in any accessory private
garage, or in a rear yard in any district is permitted, providing no living
quarters shall be maintained or any business practiced in the recreational
vehicle while such recreational vehicle is so parked or stored; and except
that, in the event of hardship, temporary use permits may be granted for
occupying such recreational vehicle or mobile home, under procedures
established in Article IV of Chapter 17.68.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.2.5, 1987)



17.52.070  Dwelling unit restrictions.



   No cellar, garage, tent, basement with unfinished structure above, or
accessory building or any mobile home or recreational vehicle outside of an
approved mobile home or recreational vehicle development shall at any time be
used as a dwelling unit. The basement portion of a finished home may be used
for normal living, eating, and sleeping purposes; provided it is properly
damp-proofed and has suitable fire protection and exits.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.3, 1987)



Article II. Accessory Buildings, Uses and Equipment



17.52.080  General considerations—Restrictions.



   A.   An accessory building shall be considered an integral part of
the principal building if it is connected to the principal building by a
roof, except as provided in Section 17.52.090.



   B.   Accessory buildings, uses, or equipment shall not be stored or
constructed between the front lot line and front building setback line except
as allowed in Section 17.52.120.



   C.   Accessory buildings and garages in residential districts shall
not exceed the height of the principal structure, except that accessory
buildings and garages which exceed the aforesaid maximum may be allowed with
a conditional use permit within the Rural Ranch, Suburban Homestead, and
Urban Ranch zoning districts, and shall not be located within a utility
easement.



   D.   No accessory building or garage for single-family homes shall
occupy more than twenty-five percent of a rear yard nor exceed six hundred
seventy-five square feet of floor area, except that an accessory building or
garage over six hundred seventy-five square feet of floor area may be allowed
with a conditional use permit.



   E.   No permit shall be issued for the construction of more than one
accessory, detached, private garage structure for each dwelling.



   F.   No accessory building or use shall be constructed or developed
on a lot prior to the time of construction of the principal building to which
it is accessory, except by a conditional use permit.



   G.   Accessory buildings in any business or industrial district may
be located only to the rear of the principal building.



   H.   No accessory building in any business or industrial district
shall exceed the height of the principal building except by conditional use
permit.



(Ord. 1397.17.36 §§ 14 and 15, 2009; Ord. 1178 §§ 6.4.1 through 6.4.8,
1987)



17.52.090  Covered patios and walkways.



   Covered patios, or roofs attached to the main building or connecting
the main building with a detached accessory building, may extend into a
required rear or side yard; provided that portions of such structures
extending into that yard:



   A.   Shall not exceed twelve feet in height or project closer than
five feet to a side or rear lot line;



   B.   Shall be entirely open on at least three sides except for
necessary supporting columns; except that a roof connecting a main building
and an accessory building shall be open on two sides. Such covered patio or
covered walkway shall be a maximum width equal to ten percent of the
connecting side of the accessory building. In cases where a connecting wall
is less than forty feet wide, however, a building permit applicant shall be
allowed a maximum covered patio (or covered walkway) width of four feet.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.4.9, 1987)



17.52.100  Detached accessory structures, uses and equipment.



   Detached accessory structures, uses and equipment in residential zone
districts shall be subject to the following development standards:



   A.   Accessory structures, uses and equipment shall comply with the
front and corner side yard setback required for the principal structure.



   B.   Accessory structures, uses and equipment, no greater than six
feet in height, and which are screened from public view by an opaque wall or
fence, shall have a zero setback from the rear and side property lines.



   C.   Accessory structures, uses and equipment, greater than six but
no greater than twelve feet in height, shall have a three-foot setback from
the rear or side property lines. Except that, in the case where the rear or
side property line is adjacent to a dedicated public alley, the setback may
be reduced to zero.



   D.   Accessory structures, uses and equipment greater than twelve
feet in height, shall comply with the rear and side yard setbacks required
for the principal structure.



   E.   All setbacks for accessory structures, uses and equipment shall
be measured from the nearest point of use, equipment or exterior wall of the
structure to the property line.



   F.   Projections beyond the exterior wall, such as eves, overhangs,
cornices, and similar architectural features, may encroach into the required
setbacks by up to eighteen inches, but in no case shall extend beyond the
property line.



   G.   The total building footprint area of all accessory structures
located in the required rear yard shall be limited to no more than
twenty-five percent of the area.



(Ord. 1397.17.39 § 1, 2012; Ord. 1178 § 6.4.10, 1987)



17.52.110  Swimming pools.



   All private and semi-private swimming pools shall meet the following
standards:



   A.   The pool and all structures housing appurtenances thereto shall
be not less than five feet from the nearest property line except, however,
that such pool or structure shall not be located between the front property
line and the front building setback line;



   B.   All swimming pools shall be enclosed by a solid wall or fence,
or chain link fence, or wrought iron fence having vertical bars of at least
one-half inch cross-section spaced no further apart than four inches between
bars. Such walls or fence shall be five feet in height; shall be constructed
so as to make the swimming pool inaccessible to small children; shall not
have more than four inches between the bottom of the wall or fence and the
underlying ground; and all gates shall be self-closing, and shall have
self-latching latches which shall be not less than four and one-half feet
above the ground, or are otherwise inaccessible from the outside to small
children;



   C.   The pool or mechanical equipment shall be located so as to
minimize the noise and lessen the nuisance to nearby occupants of apartments
and houses;



   D.   All swimming pool plans and safety devices proposed to be built
or erected in conjunction with swimming pools shall be first presented to the
planning department for approval.



(Ord. 1397.17.13 § 2, 1995; Ord. 1178 § 6.4.11, 1987)



17.52.120  Miscellaneous structures.



   Porches, steps, architectural features such as eaves, awnings, and
chimneys, and balconies or stairways, wing walls or bay windows, may not
project within three feet of the property line.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.4.12, 1987)



Article III. Fences and Walls



17.52.130  Permit required.



   No persons, firm or corporation, except on a farm and related to
farming, shall hereafter construct, or cause to be constructed or erected
within the city any fence without first making an application for and
securing a building permit.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.5.1, 1987)



17.52.140  Location requirements.



   All fences shall be located entirely upon the private property of the
persons, firms or corporation constructing, or causing the construction, of
such fence unless the owner  of the property adjoining agrees, in writing,
that such fence may be erected on the division line of the respective
properties.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.5.2, 1987)



17.52.150  Construction, maintenance and height requirements.



   A.   Construction and Maintenance.



   1.   Every fence shall be constructed in a substantial, workmanlike
manner and of substantial material reasonably suited for the purpose for
which the fence is proposed to be used. Every fence shall be maintained in a
condition of reasonable repair and shall not be allowed to become and remain
in a condition of disrepair, damage, or unsightliness, or constitute a
nuisance, public or private. Any such fence which is, or has become,
dangerous to the public safety, health or welfare, or has become unsightly
through improper maintenance or neglect is a public nuisance and the zoning
administrator shall commence proper proceedings for the abatement thereof.



   2.   Link or wire fences, wherever permitted, shall be constructed
in such a manner that no barbed ends shall be at the top, except in
industrial districts and shall be constructed of at least 11 gauge wire or
its comparable.



   3.   Electrical or barbed wire fences shall be prohibited, except in
B-4, I-1 or I-2 districts.



   B.   Measuring Fence Height. The height of any fence shall be
calculated to the uppermost points as follows:



   1.   In required yards abutting a street, the height of the fence
shall be the total effective height measured from the finished grade on the
side nearest the street;



   2.   In other required yards, the height of the fence shall be the
total effective height above the finished grade measured on the side nearest
the abutting property;



   3.   On property lines, the height may be measured from the finished
grade of either side when the abutting property owners are in joint
agreements, with the agreement submitted in writing.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.5.3, 1987)



17.52.160  Residential fences.



   In all parts of the city zoned residential, no fence or wall shall be
erected or maintained more than six feet in height and also:



   A.   No fence or wall shall be allowed in any required residential
front yard which has any supporting member measuring more than thirty-six
inches in height;



   B.   Fences, walls, or hedges which are erected in any side yard and
which run parallel or approximately parallel to the front line of a building
or mobile home shall be set back from the front line of the building or
mobile home a minimum of five feet;



   C.   On corner lots in all districts, no fence or planting in excess
of thirty inches above the street center line grade shall be permitted within
a triangular area defined as follows: beginning at the intersection of the
projected curbing lines of two intersecting streets, thence forty feet along
one curb line, thence diagonally to a point forty feet from the point of
beginning on the other curb lines, then to the point of beginning, and at the
intersection of each driveway or alley with a street, a triangular area where
corners are defined by two points on the right-of-way line, fifteen feet on
each side of the centerline of the driveway or alley and a point on the
centerline ten feet outside right-of-way;



   D.   In those instances where a fence is erected as an enclosure
which restricts access from the front to the rear yard, a gate, identifiable
collapsible section of fence, or other such means of recognizable ingress
shall be installed, shall remain unobstructed and shall be a minimum of three
feet in width. The location of such ingress points shall be positioned at any
point paralleling the front lot line between the side lot property line and
the principal structure;



   E.   In corner side yards, fences up to six feet in height may be
permitted; provided, that no fence may be built in a corner side yard that is
adjacent to a neighboring front yard.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.5.4, 1987)



17.52.170  Business and industrial district fences.



   Fences in all business and industrial districts shall not exceed ten
feet in height except that boundary-line fences abutting residential
districts shall not be greater than six feet in height. No fence or planting
in excess of thirty inches above the street centerline grade shall be
permitted within a triangular area defined as follows: beginning at the
intersection of the projected curbing lines of two intersecting streets,
thence forty feet along one curb line, thence diagonally to a point forty
feet from the point of beginning on the other curb lines, then to the point
of beginning, and at the intersection of each driveway or alley with a
street, a triangular area where corners are defined by two points on the
right-of-way line, fifteen feet on each side of the centerline of the
driveway or alley and a point on the centerline ten feet outside right-of-way.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.5.5, 1987)



17.52.180  Special purpose fences.



   Fences for special purposes and fences differing in construction,
height or length may be permitted in any district by issuance of conditional
use permit approved by the planning and zoning commission. Findings shall be
made that the fence is necessary to protect, buffer or improve the premises
for which the premises for which the fence is intended and will not
detrimentally effect adjacent property.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.5.6, 1987)



17.52.190  Fences in all districts.



   Any fence constructed so as to have only one elevation “finished,”
which shall be defined as not having its supporting members significantly
visible, shall be erected such that the finished elevation of the fence is
exposed to the adjacent property.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.5.7, 1987)



17.52.200  Outdoor storage areas.



   A.   All utility substations, wells, storage facilities, or other
utilities shall be screened from view by a wall or landscape screen.



   B.   All storage for commercial operations shall be conducted within
a completely enclosed building or within an area completely enclosed, except
for access points, by a wall at least six feet in height.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.5.8, 1987)



Article III. Signs



17.52.210  Signs to comply with provisions.



   Signs, where permitted by this title, shall be designed, constructed,
reconstructed, repaired, removed, located and displayed as specified in
Ordinance 583 of the city of Casa Grande, adopted April 19, 1976 as the sign
code of the city and on file in theoffice of the city clerk.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.6, 1987)



Article IV. Setback and Height Encroachments, Limitations and Exceptions



17.52.220  Requirements in any yards.



   Requirements in any yards shall apply to:



   A.   Posts, off-street;



   B.   Open parking spaces;



   C.   Sills;



   D.   Pilasters;



   E.   Lintels;



   F.   Cornices;



   G.   Eaves;



   H.   Gutters;



   I.   Awnings;



   J.   Open terraces;



   K.   Service-station pump islands;



   L.   Open canopies;



   M.   Steps;



   N.   Flag poles;



   O.   Ornamental features;



   P.   Open Fire Escapes;



   Q.   Sidewalks; and



   R.   Fences, except as hereinafter amended;



   S.   Also, terraces, steps, exposed ramps (wheelchair), uncovered
porches, stoops or similar features; provided, they do not extend above the
height of the ground-floor level of the principal structure or to a distance
of less than three feet from any lot line nor less than one foot from any
existing or proposed access drive. Also, yard lights and nameplate signs in
residential districts; trees; shrubs; plants; floodlights or other sources of
light-illumination, authorized lights or light standards for illuminating
parking areas, loading areas or yards for safety and security reasons;
provided, the direct source of light is not visible from the public
right-of-way or adjacent, residential property.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.7.1, 1987)



17.52.230  Requirements in side and rear yards.



   A.   Balconies eight feet above grade may extend into the yards to
within five feet of a lot line; provided, the balconies do not extend over
nonresidential driveways.



   B.   Recreational equipment, picnic tables and apparatus needed for
the operation of active and passive solar-energy systems.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.7.2, 1987)



17.52.240  Reserved



17.52.250  Height requirements.



   A.   Height limitations shall not apply to:



   1.   Church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes;



   2.   Monuments;



   3.   Chimneys and smokestacks;



   4.   Flag poles;



   5.   Parapet walls extending no more than four feet above the
limiting height of the building except as hereinafter provided; and



   6.   Solar-energy collectors and equipment used for the mounting or
operation of such collectors.



   B.   Places of public assembly in churches, schools and other
permitted public and semi-public buildings may exceed height limitations
otherwise established by this title; provided, that these are located on the
ground floor of such buildings and provided that for each one foot by which
the height of such buildings exceed the maximum height otherwise permitted in
the zone, its side and rear yards shall be increased in width or depth by an
additional foot over the side and rear yards required for the highest
building otherwise permitted in the zone.



   C.   Elevator and stair penthouses, water tanks, monitors and
scenery lofts are exempt from height limitations otherwise established in
this title; provided, that no linear dimension of any such structure exceed
fifty percent of the corresponding street frontage line.



   D.   Towers and monuments, cooling towers, gas holders or other
structures, where the manufacturing process requires a greater height and
grain elevators and silos are exempt from this title; provided, that any
structure above the height otherwise permitted in the zone shall occupy no
more than twenty-five percent of the area of the lot and shall be at least
twenty-five feet from every lot line.



(Ord. 1397.17.14 § VIII, 1996; Ord. 1178 § 6.7.4, 1987)



17.52.260  Side and rear setbacks—Zero lot line provision.



   Subject to the regulations contained in the Uniform Building Code and
other applicable regulations, buildings may be excluded from side and rear
setback requirements provided party walls are used and if the adjacent
buildings are constructed as an integral unit. This primarily pertains to
townhomes and condominium structures.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.7.5, 1987)



Article V. Screening



17.52.270  Requirements.



   All multi-family and mobile home developments' principal and accessory
uses (except signs) which are situated on a parcel which abuts a
single-family residential zone and all business and industrial developments'
principal and accessory uses (except signs) which are situated on a parcel
which abuts a residential zone shall be screened from such a zone by an
approved wall or fence not less than six feet in height above the level of
the adjacent property at the zone boundary. Walls or fences of lesser heights
or planting screens may be permitted by the city if there is a finding that
nature or extent of the use being screened is such that a lesser degree of
screening will adequately promote the use and enjoyment of the properties
within the adjacent residential zone, or there is a finding that a screening
of the type required by this title would interfere with the provision of
adequate amounts of light and air to same properties. All required screening
devices shall be designed so that they are architecturally harmonious with
the principal structures on the site and they shall be properly maintained so
as not to become unsightly, hazardous or less opaque than when originally
constructed.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.8, 1987)



Article VI. Landscaping Requirements



17.52.280  Purpose and intent.



   The purpose of this section is to provide standards and requirements
for the installation of landscaping and screening walls for all new and
expanded development within the city in order to promote the general welfare
of the community; to effectuate attractive and logical development; to aid in
the enhancement of property values; to create an attractive appearance along
city streets; to complement the visual effect of buildings; to provide
appropriate buffers between incompatible land uses and protection from
intense activities; and to aid in conserving water by encouraging the use of
varieties of plants, trees and shrubs indigenous to arid regions which are
characterized by low-water consumption. The standards and regulations of this
section shall be held to be the minimum requirements necessary for the
promotion of the foregoing objectives of this section. In those instances
where the minimum standards and requirements am not sufficient to achieve the
purpose and objectives of the section the director may impose such other
reasonable requirements as may be deemed appropriate.



(Ord. 1397.17.1 (pan), 1991; Res. 1976 § 2 (part), 1991)



17.52.290  Definitions.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   A.   “Director” means the planning director or his designated
representative.



   B.   “Landscape materials” means any materials used for the
purpose of landscape improvement which may include, but shall not be limited
to, the following: trees, shrubs, groundcovers, tufts, vines, walkways,
berms, stone groundcover materials, sculptures, foundations, irrigation
equipment, street furniture, outdoor lighting, fences and walls.



   C.   “Landscape plan” means a graphic representation of the
development site indicating the location of all existing and proposed
landscape improvements to be present on the site at the completion of the
construction of the project. Such landscaping plan shall consist of
preliminary and final plans as set forth herein.



   D.   “Landscaping” means an exterior improvement of property in
accordance with an approved landscape plan and utilizing approved landscape
materials.



   E.   “Screening wall” means a solid wall designed and
constructed so as to conceal areas used for refuse, mechanical equipment,
parking, and service and loading bays from street and public view, and to
separate potential incompatible land uses.



(Ord. 1397.17.1 (part), 1991; Res. 1976 § 2 (part), 1991)



17.52.300  Scope.



   The provisions of this section shall apply to all development or
construction, all building remodeling, alterations, additions, or expansions,
and to all changes of occupancy in the use or development of land which
requires the approval of a major site plan or subdivision plat by the city.
Agricultural uses and single-family and two-family residences and their
accessories shall be exempt from the requirements of this section.



(Ord. 1397.17.1 (part), 1991; Res. 1976 § 2 (part), 1991)



17.52.310  Compliance.



   For all development projects included in Section 17.52.300 preliminary
and final landscape plans shall be prepared in accordance with the standards
and requirements set forth in this section, and shall be sub-mired and
approved in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section.



(Ord. 1397.17.1 (part), 1991; Res. 1976 § 2 (part), 1991)



17.52.320  Variances.



    Where there exists extraordinary conditions of topography, land
ownership, site boundaries and dimensions, adjacent development
characteristics or other circumstances not provided for in this section, the
planning and zoning commission may modify or vary the strict provisions of
this section in such a manner and to such an extent as is deemed appropriate
to the public interest, provided that the purpose and intent of this section
is maintained with such modification or variance. Applicants must request a
variance in writing stating the reasons why the variance is necessary. This
request shall be considered as part of the major site plan or subdivision
review.



(Ord. 1397.17.1 (part), 1991; Res. 1976 § 2 (part), 1991)



17.52.330  Enforcement and notice of violations.



   This section shall be enforced by the director or his duly authorized
representative. The director shall have the authority to enter upon the
premises, or any part thereof, at any and all reasonable times, for the
purposes of performing his official duties. It is unlawful to refuse the
director entry upon such premises. When any condition which would constitute
a violation of the provisions of this section comes to the director's
attention, he shall cause a written notice thereof to be served upon the
owner, lessee or other person in control of the premises. The notice shall
specify the nature of the violation and shall order the responsible party to
correct the violation within thirty days of the date of the notice.



(Ord. 1397.17.1 (part), 1991; Res. 1976 § 2 (part), 1991)



17.52.340  Penalties.



   Any person in control of any premises who fails to correct a violation
of this section within thirty days after notice thereof by the director shall
be liable to the city pursuant to Chapter 17.72 of this code.



(Ord. 1397.17.1 (part), 1991; Res. 1976 § 2 (part), 1991)



17.52.350  Landscape inspections.



   A.   All projects required by this section to be landscaped shall
pass a landscape inspection prior to a certificate of occupancy being issued
by the city. Such inspection shall be requested by the applicant at least
twenty-four hours prior to being performed.



   B.   The city shall have the right to refuse to pass any project not
meeting the provisions of this section. The city shall also have the right to
reject landscape materials as being substandard as to size, condition or
appearance including a pre-inspection of materials at the supplier if deemed
necessary.



(Ord. 1397.17.1 (part), 1991; Res. 1976 § 2 (part), 1991)



17.52.360  Required landscape maintenance.



   A.   With respect to every lot, parcel, or tract of land within the
city containing a use for which the provisions of this section apply, every
owner, lessee, or any other person having the lawful right to possession and
control of such premise shall:



   1.   Maintain all landscape materials and landscaped areas in
accordance with the proved landscape plan, including the street right-of-way
landscaping required in Section 17.52.1490. Such landscaped areas shall be
kept free of trash, debris, weeds, and dead plant material, and shall in all
respects be maintained in a neat and clean fashion.



   2.   Replace all dead or removed plants with healthy plants of the
same variety and in the size and quality as those removed, up to the fifteen
gallon size.



   B.   The city shall accept responsibility for the maintenance and
operation of all landscaping and appurtenances installed in accordance with
the provisions of Section 17.52.550 for any landscaping and appurtenances
installed within street rights-of-way, which rights-of-way are described by
one of the following categories:



   1.   Arterial and/or collector street rights-of-way adjacent to
single-family residential areas that back onto the arterial and/or collector
street, and have a screening wall constructed on the rear property line;



   2.   Arterial and/or collector street rights-of-way adjacent to
single family residential areas that side onto the arterial and/or collector
street, and which have a screening wall constructed on the side property line;



   3.   Designated and approved bridle trails, bicycle paths and
multi-use recreational facilities within city limits;



   4.   Median islands on arterial and collector public streets within
the city;



   5.   Street rights-of-way abutting municipal public facilities;



   6.   Street landscaping within districts specifically approved or
created by city council;



   7.   Flood control facilities which have been accepted for operation
and maintenance by the city.



   C.   Prior to the city accepting for maintenance any landscaping
described in subsection B of this section, the following conditions shall
have been satisfied:



   1.   The landscaping shall be inspected and approved by the city for
compliance with the approved landscape plan;



   2.   The subsequent completion of a sixty-day maintenance period
wherein the developer shall be responsible for all watering, weeding, and
replacement of all dead or dying plant materials.



   3.   A final inspection called by the developer or his
representative at the completion of the sixty-day maintenance period
resulting in final approval and acceptance by the city.



(Ord. 1397.17.1 (part), 1991; Res. 1976 § 2 (part), 1991)



17.52.370 Landscape plan.



   A.   A landscape plan consisting of a preliminary plan and a final
plan shall be prepared, submitted, and approved for all applicable
development projects in accordance with the procedures and requirements set
forth in this section.



   B.   All changes in landscape plans before, during, or after
preliminary or final landscape plan approval shall be approved by the
director prior to the installation of any such landscape change.



   C.   All changes in the landscaping of a site before, during, or
after final landscape plan approval and landscape installation shall be
approved by the director as set forth in this section.



(Ord. 1397.17.1 (part), 1991; Res. 1976 § 2 (part), 1991)



17.52.380 Preliminary landscape plan.



   A.   Two copies of a preliminary landscape plan shall be submitted
along with the required development site plan for review by the director. The
preliminary landscape plan may be shown on the major site plan drawings. The
preliminary landscape plan shall be a conceptual plan and shall include the
following information in generalized form:



   1.   The location and identification of all proposed landscape areas
(on-site, street right-of-way, parking area, landscape buffers and others);



   2.   Preliminary data pertaining to the amount of net site area, the
ground floor areas of all proposed industrial buildings, the number of
required and proposed parking spaces, and the amount of all proposed
landscaped areas, required and provided;



       3.   The approximate location of all proposed trees, shrubs,
and other landscape materials and improvements;



     4.   Notes or graphical representations adequately showing the
intent of the proposed plans and materials and indicating how those plans
will comply with this section;



   5.   The location, height, type, and general design and finish of
all proposed screening walls;



       6.   The location of all proposed stormwater drainage and
retention areas;



       7.   Notes or graphic indications of the proposed type of
irrigation system, water source, pressure and supply outlet.



       B.   The preliminary landscape plan shall be reviewed and
approved by the director as part of the major site plan review or preliminary
subdivision review, and may be approved with stipulated changes or additions.



(Ord. 1397.17.1 (part), 1991; Res. 1976 § 2 (pan), 1991)



17.52.390 Final landscape plan.



   A.   Two copies of a final landscape plan shall be submitted along
with all other required site improvement and building plans at the time of
application for a building permit or prior to recording of the final plan.
The final landscape plan shall contain the final calculations, data, and
specific details and information of all proposed landscaped areas, landscape
materials, screening walls, irrigation system, and other items that were
required and identified in conceptual form on the preliminary landscape plan.
The final landscape plan shall contain a specific schedule of all plant
material identified by common and botani-cal name, and shall clearly indicate
the quantity and size of each tree and shrub, to be installed.



   B.   The final landscape plan shall be in conformance with the
approved preliminary plan and any stipulated changes or additions, and shall
be approved by the director prior to the issuance of a building permit or the
recording of the final plat.



(Ord. 1397.17.1 (part), 1991; Res. 1976 § 2 (part), 1991)



17.52.400  Installation of landscape improvements prerequisite to
certificate of occupancy--Bond to secure installation.



   All landscape improvements (landscape materials, irrigation system,
screening walls, etc.) shall be installed by the developer on the site in
accordance with the approved final landscape plan prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy for the building or use. When considered advisable,
upon presentation of a cash bond, cash deposit, or assured letter of credit
in an mount sufficient to guarantee installation of the landscaping and
irrigation system, the director may approve a delay in the immediate
installation of the required landscape improvements for a period of time not
to exceed six months. In those instances where the director approved a delay
in the installation of the required landscape improvements, a temporary
certificate of occupancy shall be issued for the building or use conditioned
upon the satisfactory installation of the required landscape improvements
within the time period approved by the director.



(Ord. 1397.17.1 (part), 1991; Res. 1976 § 2 (part), 1991)



17.52.410  Low water use plants, minimum size of trees, shrubs, etc., and
substitution of cover for shrubs.



   A.   In order to conserve water, all plant materials installed shall
be listed on the low water use plant list as adopted in Table 17.52.410 and
may be amended, by the city of Casa Grande, or as approved by planning and
zoning commission at the time of review. Any plants located in public
rights-of-way must be listed on the plant list.



   B.   Unless otherwise specified herein, all required trees shall be
a minimum of fifteen gallons in size. All shrubs shall be a minimum of one
gallon in size. All fifteen gallon trees must be a minimum of six to eight
feet in height, three to four feet in spread and three-quarters to one and
one-quarter-inches trunk caliper at ground level. Upon approval of the
director, the installation of twenty square feet of vegetative groundcover in
any landscaped area may substitute for one required shrub, up to a maximum of
thirty percent of the required shrubs in any particular landscaped area.



   B.   All Mexican Fan Palms (Washington Robusta) and California Fan
Palms (Washingtonia Filifera) shall have a minimum five foot trunk height
measured from the base of the trunk to the base of the fronds when located
within the public fight-of-way or within twenty-five feet of the street
property line.



(Ord. 1397.17.1 (part), 1991; Res. 1976 § 2 (part), 1991)



TABLE 17.52.410
City of Casa Grande Low Water Use Plant List



In order to promote water conservation, all plant material installed due to
the landscaping requirements of Chapter 17, Article VI of the Municipal Code
must be used from the list below. The city of Casa Grande gratefully
acknowledges the Arizona Department of Water Resources — Pinal Active
Management Area for the development of this list.



   A.   Trees




   Botanical Name   Common Name





   Acacia spp.   Acacia/Wattle





   Agonis flexuosa   West Australia Peppermint





   Brachychiton populneus   Bottle Tree





   Brahea spp.





   Bursera spp.





   Caesalpinia spp.





   Callistemon viminalis   Weeping Bottle Brush





   Casuarina spp.





   Celtis reticulata   Western Hackberry





   Ceratonia siliqua   St. John's Bread Tree/Carob Tree





   Cercidium spp.





   Chamaerops humilis   Mediterranean Fan Palm





   Chilopsis linearis   Desert Willow





   Cupressus arizonica   Arizona Cypress





   Cupressus sempervirens   Italian Cypress





   Dahlbergia sissoo   Sissoo Tree





   Dalea spp.





   Eucalyptus spp.





   Forchammeria watsonii





   Geijera parviflora   Australian Willow





   Gleditsia triacanthos   Honey Locust





   Leucaena retusa   Golden Ball Lead Tree





   Lysiloma spp.





   Olea Europaea “Swan Hill”   Swan Hill Olive (or other non-pollen
producing olive trees)





   Olneya tesota   Ironwood





   Parkinsonia aculeata   Mexican Palo Verde





   Phoenix canariansis   Canary Island Date Palm





   Phoenix dactylifera   Date Palm





   Pinus canariensis   Canary Island Pine





   Pinus eldarica   Afghan Pine





   Pinus halepensis   Aleppo Pine





   Pinus pinea   Italian Stone Pine





   Pinus roxburghii   Chir Pine





   Pistacia spp.   Pistachio





   Pithecellobium spp.





   Pittosporum phillyraeoides   Willow Pittosporum





   Prosopis spp.   Mesquite





   Quercus spp.   Oak





   Rhus lancea   African Sumac





   Schinus terebinthifolious   Brazilian Pepper





   Sophora secundiflora   Texas Mountain Laurel





   Tamarix aphylla   Athel Tree





   Ulmus parvifolia “sempervirens”   Evergreen Elm





   Vitex agnus-castus   Chaste Tree





   Washingtonia spp.   Fan Palm





   Ziziphus jujuba   Chinese Jujube




   B.   SHRUBS




   Botanical Name   Common Name





   Acacia spp.   Acacia/Wattle





   Alousia spp.





   Ambrosia deltoidea   Triangleleaf Bursage





   Ambrosia dumosa   White Bursage





   Atriplex spp.   Saltbush





   Baccaris spp.





   Berberis haematocarpa   Red Barberry





   Bougainvillea spp.   Bougainvillea





   Buddleia marrubifolia   Summer Lilac





   Caesalpinia spp.





   Caliandra californica   Fairy Duster





   Calliandra eriophylla   Fairy Duster





   Calliandra peninsularis   Fairy Duster





   Callistemon citrinus   Lemon Bottle Brush





   Callistemon viminalis “Captain Cook”   Dwarf Bottle Brush





   Calothamnus spp.   Cassia spp.





   Cassia





   Celtis pallida   Desert Hackberry





   Chrysothamnus nauseosus   Rabbit Brush





   Cistus spp.





   Convolvulus cneorum   Bush Morning Glory





   Cordia boissieri





   Cordia parvifolia   Little Leaf Cordia





   Dalea spp.





   Dodonaea spp.   Hopbush





   Encelia spp.   Brittlebush





   Ephedra spp.   Mormon Tea





   Eremaea beaufortioides   Eremea





   Eremaea pauciflora   Snow Gum





   Eremaea violacea   Violet Eremea





   Eriogonum spp.   Buckwheat





   Eucalyptus spp.





   Forestiera neomexicana   Desert Olive





   Genista hispanica   Spanish Broom





   Grevillea rosmarinifollia varieties





   Hakea spp.





   Haplopappus Laricifolia   Turpentine Bush





   Hyptis emoryi   Desert Lavender





   Jatropha spp.





   Juniperus chinensis varieties   Juniper





   Justicia spp.





   Kunzea spp.





   Lantana camara   Bush Lantana





   Leucophyllum spp.   Creosote Bush





   Lycium spp.





   Melaleuca spp.





   Mimosa biuncifera   Wait-a-Minute Bush





   Mimosa dysocarpa   Velvet Pod Mimosa





   Nerium oleander varieties   Oleander





   Plumbago scandens   Cape Plumbago





   Punica granatum varieties   Pomegranate





   Pyra cantha spp.   Pyracantha





   Quercus spp.   Oak





   Rhus ovata   Mountain Laurel





   Rhus trilobata   Skunkbush





   Rhus virens   Evergreen Sumac





   Ruellia californica   Ruellia





   Ruellia peninsularis





   Salvia spp. (shrub only)   Sage





   Sececio cineraria   Dusty Miller





   Simmondsia chinensis   Jojoba





   Sophora arizonica





   Sophora formosa





   Tecoma stans   Yellow Bells





   Teucrium fruticans   Bush Germander





   Vauquelinia spp.   Rosewood





   Viguiera tomentosa   Golden Eye





   Ziziphus obtusifolia   Greythorn




   C.   GROUNDCOVERS/HERBACEOUS PLANTS




   Botanical Name   Common Name





   Acaia spp.





   Anigozanthos spp.   Kangaroo Paw





   Artemisia spp.





   Asclepias subulata   Desert Milkweed





   Asparagus densiflorus cv. sprengeri   Sprenger Asparagus





   Atriplex spp.





   Baccharis spp.





   Carpobrotus edulis   Ice Plant





   Centaurea cineraria   Dusty Miller





   Cephalophyllum spp.   Red Spike Ice Plant





   Clianthus formosus   Sturt's Desert Pea





   Convolvulus mauritanicus   Ground Morning Glory





   Dalea spp.





   Gazania spp.   Gazania





   Grevillea crithmifolia   Spider Flower





   Kennedia coccinea   Coral Vine





   Kennedia prostrata   Scarlet Runner





   Lantana montevidensis   Trailing Lantana





   Malephora crocea   Ice Plant





   Myoporum parvifolium   Sandalwood





   Oenothera berlandieri   Mexican Evening Primrose





   Oenothera drummondii   Baja Primrose





   Pentzia incana   Karoo Groundcover





   Romneya coulteri   Matilija Poppy





   Rosmarinus officinalis   Prostrate Rosemary “prostratus”





   Salvia chamaedryoides   Blue Sage





   Salvia farinacea   Mealy Cup Sage





   Santolina chamaecyparissus   Lavender Cotton





   Santolina virens   Green Santolina





   Sesuvium verrucosum   Sea Purslane





   Sphaeralcea spp.   Globe-Mallow





   Verbena bipinnatifida   Verbena





   Verbena peruviana   Peruvian Verbena





   Verbena pulchella   False sand Verbena





   Verbena rigida   Verbena




   D.    SUCCULENTS




   Botanical Name   Common Name





   Agave spp.   Century Plant/Agave





   Aloe spp.   Aloe





   Cacti (all)





   Dasylirion spp.   Desert Spoon





   Fouquieria spp.





   Hesperaloe spp.





   Nolina spp.   Bear Grass





   Yucca spp.   Yucca




   E.   ANNUALS/PERENNIALS




   Botanical Name   Common Name





   Abronia villosa   Sand Verbena





   Arctotis spp.   African Daisy





   Argemone pleicantha   Prickly Poppy





   Baeria chrysostoma   Goldfield





   Bahia absinthifolia   Bahia





   Baileya multiradiata   Desert Marigold





   Cassia covesii





   Catharanthus roseus cultivars   Madagascar Periwinkle





   Celosia spp.   Cockscomb





   Cosmos spp.   Cosmos





   Dimorphotheca spp.   African Daisy





   Dyssodia pentachaeta   Dyssodia





   Eschscholzia californica   California Poppy





   Eschscholzia mexicana   Mexican Gold Poppy





   Gilia leptantha   Showy Blue Gilia





   Gomphrena globosa   Globe Amaranth





   Helichrysum bracteatum   Everlasting Daisy





   Helipterum spp.





   Kallstroemia grandiflora   Arizona Poppy





   Layia platyglossa   Tidy Tips





   Lesquerella gordoni   Gold Crucifer





   Linaria spp.   Toadflax





   Lupinus densiflorus   Lupine





   Lupinus sparsiflorus





   Matricaria grandiflora   Pineapple Weed





   Melampodium leucanthum   Blackfoot Daisy





   Mentzelia spp.   Blazing Star





   Orthocarpus purpurascens   Owl's Clover





   Pectis papposa   Chinch Weed





   Penstemon spp.





   Phacelia spp.





   Tagetes spp.   Marigold





   Ursinia spp.   Ursinia




   F.   GRASSES




   Botanical Name   Common Name





   Aristida purpurea   Red Three Awn





   Bromus rubens   Red Brome





   Eragrostis atherstone   Cochise Lovegrass





   Eragrostis lehmanniana   Lehmann Lovegrass





   Muhlenbergia dumosa   Giant Muhley





   Pennisetum setaceum   Fountain Grass





   Schismus barbatus   Schismus




   G.   VINES




   Botanical Name   Common Name





   Antigonon leptopus   Mountain Rose/Queens Wreath





   Bougainvillea spp.   Bougainvilla





   Billardiera ringens   Riverbell Flower





   Campsis radicans   Common Trumpet Creeper





   Cissus Trifoliata   Arizona Grape Ivy





   Clematis drummondii   Virgin's Bower





   Hardenbergia comtoniana   Wild Wisteria





   Kennedia nigricans   Black Yellow Vine





   Macfadyena unguis - cati   Cat Claw





   Mascagnia lilacaena   Lilac Orchid Vine





   Mascagnia macroptera   Yellow Orchid Vine





   Merremia aurea   Yuca





   Solanum jasminoides   Potato Vine




17.52.420  Natural topping of landscaped areas.



   All landscaped areas shall be finished with a natural topping material
which may include, but not be limited to, the following: turf, groundcover,
planting, decomposed granite (two inches minimum depth), river nm rock,
expanded shale, or bark. No more than forty percent of the total irrigated
landscape area shall be tuff. In developments with landscaping greater than
ten thousand square feet, no more than ten percent of the landscapable area
shall be turf. A pre-emergent herbicide shall be applied to the ground prior
to the placement of natural surface materials (decomposed granite, river run
rock, etc.) in any landscaped area to prevent weed growth.



(Ord. 1397.17.1 (part), 1991; Res. 1976 § 2 (part), 1991)



17.52.430  Landscaped areas along street frontage.



   Landscaped areas along street frontages shall be contoured or bermed to
provide variations in grade, visual relief, parking lot screening, and a more
pleasing aesthetic value.



(Ord. 1397.17.1 (part), 1991; Res. 1976 § 2 (part), 1991)



17.52.440  Irrigation standards.



   All landscaped areas shall be supported by an automatic irrigation
system which may be a spray, bubbler, or drip type system. A pressure-type
vacuum breaker shall be required with the installation of all sprinkler
systems. All irrigation systems and landscaped areas shall be designed,
constructed, and maintained so as to promote water conservation and prevent
water overflow or seepage into the street, sidewalk, or parking areas. "PVC"
Schedule 40 type or equal irrigation pipe shall be used in any street
right-of-way landscaped areas to be maintained by the city pursuant to
Section 17.52.360(B).



(Ord. 1397.17.1 (part), 1991; Res. 1976 § 2 (part), 1991)



17.52.450  Obstructions to visibility.



   All landscaping and landscaped materials established in close proximity
to a driveway or street intersection shall be installed and maintained in
compliance with the sight visibility requirements set forth in Section
17.52.160(C) of this code.



(Ord. 1397.17.1 (part), 1991; Res. 1976 § 2 (part), 1991)



17.52.460  Protection of landscaped areas from vehicular damage.



   Protection of plant materials from vehicles in areas adjacent to
parking areas, driveways, and vehicular access ways shall include, but not be
limited to, concrete curbing.



(Ord. 1397.17.1 (part), 1991; Res. 1976 § 2 (part), 1991)



17.52.470  Use of landscape areas for other purposes.



   No part of any landscape area shall be used for any other use such as
parking or display; except for required on-site retention areas, signs or
when such use is shown on the approved final landscape plan.



(Ord. 1397.17.1 (part), 1991; Res. 1976 § 2 (part), 1991)



17.52.480 On-site landscaped areas.



   All development projects covered by Section 17.52.300 shall provide
on-site landscaped areas located in accordance with the following standards
and requirements:



   A.    For all development within the industrial zoning districts,
landscaped areas shall be provided on the site in an amount equal to or
greater than ten percent of the ground floor area of all buildings, or seven
percent of the net site area, whichever is greater.



   B.    For all development within all other zoning districts,
landscaped areas shall be provided on the site in an amount equal to or
greater than ten percent of the net site area.



   C.    A landscaped area not less than an average width of fifteen
feet throughout a particular street frontage shall be established and
maintained along all street frontages between any building, on-site parking
area or outdoor storage area and the nearest point of the existing or future
required street/sidewalk improvements (the back of an existing sidewalk, the
line equal to the back of a future sidewalk, or the back of the street curb
where no sidewalk is required). The area of this landscape strip may be used
to satisfy, to the extent provided, the on-site landscaped area and street
right-of-way landscaping area requirements set forth in this section.



   D.   All portions of the development site not occupied by buildings,
structures, vehicle access and parking areas, loading/unloading areas, and
approved storage areas shall be landscaped in accordance with these
provisions. Future building pads within a phased development shall be
improved with temporary landscaping, or otherwise maintained weed-free in
such a manner as may be approved by the director.



(Ord. 1397.17.1 (part), 1991; Res. 1976 § 2 (part), 1991)



17.52.490  Street right-of-way landscaping.



   The landscaping of all street rights-of-way contiguous with the
proposed development site not used for street pavement, curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, or driveways shall be required in addition to the on-site
landscaped areas required in Section 17.52.480.



(Ord. 1397.17.1 (part), 1991; Res. 1976 § 2 (part), 1991)



17.52.500  Parking area landscaping.



   All applicable development projects with on-site parking areas greater
than one hundred spaces shall contain at least one landscaped planter, not
less than one hundred seventy-five square feet in area and with a minimum
width of five feet measured from back of curb to back of curb, for every ten
parking spaces provided on the site. No shrubs within a planter island of an
on-site parking area shall be maintained to a height in excess of three feet,
and all trees within such planters shall maintain a minimum clearance of five
feet from the lowest branch to the adjacent grade elevation. The required
number of landscaped planters shall be distributed or located within the
parking areas to enhance the proposed development project. The landscaped
area within these planters may be used to satisfy, to the extent provided,
the landscape area requirements set forth in Section 17.52.480.



(Ord. 1397.16.2 §§ 1 (part), 2 (part), 1994)



17.52.510  Street frontages.



   A.   The installation of street trees, shrubs, and vegetative
groundcover shall be required for all applicable projects if an amount equal
to or greater than one tree and three shrubs for each thirty feet of street
frontage, and vegetative groundcover occupying a minimum of sixty percent of
the total street frontage landscaped area. This minimum quantity of trees,
shrubs, and vegetative groundcover shall be located in the street
right-of-way landscaped area required in Section 17.52.490, or within the
front twenty- five feet of the on-site landscaped areas required in Section
17.52.480 and shall be designed and located to enhance the proposed
development project and the streetscape.



   B.   All street frontage landscaping located adjacent to driveway
exits, alleys, and street intersections shall be designed, installed, and
maintained in accordance with the height, location and visibility
requirements as set forth in Section 17.52.160(C).



(Ord. 1397.17.1 (part), 1991; Res. 1976 § 2 (part), 1991)



17.52.520  Multiple-family residential developments.



   All multiple-family residential developments shall contain a minimum of
one tree and two shrubs for each dwelling unit. For two-story buildings and
above, seventy-five percent of all required trees shall be twenty-four inch
box or larger in size. In addition to the foregoing requirement, one tree and
two shrubs shall be required within each planter island established within an
open parking area as required by Section 17.52.500.



(Ord. 1397.17.1 (part), 1991; Res. 1976 § 2 (part), 1991)



17.52.530  Industrial developments.



   All development within the industrial zoning districts shall contain a
minimum of one tree and three shrubs for every five parking spaces provided
on the site.



(Ord. 1397.17.1 (part), 1991; Res. 1976 § 2 (part), 1991)



17.52.540  Commercial and other developments.



   All development within the commercial zoning districts and all other
applicable development projects not specified in Sections 17.52.520 and
17.52.530 shall contain a minimum of two trees and five shrubs for every
three parking spaces provided on the site.



(Ord. 1397.17.1 (part), 1991; Res. 1976 § 2 (part), 1991)



17.52.550  Street frontage landscaping.



   All developments that back or side onto a street and which have a
six-foot screening wall constructed on the property line shall install within
the street right-of-way contiguous with the property three shrubs and one
tree for every thirty feet of such street frontage. All such trees and shrubs
shall be provided with an automatic drip or bubbler irrigation system. Ground
cover shall be one-quarter inch minus decomposed granite without plastic
liners. A pre-emergent herbicide shall be applied to the ground prior to and
after the placement of natural surface materials (decomposed granite, river
run rock, etc.) in any landscaped area to prevent weed growth. The foregoing
requirement shall apply in lieu of the street frontage landscape improvements
required in Section 17.52.510 for those applicable street frontages.



(Ord. 1397.17.1 (part), 1991; Res. 1976 § 2 (part), 1991)



17.52.560  Cumulative totals.



   Quantities of plants required by each of the Sections 17.52.510 through
17.52.550 which apply to that project submitted to the city for landscape
approval shall be added together to calculate the minimum total quantity of
plant materials required for that particular project.



(Ord. 1397.17.1 (part), 1991; Res. 1976 § 2 (part), 1991)



Article VII.  Medical Marijuana Uses



17.52.570  Application of this article.



   The requirements of this article shall apply to all medical marijuana
uses.



(Ord. 1397.17.37 § 7 (part), 2011)



17.52.580  Days and hours of operation.



   A medical marijuana dispensary shall only be allowed to operate Monday
through Saturday, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.



(Ord. 1397.17.37 § 7 (part), 2011)



17.52.590  Development standards.



   All medical marijuana uses shall:



   A.   Be located in a permanent building housing only one user or
tenant, except that a medical marijuana dispensary may be in a permanent
building housing more than one tenant, provided that the walls separating the
dispensary tenant space from the adjoining tenant space(s) are constructed to
one of the following standards, extending from the floor to the roof deck:



   1.   Minimum-six-inch masonry.



   2.   Interior wall covered with sheet metal, a minimum of 18 gauge,
and one layer of one-quarter-inch plywood fastened with screws to the
interior wall studs.



   3.   Construction designs approved by the Building Official as
providing an equivalent level of security. 



   B.   Provide a monitored security alarm system.



   C.   May not be located in a trailer, cargo container, or motor
vehicle.



   D.   Not have drive-through service.



   E.   Not emit dust, fumes, vapors, or odors into the environment
above ambient levels.



   F.   Not provide offsite delivery of medical marijuana to qualified
patients.



   G.   Prohibit consumption of marijuana on the premises.



   H.   Not have outdoor seating areas.



   I.   Display a current City of Casa Grande business license
applicable to medical marijuana uses.



(Ord. 1397.17.37 § 7 (part), 2011)



17.52.600  Distance requirements.



   Medical marijuana uses shall meet the following minimum separations,
measured in a straight line from the boundary of the parcel containing the
medical marijuana use to the property boundary of the parcel containing any
existing uses listed below:



   A.   Five hundred feet from any other medical marijuana use.



   B..   Five hundred feet from a substance abuse diagnostic and
treatment facility, or other drug or alcohol rehabilitation facility. 



   C.   Five hundred feet from any residential dwelling or any platted
residential subdivision.



   D.   One thousand feet from a public or private school.



   E.   One thousand feet from a daycare center providing care to minor
children.



   F.   Five hundred feet from a public library or public park.



   G.   Five hundred feet from a church or religious institution.



   H.   Five hundred feet from any airport.



(Ord. 1397.17.37 § 7 (part), 2011)



17.52.610  Medical Marijuana Dispensary Overlay Zone.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, a medical marijuana
dispensary shall be principally permitted on any property that allows medical
offices, clinics, or other medical facilities, provided: (a) said property is
located within the following boundaries:  north of Florence Boulevard, south
of McMurray Road, east of Arizola Road, and west of Henness Road; and (b) it
also meets all distance separation requirements prescribed in Section
17.52.600.  All dispensaries permitted by this section shall also be subject
to all other requirements, restrictions, and prohibitions set forth in this
Chapter 17.52, Article VII.



(Ord. 1397.17.37 § 7 (part), 2011)



17.52.620  Prohibitions.



   A medical marijuana cultivation facility not associated with a medical
marijuana dispensary is prohibited, and only one medical marijuana
cultivation facility shall be permitted for the single medical marijuana
dispensary with which it is associated.




(Ord. 1397.17.37 § 7 (part), 2011)




Chapter 17.54
VARIANCES



Sections:



17.54.010   Generally.



17.54.020   Application for variance.



17.54.030   Notice of hearing.



17.54.040   Evidence required for variance.



17.54.050   Board of adjustment action on variances.



17.54.060   Disapproved application.



17.54.070   Conditional approval.



17.54.080   Guarantees.



17.54.010  Generally.



   The board of adjustment may allow a departure from the terms of the
development standards set forth in this title where such departure will not
be contrary to the public interest, and where, owing to conditions peculiar
to the property because of its size, shape or topography, and not as a result
of the action of the applicant, the literal enforcement of this title would
deprive the owner of the reasonable use of the land and/or building involved.



(Ord. 1397.17.48 § 1 (part), 2018; Ord. 1178 § 1, 1987)



17.54.020  Application for variance.



   A request for variance shall be made by filing an application with
appropriate fees. The application shall contain information as may be
required by the planning director for purposes of this title. The plans shall
contain sufficient information for the board to make a proper decision on the
matter. The request shall state the exceptional conditions and the peculiar
and practical difficulties claimed as a basis for a variance.



(Ord. 1397.17.48 § 1 (part), 2018; Ord. 1178 § 2, 1987)



17.54.030  Notice of hearing.



   A.   No variance may be granted by the board until a public hearing
has been held on the application.



   B.   A notice of time, date, place and purpose of the hearing shall
be published in a newspaper of general circulation, published or circulated
within the city at least fifteen days prior to the date of the hearing.



   C.   A notice shall be posted on, or close to, the site affected, in
a location that allows for the public to read the notice from the public
right-of-way. The notice shall be in the form required by the planning
department, and shall contain sufficient information to inform the public of
the nature of the variance.



   D.   Additionally, a notice shall be mailed, at least fifteen days
prior to the hearing, to each owner of the property situated within two
hundred feet of the property to which the variance relates. The planning
director shall be responsible for mailing the notice. Failure to receive
notice by individual property owners will not necessarily invalidate the
proceedings.



   E.   Notice of the time, date, place and purpose of the hearing
shall be sent to the applicant at least fifteen days prior to the healing
date.



(Ord. 1397.17.48 § 1 (part), 2018; Ord. 1178 § 3, 1987)



17.54.040  Evidence required for variance.



   At the public hearing on a variance application, the applicant shall
present a statement and adequate evidence for the purpose of showing:



   A.   That there are special circumstances or conditions applicable
to the property referred to in the application which do not prevail on other
property in that zone, and that these special circumstances applicable to the
property were not self-imposed by the property owner;



   B.   That the strict application of the regulations would work an
unnecessary hardship and that the granting of the application is necessary
for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial existing property rights;



   C.   That the granting of such application will not materially
affect the health or safety of persons residing or working in the
neighborhood and will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or
injurious to property or improvements of the neighborhood.



(Ord. 1397.17.48 § 1 (part), 2018; Ord. 1178 § 4, 1987)



17.54.050  Board of adjustment action on variances.



   A.   Within forty-five days of the date of application, but no
sooner than fifteen days from the date of public notice, the board of
adjustment shall hold a hearing on the variance request. The board shall
consider oral or written statements from the city staff, the applicant and
the public.



   B.   In the event the board of adjustment can determine that the
requested variance substantially conforms to the standards set forth in
Section 17.54.040, it may, by a vote of five members of the board, approve a
variance request. A variance request that is not approved shall be deemed to
be denied. Variance requests may be tabled by a vote of the simple majority
of those board members present. Any postponement shall be limited to a
maximum of seventy-five days; unless extended with the written permission of
the applicant.



   C.   The board of adjustment shall forward a report of its findings,
and any conditions imposed on approved variances, promptly to the planning
and zoning commission and the city council. Transmitted meeting minutes will
satisfy this requirement.



(Ord. 1397.17.48 § 1 (part), 2018; Ord. No. 1397.17.43 § 2, 2012; Ord. 1178
§ 5, 1987)



17.54.060  Disapproved application.



   In the event the board of adjustment disapproves an application for a
variance, no permit shall be issued pending appeal to the superior court. The
appeal shall be perfected within thirty days from the date the disapproval is
officially entered on the minutes of the board. If the court shall overrule
the action of the board, then the planning director shall issue the requested
permit without further action by the board; unless the court orders the board
to hold a further hearing to permit the board to fix conditions or require
guarantees as set forth in Sections 17.54.070 and 17.54.080.



(Ord. 1397.17.48 § 1 (part), 2018; Ord. 1178 § 6, 1987)



17.54.070  Conditional approval.



   In approving any variance, the board of adjustment may impose such
conditions as necessary to ensure the character of the area in which the
variance is granted is maintained in accordance with the objectives of this
title.



(Ord. 1397.17.48 § 1 (part), 2018; Ord. 1178 § 7, 1987)



17.54.080  Guarantees.



   Where necessary, the board of adjustment may require guarantees, in
such form as it may deem proper under the circumstances, to insure compliance
with any conditions imposed. Where any condition under which a variance has
been granted is violated, the variance shall cease to exist and the permit
shall become null and void.



(Ord. 1397.17.48 § 1 (part), 2018; Ord. 1178 § 8, 1987)



Chapter 17.56
OFF-STREET PARKING



Sections:



Article I. General Requirements



17.56.010   General provisions.



17.56.020   Minimum parking space dimensions.



17.56.030   Requirements within structures.



17.56.040   Required circulation between bays.



17.56.050   Preserving off-site parking.



17.56.060   Drive access—Approval required for alteration.



17.56.070   Drive access required when.



17.56.080   Drive access—Required distance from intersection.



17.56.090   Drive access—Required spacing.



17.56.100   Drive access—Number required.



17.56.110   Minimum parallel parking space required.



17.56.120   Required grade elevation of parking area.



17.56.130   Parking, equipment storage, and display lot surfacing
requirements.



17.56.140   Striping requirements.



17.56.150   Lighting requirements.



17.56.160   Signs not to obstruct—Compliance with city regulations.



17.56.170   Curbing requirements.



17.56.180   Vehicles not to protrude over property lines.



17.56.190   Screening requirements.



17.56.200   Maintenance responsibility.



17.56.210   Required parking areas to be used for parking only.



17.56.220   Number of paved parking spaces required.



17.56.230   Joint use of parking facilities allowed when.



17.56.240   Off-site parking—Terms and conditions.



Article II. Off-Street Loading Berth Requirements



17.56.250   Affected uses.



17.56.260   Standards.



Article I. General Provisions



17.56.010  General provisions.



   A.   Floor Area. The term “floor area” for the purpose of
calculating the number of off-street parking spaces required, shall be
determined on the basis of the exterior-area dimensions of the building,
structure or use multiplied by the number of floors, minus ten percent,
except as may hereinafter be provided or modified.



   B.   Change of Use or Occupancy of Buildings. Any change of use or
occupancy of any building or buildings including additions thereto requiring
more parking shall not be permitted until such additional parking spaces as
required by this title are furnished.



   C.    Parking Accessory to Residential Use. Only licensed and
operable vehicles may be parked on off-street parking areas accessory to
residential use. The off-street parking of such vehicles accessory to
residential use is subject to the limitations, restrictions, prohibitions,
and exceptions contained elsewhere in this code. Off-street parking accessory
to residential use shall not be used for the parking of any commercial
vehicle exceeding 12,000 pounds gross vehicle weight rating or for the open
storage of commercial equipment.



   D.   Parking in Residential Setbacks. No motor home or recreational
vehicle shall be parked in any front or corner side setback. In rear setbacks
motor or recreational vehicles shall be parked on a paved parking surface.



   E.   Accessible Parking Required.  When parking facilities are
required by the issuance of a building permit, accessible parking spaces
shall be provided in conformance with this section.



   1.   Number of Accessible Parking Spaces. All off-street parking
areas shall include reserved spaces for use by disabled persons in accordance
with the following:



   Exception: Nonresidential Occupancies. Areas dedicated only to tenant
and employee parking shall not be subject to the requirements of the
following table. However, accessible parking space(s) shall be provided upon
the request of an employee or tenant.



   a.   Health Care Facilities.



   i.   General Health Care Facilities. Employees and visitor parking
to comply with the following table.



   ii.   Outpatient Facilities. Not less than ten percent of the total
parking spaces provided shall be accessible spaces.



   iii.   Spinal Cord Injury Facilities. Not less than twenty percent
of the total employee and visitor parking spaces shall be accessible spaces.



   b.   Multiple-Family Housing. Also see the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development's Fair Housing Accessibility Guidelines.



   i.   Accessible parking space shall be provided for two percent of
the covered dwelling units devoted to housing the physically challenged; and



   ii.   Where parking is provided for visitors, two percent of the
spaces, or at least one space, shall be accessible.



   c.   Accessible parking spaces for uses not listed above shall be
provided in accordance with the following table.



               Minimum Required



   Total Parking Spaces          Number of
     In Lot or Garage       Accessible Spaces



        1—25            1



       26—50            2



       51—75            3



       76—100            4



      101—150            5



      151—200            6



      201—300            7



      301—400            8



      401—500            9



      501—1000      2% of total spaces



      1,000 and over      20 spaces plus 1 space for every 100
spaces over 1,000.



   d.   Existing Parking Lots. Parking areas built before the effective
date of the ordinance codified in this section that do not have sufficient
accessible parking spaces shall be permitted to allow existing nonaccessible
parking spaces to be combined and converted to accessible parking spaces. The
overall reduction in total parking space availability shall not exceed five
percent below the required quantity of off-street parking spaces.



   2.   Location of Accessible Parking Spaces. Accessible parking
spaces shall be located on the shortest route of travel to an accessible
building entrance. Wherever practical, the accessible route of travel shall
not cross lanes for vehicular traffic.



   a.   Accessible parking spaces shall be located on a surface with a
slope not exceeding one vertical foot in fifty horizontal feet.



   b.   Where crossing vehicle traffic lanes is necessary, the route of
travel shall be designated and marked by a four foot wide crosswalk.



   c.   In facilities with multiple accessible building entrances with
adjacent parking, accessible parking spaces shall be dispersed and located
near accessible entrances.



   d.   In a parking garage or under shade canopies, the ratio of
covered to uncovered accessible parking spaces shall not be less than the
ratio of covered to uncovered nonaccessible parking spaces.



   e.   Parking garages shall have not less than twenty percent of the
accessible spaces designated for high-profile vehicles. A minimum headroom
clearance of nine feet six inches shall be provided in all parking,
maneuvering and circulation areas serving accessible spaces. Signage shall be
provided to identify high-profile accessible parking spaces and to direct
users to the location of both high-profile and standard- height accessible
parking spaces.



Exception. Signage is not required to identify high profile and standard
height vehicle spaces when all accessible spaces are high-profile spaces.



   3.   Identification of Accessible Parking Spaces. Accessible parking
spaces shall be identified through the use of signage as set forth in
subsections a, b and c.



   a.   Accessible parking spaces shall be prominently outlined with
paint on four sides and have the international wheelchair symbol displayed on
the ground at the entry of the space. The color scheme of the accessible
parking space and access aisle shall be in contrast with that of the
surrounding nonaccessible parking spaces. Access aisles shall be designated
with diagonal striping.



   b.   Each accessible parking space shall be identified by a sign
meeting the following criteria:



   i.   Each sign shall be mounted on a signpost, building, or
wall/fence  directly in front of the parking space;



   ii.   The sign shall contain the international wheelchair symbol of
accessibility;



   iii.   All new signs shall comply with the size and height
requirements of the American Disabilities Act (ADA).



   c.   Van-accessible spaces shall be so designated. 



   4.   Size of Accessible Parking Spaces. A single accessible parking
space shall be not less than eleven feet in width and eighteen feet in
length. On the right side of the parking space shall be an adjacent access
aisle not less than five feet in width.



   Exceptions:



      1.**Two accessible parking spaces may share a single access aisle.



      2.**Other parking plans as approved by the building official.



   5.   Restricted Parking Area. A restricted parking area for the
disabled shall consist of the parking space and access aisle. No person shall
park in a restricted parking area identified for use as reserved for persons
with physical disabilities.



   Exception: A motor vehicle bearing a handicap plate or permit
transporting the person eligible for the vehicle's plate or permit.



   6.   Maintenance. Signs, parking space and access aisle shall be
maintained in a good condition. In the event an item becomes damaged,
obstructed, or nonreadable, such item shall be immediately repaired by the
owner and/or tenant. (Ord. 1397.17.44 § 1, 2013; Ord. 1397.17.24 § 1, 2000;
Ord. 1397.17.5 § 2, 1992; Ord. 1178.37 § 1, 1990; Ord. 1178 § 6.10.1)



17.56.020  Minimum parking space dimensions.



   A.   Parking Dimensions. The minimum parking dimensions are as set
out in Table 17.56.020 codified at the end of this chapter.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.10.2(A))



17.56.030  Requirements within structures.



   The off-street parking requirements may be furnished by providing
spaces so designed within the principal building or structure attached
thereto; however, unless provisions are made, no building permit shall be
used to convert the parking structures into a dwelling unit or living area or
other activity until other adequate provisions are made to comply with the
required off-street parking provisions of this title.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.10.2(B), 1987)



17.56.040  Required circulation between bays.



   Except in the case of single, two-family, townhouse, three-family and
four-family dwellings, parking areas shall be designed so that circulation
between parking bays occurs within the designated parking lot and does not
depend upon a public street or alley. Except in the case of single,
two-family, townhouse, three-family and four-family dwellings, parking area
design which requires backing into the public street is prohibited.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.10.2(C), 1987)



17.56.050  Preserving off-site parking.



   When required, accessory off-street parking facilities are provided
elsewhere than on the lot with the same ownership or control, either by deed
or long-term lease, than the property occupied by such principal use, the
owner of the principal use shall file a recordable document with the city and
county clerk requiring the owner and his or her heirs and assigns to maintain
the required number of off-street spaces during the existence of the
principal use.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.10.2(D), 1987)



17.56.060  Drive access—Approval required for alteration.



   The city encourages sharing access drives between separate parcels.
Some of the following standards may be relaxed if shown during the site
design review process that more efficient design can be accomplished without
jeopardizing the public's health, safety and welfare. All changes are subject
to approval by the planning and zoning commission. All drive accesses shall
be approved by the city engineer for width and location.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.10.2(E), 1987)



17.56.070  Drive access required when.



   All nonresidential off-street parking spaces shall have access from a
drive access and not directly from the public street. Access drives shall be
not less than twenty-four feet in width for two-way traffic nor less than
twelve feet in width for one-way traffic. Residential drive accesses shall be
not less than ten feet in width.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.10.2(F), 1987)



17.56.080  Drive access—Required distance from intersection.



   Driveway access distances from street intersections shall be subject to
the minimum dimensions set out in Table 17.56.080 codified at the end of this
chapter.



(Ord. 1178.39 § 2 (part), 1990)



17.56.090  Drive access—Required spacing.



   Drive accesses to a public street except for single, two-family and
townhouse dwellings shall be located as measured from inside of drive to
inside of drive according to the specified distances, set out in Table
17.56.090 codified at the end of this chapter, unless granted approval by the
planning and zoning commission.



(Ord. 1178.39 § 2 (part), 1990)



17.56.100  Drive access—Number required.



   Each property shall be allowed at least one drive access for each one
hundred feet of street frontage. Single-family uses shall be limited to one
drive access per property. These conditions shall apply unless otherwise
granted approval by the planning and zoning commission.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.10.2(I), 1987)



17.56.110  Minimum parallel parking space required.



   Parallel parking spaces shall be a minimum of twenty-two feet in length.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.10.2(J), 1987)



17.56.120  Required grade elevation of parking area.



   The grade elevation of any parking area shall not exceed three percent.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.10.2(K), 1987)



17.56.130  Parking, equipment storage, and display lot surfacing
requirements.



   A.   New Parking Lots. All areas intended to be utilized for
parking, maneuvering aisles, and access drives shall be paved with asphalt or
concrete surface designed to a specification appropriate to the type and
volume of anticipated traffic as determined by a qualified design
professional.



Exception: Parking, maneuvering aisles, and access drive areas that are used
on an infrequent basis (i.e., occasional use, overflow lots, special event
parking) may be surfaced with material which limits the emissions of dust,
such as crushed stone or some type of aggregate base course treated with a
dust-control substance, such as calcium chloride, lignin sulfonate, or a
similar product as approved by the city.



   B.   Existing Parking Lots. Unpaved parking, maneuvering aisles, and
access drives associated with existing developments that are required to pave
in conjunction with a change of land use in accordance with Subsection
17.64.020.B., or which are paved voluntarily by the property owner, may use
alternative paving products, such as chip and seal, asphalt millings, or a
similar product appropriate to the type and volume of anticipated traffic as
determined by the city.



   C.   Storage Lots. Storage areas for vehicles, equipment, and/or
materials, which are enclosed by an opaque screen that is a minimum of six
feet in height, may be surfaced with material which limits the emissions of
dust, such as crushed stone or some type of aggregate base course treated
with a dust-control substance, such as calcium chloride, lignin sulfonate, or
a similar product as approved by the city.



   D.   Display Areas. Display areas for vehicles, equipment, and/or
materials, which are screened from public street view by an opaque wall,
berming, landscaping or any combination thereof to a minimum of three  feet
in height, may be surfaced with material which limits the emissions of dust,
such as crushed stone or some type of aggregate base course treated with a
dust-control substance, such as calcium chloride, lignin sulfonate, or a
similar product as approved by the city.



   E.   Accessible Parking Spaces and Routes. Required accessible
parking stalls and accessible routes shall be paved with a surface that
allows for unimpeded travel by individuals with disabilities.



   F.   Approval. Plans and surfacing specifications for the
development of new parking lots, the paving of existing parking lots, or the
creation of equipment, vehicle, or materials storage or display areas shall
be submitted for review and approval as either a minor or major site plan
pursuant to Subsection 17.68.010.A.



(Ord. 1397.17.40 § 1, 2012: Ord. 1178 § 6.10.2(L), 1987)



17.56.140  Striping requirements.



   Except for townhouses and single-, two-, three-, and four-family
dwellings, all parking stalls shall be marked with painted lines not less
than four inches wide.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.10.2(M), 1987)



17.56.150  Lighting requirements.



   Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area shall be so
arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining property, abutting
residential uses and public rights-of-way and be in compliance with Chapter
15.48 of this code.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.10.2(N), 1987)



17.56.160  Signs not to obstruct—Compliance with city regulations.



   No sign shall be so located as to restrict the sight lines and orderly
operation and traffic movement within any parking lot. All signs shall
conform to the city sign requirements of the sign code codified in Chapter
15.24 of this code.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.10.2(O), 1987)



17.56.170  Curbing requirements.



   Except for townhouses and single-, two-, three-, and four-family
dwellings, all open off-street parking areas and driveways shall have a
concrete curb or other perimeter barrier approved by the planning director.
The perimeter barrier shall be no closer than three fee to property lines.
However, the city encourages shared access between parcels which may
eliminate the need for the perimeter barrier around the entire perimeter of a
parcel. The planning director will determine whether a perimeter barrier will
be needed around the entire perimeter of two or more parcels sharing parking
and/or driveway accesses during the design review process, subject to
approval by the planning and zoning commission.



(Ord. 1397.17.2 § 2, 1991)



17.56.180  Vehicles not to protrude over property lines.



   All on-site parking stalls which abut property lines shall be designed
and constructed such that parked vehicles shall not protrude over property
lines.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.10.2(Q), 1987)



17.56.190  Screening requirements.



   Every parking facility abutting property located in a residential
district shall be separated from such property by a decorative wall, view
obscuring fence, or permanently maintained hedge no less than five nor more
than six feet in height.



(Ord. 1397.17.3 § 2, 1991)



17.56.200  Maintenance responsibility.



   It shall be the joint and separate responsibility of the lessee and
owner of the principal use, uses or building to maintain in a neat and
adequate manner, the parking space, accessways, striping, landscaping, and
required fences.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.10.3, 1987)



17.56.210  Required parking areas to be used for parking only.



   Required accessory off-street parking spaces in any residential
district shall not be utilized for open storage, sale or rental of goods, or
storage of inoperable vehicles, unless approved for use for a special
temporary use.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.10.4), 1987)



17.56.220  Number of paved parking spaces required.



   The minimum number of paved off-street parking spaces as set out in
Table 17.56.220 codified at the end of this chapter shall be provided and
maintained by ownership, easement and/or lease for and during the life of the
respective uses designated.



(Ord. 1397.17.27 § 1, 2000; Ord. 1178.40 § 2, 1991; Ord. 1178 § 6.10.5,
1987)



17.56.230  Joint use of parking facilities allowed when.



   A.   Up to eighty percent of the parking facilities required by this
section for a church or for an auditorium incidental to a public or parochial
school may be supplied by the off-street parking facilities by the following
daytime uses: banks, business offices, retail stores, personal service shops,
household equipment or furniture shops, clothing or shoe repair or service
shops, manufacturing, wholesale and similar uses.



   B.   Other joint use of parking by adjacent commercial uses to
reduce total paved parking spaces may be allowed with approved parking study
submittal by a registered transportation engineer.



   C.   Conditions required for joint use:



   1.   The building or use for which application is being made to
utilize the off-street parking facilities provided by another building or use
shall be located within three hundred feet of the parking facilities;



   2.   The applicant shall show that there isno substantial conflict
in the operating hours of the two buildings or uses for which joint use of
off-street parking facilities is proposed;



   3.   A properly drawn legal instrument, executed by the parties
concerned for a joint use of off-street parking facilities, duly approved as
to form and manner of execution by the city attorney, shall be filed with the
city clerk and recorded with the county recorder.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.10.6, 1987)



17.56.240  Off-site parking—Terms and conditions.



   A.   Any off-site parking which is used to meet the requirements of
this title shall be a conditional use as regulated by this title and shall be
subject to the conditions listed below.



   B.   Off-site parking shall be developed and maintained in
compliance with all requirements and standards of this title.



   C.   Reasonable access from off-site parking facilities to the use
being served shall be provided.



   D.   The site used for meeting the off-site parking requirements of
this title shall be under the same ownership as the principal use being
served, under public ownership, or shall have guaranteed permanent use by
virtue of a perpetual lease filed with the city clerk and county clerk.



   E.   Off-site parking for multiple-family dwellings shall not be
located more than two hundred feet from any normally used entrance of the
principal use served.



   F.   Off-site parking for nonresidential uses shall not be located
more than three hundred feet from the site of the principal use being used.



   G.   Any use which depends upon off-site parking to meet the
requirements of this title shall maintain ownership or prove a long term
irrevocable lease agreement for parking utilization of the off-site location.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.10.7, 1987)



Article II. Off-Street Loading Berth Requirements



17.56.250  Affected uses.



   A.   Every hotel, restaurant, department store, freight terminal or
railroad yard, hospital or sanitarium, industrial plant, manufacturing
establishment, retail establishment, storage warehouse or wholesale
establishment, and all other structures de-voted to similar mercantile or
industrial pursuits, which has an aggregate gross floor area of fifteen
thousand square feet or more shall provide off-street truck loading or
unloading berths in accordance with Table 17.56.250 codified at the end of
this chapter.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.11.11, 1987)



17.56.260  Standards.



   All off-street loading facilities shall conform to the following
standards:



   A.   Unless otherwise specified in these zoning regulations, the
first loading berth shall be at least seventy feet in length and additional
berths required shall be at least forty-five feet in length and all loading
berths shall be at least twelve feet in width and fourteen feet in height,
exclusive of aisle and maneuvering space;



   B.   Such space may occupy all or any part of any required yard
space, except front and exterior side yards, and shall not be located closer
than fifty feet to any lot in any residential zone unless separated from the
zone, except at the accesses, by a masonry wall not less than eight feet in
height;



   C.   Sufficient room for turning and maneuvering vehicles shall be
provided on the site so that vehicles shall cross a property line only by
driving forward;



   D.   Each loading berth shall be accessible from a street or alley
or from an aisle or drive connecting with a street or alley;



   E.   The loading area, aisles, and access drives shall be paved so
as to provide a durable, dustless surface and shall be so graded and drained
so as to dispose of surface water without damage to private or public
properties, streets or alleys;



   F.   Bumper rails shall be provided at locations where needed for
safety or to protect property;



   G.   If the loading area is illuminated, lighting shall be deflected
away from abutting residential sites so as to cause no annoying glare;



   H.   No regular repair work or servicing of vehicles shall be
conducted in a loading area;



   I.   Off-street loading facilities shall be located on the same site
with the use for which the berths are required;



   J.   If more than one use is located on a site, the number of
loading berths provided shall be equal to the sum of the requirements
prescribed in this title for each use. If more than one use is located on a
site and the gross floor area of each use is less than the minimum for which
loading berths are required but the aggregate gross floor area is greater
than the minimum for which loading berths are required, off-street loading
berths shall be provided as if the aggregate gross floor area were used for
the use requiring the greatest number of loading berths;



   K.   Off-street loading facilities for a single use shall not be
considered as providing required off-street loading facilities for any other
use;



   L.   At the time of initial occupancy, major alterations or
enlargement of a site, or of completion of construction of a structure or of
a major alteration or enlargement of a structure, there shall be provided
off-street loading berth requirements. The number of loading berths provided
for a major alteration or enlargement of a site or structure shall be in
addition to the number existing prior to the alteration or enlargement;



   M.   Space allocated to any off-street loading berth shall not be
used to satisfy the space requirements for any off-street parking facility.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.11.2, 1987)



Chapter 17.56 - Tables



Table 17.56.020



 



Angle
 
Width1
 
Length
 
Aisle Width2


 
Standard
 
Handi-
capped
 
Standard
 
Handi-
capped
 


90 degrees
 
9'
 
13'
 
18'
 
18'
 
25'


60 degrees
 
9'
 
13'
 
18'
 
18'
 
20'


45 degrees
 
9'
 
13'
 
18'
 
18'
 
15'3


1 As measured by a line perpendicular to the stall line at a point on the
outside end of the stall, except when the stall is on the inside edge of a
curve, in which case the point of measurement shall be on the inside end of
the stall.


2 For 90 degree parking, aisles are 2-way; for 60 degree and 45 degree
parking they are 1-way only.


3 Except where needed as a fire lane in which case a 20_ minimum is required.




 



Table 17.56.080
Minimum Corner Clearances



 



 

Intersection Control Dimensions (Feet)




Facility

 
1
 
2
 
3
 
4
 
5


Major Arterial (S)
 
230
 
120
 
230
 
230
 
100


Minor Arterial/
Collector (S)
 
175
 
85
 
175
 
175
 
0


Major Arterial (U)
 
120
 
120
 
85
 
120
 
100


Minor Arterial/
Collector (U)
 
75
 
85
 
85
 
75
 
0


Note: S=Signalized; U=Unsignalized







 



Table 17.56.090
MINIMUM DRIVEWAY SPACING (CENTERLINE TO CENTERLINE)



 




Facility

 

Land Use

 

Minimum
Spacing
(Feet)



Major Arterial
 
 


 
Commercial; High Density/High
Activity
 
200


 
Industrial/Office Park; Low to
Moderate Activity
 
275


Minor Arterial
 
 


 
Commercial; High Density/Activity
 
150


 
Industrial/Office Park; Low to
Moderate Activity
 
230


 
Multifamily Residential; Low to
Moderate Activity
 
150




 



Table 17.56.220



 



 
 

Off-Street Parking Spaces Required



Dwelling Types
 
W/Street Parking
 
W/O Street Parking


Single Family
 
2 Spaces/Unit
 
3 Spaces/Unit


Mobile Homes
 
2 Spaces/Unit
 
3 Spaces/Unit


Two-Family
 
2 Spaces/Unit
 
2.25 Spaces/Unit


Three-Family
 
2 Spaces/Unit
 
2.25 Spaces/Unit


Four-Family
 
2 Spaces/Unit
 
2.25 Spaces/Unit


Townhouse
 
2 Spaces/Unit
 
2.25 Spaces/Unit


Apartments
 
1 Space/studio and one bedroom unit; 2 spaces/two bedroom (or more) unit; and
1 guest space for every ten units
 
1 Space/studio and one bedroom unit; 2 spaces/two bedroom (or more) unit; and
1 guest space for every ten units


Boarding Houses
 
2.25 Spaces/Unit
 
2.25 Spaces/Unit


Group Homes
 
1 Space per Potential Guest Room
 
1 Space per Potential Guest Room


B. Nonresidential Uses.
 


Use Type
 
Off-Street Parking Spaces Required


Automobile Sales
 
a. One (1) space per 200 square feet of indoor floor area, plus

b. Two (2) spaces per 20 outdoor vehicle display spaces


 
 


Automobile Washing Establishment:

-Automatic Drive- Through

- Self-Service
 

 

a. Three (3) spaces or one for each employee on maximum shift, in addition to
stacking space

a. Two (2) spaces per stall not including washing or drying spaces

 


Bowling Alley
 
a. Four (4) spaces per alley, plus

b. Two (2) spaces per billiard table, plus

c. One (1) space per pinball and/or electronic game machine

d. One (1) space per each five visitor gallery seats


Church
 
a. One (1) space per four seats based upon design capacity of main assembly
hall


Community or Recreation Center
 
a. One (1) space per 200 square feet of floor area


Convenience Store
 
a. Two (2) spaces per service stall but no less than four (4) spaces


Court Clubs, (Raquetball, Handball, Tennis)
 
a. One (1) space per 200 square feet of floor area, plus 3 spaces per court


Dancehalls, Skating Rinks or Similar Uses
 
a. One (1) space per 300 square feet of floor area


Day Care Centers
 
a. One (1) space per 200 square feet of floor area


Elderly (Senior Citizens) Housing
 
a. One (1) space per unit


Furniture Stores Over 20,000 Square Feet
 
a. Three (3) spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area


Golf Courses
 
a. One (1) space per 200 square feet of main building floor area, plus

b. One (1) space for every two practice trees in driving range, plus

c. Four (4) spaces per each green in the playing area


Hospital
 
a. One (1) space per bed


Manufacturing and Industrial Uses
 
a. One (1) space/750 square feet for the first 20,000 square feet of floor
area, plus

b. One (1) space/1,000 square feet for floor area between 20,001 and 100,000,
plus

c. One (1) space/1,500 square feet of floor area over 100,000 square feet, or

d. One (1) space per employee on the shift with the highest number of
employees, whichever is greater.

e. Office space shall be calculated using the parking standard for general
office.

f. Building area dedicated exclusively to warehousing/storage shall be
calculated at one (1) space per 1,500 square feet of floor area.

g. Manufacturing or industrial uses with verifiable unique manufacturing
characteristics that would require fewer parking spaces than those otherwise
required by this table may propose alternative parking ratios, based on the
unique characteristics of that industry. Use of the alternative parking
standards shall require:

    1. Approval by the Planning and Development

        Director;

    2. Demonstration that there is adequate room on

        the site to provide the parking required by

        provisions a.-f., if such parking is needed in

        the future; and

    3. A recorded agreement between the City and

        the property owner, verifying that the

        property owner will provide additional

        on-site parking, up to the minimum required

        by provisions a.-f., if  needed due to future

        employee and/or customer parking demand as

        determined by the City.


Medical, Dental, Health Offices/Clinics
 
One (1) space per 200 square feet of floor area


Motels, Hotels

 

 

-Restaurants, Bars, Dining Rooms

 

-Commercial Areas

-Public Assembly Areas
 
a. One and one-tenth (1.1) spaces per each guest room, plus

b. One (1) space per employee on maximum shift, plus

c. Spaces for accessory uses as follows:

d. One (1) space per 60 square feet

 

 

e. One (1) space per each 400 square feet of floor area

f. One (1) space for each five seats based upon design capacity, except that

g. Total off-street parking for public assembly may be reduced by one space
for every four guest rooms.


Nursing Homes, Rest Homes or Similar Uses
 
a. Four (4) spaces, plus

b. One (1) space for each three beds, plus

c. One (1) space for each employee on maximum shift


Offices (Except Medical and Dental)

-Floor Area 0- 5,000 square feet

-Floor Area 5,000-20,000 square feet

-Floor Area over 20,000 square feet
 
a. Minimum of four (4) spaces and

 

b. Four (4) spaces per 1,000 square feet

c. Three and one-half (3.5) spaces per 1,000 square feet

d. Three (3) spaces per 1,000 square feet


Plant Nurseries, Building Materials Sales, Equipment Rental and Similar Uses
 
a. One (1) space per 300 square feet of office and/or inside retail sales
area, plus

b. One (1) space per 1,000 square feet of outdoor storage, sales and/or
display area between 0-10,000 square feet, plus

c. One (1) space per 2,000 square feet of outdoor storage sales, and/or
display area over 10,000 square feet.


Restaurants, Cafes, Bars and Similar Uses
 
a. One (1) space per 100 square feet of floor area, plus

b. One (1) space per 200 square feet of outdoor serving (patio) area


Retail Store and Service Establishments
 
a. One (1) space per 250 square feet of floor area, plus

b. One (1) space per 500 square feet of accessory outdoor sales and/or
display area, plus

c. One (1) space per 1,000 square feet of accessory fenced outdoor storage
area.


Schools

-Elementary and/or Junior High

 

 

 

 


-Senior High

 

 

 

 

 

 


-Business or Similar School
 

a. One and one-half (1.5) spaces for each classroom, library, lecture hall
and cafeterias, plus

b. One (1) space per each three fixed seats in the main area of public
assembly, or

c. One (1) space for each 21 square feet of area available for public
assembly if fixed seats are not provided.

 

a. One and one-half (1.5) spaces for each classroom or lecture hall, plus

b. One (1) space per each five students, plus

c. One (1) space for each non-teaching employee, plus

d. One (1) space per each three fixed seats in the area of public assembly, or

e. One (1) space per 21 square feet of area available for public assembly if
fixed seats are not provided.

 

a. One (1) space for each 150 square feet of floor area


Swap Meets, Flea Markets
 
One (1) space per 300 square feet of designated vendor area.


Theater, Auditorium or Similar Place of Public Assembly
 
a. One (1) space per four seats based upon design capacity


Warehousing, Storage or Handling of Bulk Goods
 
a. One (1) space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area for a building
between 0 and 150,000 square feet.


b. One (1) parking space per 2,000 square feet of gross floor area for a
building between 150,001 and 500,000 square feet.


c. One (1) parking space per 2,500 square feet of gross floor area over
500,000 square feet.




 



(Ord. 1397.17.42 § 1, 2012: Ord. 1397.17.36 § 16, 2009: Ord. 1397.17.46 §
1, 2015)



Table 17.56.250



 



Square Feet of Aggregate Gross Floor Area Devoted To Such Use
 

Required No.
of Berths



15,000 square feet up to and including 40,000 square feet
 

1



40,001 square feet up to and including 100,000 square feet
 

2



100,001 square feet up to and including 160,000 square feet
 

3



160,001 square feet up to and including 240,000 square feet
 

4



240,001 square feet up to and including 320,000 square feet
 

5



320,001 square feet up to and including 400,000 square feet
 

6



400,001 square feet up to and including 490,000 square feet
 

7



For each additional 90,000 square feet
 

1 additional



Any office building 100,000 square feet or larger shall have at least one (1)
off-street loading berth.




 



Chapter 17.58
MISCELLANEOUS STORAGE STANDARDS AND HANDLING OF HAZARDOUS WASTE



Sections:



17.58.010   Glare and lighting facilities.



17.58.020   Surface-water ponding to be retained where possible.



17.58.030   Storage and exterior display requirements.



17.58.040   Exterior incineration or storage of trash prohibited.



17.58.050   Provision of refuse containers required.



17.58.060   Public-street frontage.



17.58.070   Emission of particulate matter to be in compliance.



17.58.080   Bulk storage to comply with certain requirements.



17.58.090   Discharge of hazardous waste to comply with certain
requirements.



17.58.100   Emission of odors.



17.58.110   Emission of noise.



17.58.120   Electrical disturbance.



17.58.130   Liquid or solid waste.



17.58.140   Radioactivity.



17.58.010  Glare and lighting facilities.



   Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area, sign or
other structure, shall be arranged so as to deflect light away from any
adjoining residential zone or from the public streets. In addition, all
lighting facilities shall comply with the city's Dark Sky Ordinance, Chapter
15.48.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.12.1, 1987)



17.58.020  Surface-water ponding to be retained where possible.



   Natural ponding in areas shall be retained as much as possible or, if
necessary, enlarged or modified as directed by the city engineer to restrict
the off-site runoff; subject to city subdivision requirements for stormwater
runoff control, the city's Master Stormwater Drainage Study, or the
Stormwater Retention Ordinance.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.12.2, 1987)



17.58.030  Storage and exterior display requirements.



   All materials, supplies, merchandise or other similar matter not on
display for direct sale, rental or lease to the ultimate customer or user
shall be stored within the confines of a one hundred percent opaque wall or
fence not less than six feet tall. Merchandise which is offered for sale as
described may be displayed beyond the confines of a building in any general
commercial district, but the area occupied by the outdoor display shall not
constitute a greater number of square feet than ten percent of the ground
floor area of the building housing the principal use, unless such merchandise
is a type customarily displayed outdoors such as automobiles and garden
supplies. No storage of any type shall be permitted within the one-half of
the required front or side street setback nearest the street nor within any
required interior side or rear setback.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.12.3, 1987)



17.58.040  Exterior incineration or storage of trash prohibited.



   No exterior incineration of trash or garbage is permissible. No
exterior storage of trash or garbage is permissible except in an accessory
building enclosed by walls and a roof or in closed containers within a
totally screened area.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.12.4, 1987)



17.58.050  Provision of refuse containers required.



   It shall be the duty of the owner or developer of all new single-family
residential construction and development within the city, when such
development is not subject to the provisions of the city subdivision
ordinance with respect to refuse containers, to provide at his/her expense
refuse containers which shall become the property of the city. The type of
such containers shall be approved by the city engineer.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.12.5, 1987)



17.58.060  Public street frontage.



   Except as otherwise allowed or required by this title, no lot shall
contain any building unless such lot abuts for at least fifty feet on a
public street or private street approved as part of a city approved Planned
Area Development.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.12.6, 1987)



17.58.070  Emission of particulate matter to be in compliance.



   The emission of smoke, dust and other particulate matter shall be in
compliance with the county bureau of air pollution standards as regulated by
the county health services department.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.12.7, 1987)



17.58.080  Bulk storage to comply with certain requirements.



   All uses associated with bulk storage of all gasoline, liquid
fertilizer, chemicals, flammable and similar liquids shall comply with
Uniform Building and Fire Code requirements and county regulations.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.12.8, 1987)



17.58.090  Discharge of hazardous waste to comply with certain requirements.



   Discharge of hazardous waste, chemicals or wastewater will be subject
to Arizona Department of Health Services, Division of Environmental Health
Standards.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.12.9, 1987)



17.58.100  Emission of odors.



   The emission of odors by any use shall be in compliance with city
standards and regulations.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.12.10, 1987)



17.58.110  Emission of noise.



   The emission of noise from any use shall be in compliance with city
standards and regulations.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.12.11, 1987)



17.58.120  Electrical disturbance.



   No activity shall be permitted which causes electrical disturbances
affecting the operation of any equipment located beyond the property line of
the activity.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.12.12, 1987)



17.58.130  Liquid or solid waste.



   No discharge at any point into any public or private disposal system or
stream, or into the ground, materials in such a way, nature or temperature as
can contaminate any water supply or otherwise cause the emission of dangerous
or objectionable elements, except in accordance with the standards approved
by the Arizona Health Department.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.12.13, 1987)



17.58.140  Radioactivity.



   The use shall conform to the regulations of the Arizona Atomic Energy
Commission with regard to sources of ionizing, radiation and radioactive
materials, and to any other applicable city, county and state regulations.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.12.14, 1987)



Chapter 17.60
HOME OCCUPATIONS



Sections:



17.60.010   In general.



17.60.020   Purpose of provisions.



17.60.030   Terms and conditions.



17.60.040   Examples of qualifying uses.



17.60.050   Prohibited uses.



17.60.010  In general.



   A home occupation is an accessory use of a dwelling unit, conducted
entirely within the dwelling unit, carried on by one or more persons, all of
whom reside within the dwelling unit, and where no persons are employed other
than resident and domestic help; anywhere the use is clearly incidental and
secondary to the use of the dwelling for residence purposes and does not
change the character thereof or adversely affect the uses permitted in the
residential district of which it is part. There shall be no outside storage
of any kind; any indoor storage, construction, alterations or electrical or
mechanical equipment used shall not change the fire rating of the structure
or the fire district in which it is located. The use may increase vehicular
traffic flow and parking by no more than one additional vehicle at a time. It
shall not cause an increase in the use of one or more utilities (water, sewer
or garbage) so that the combined total use for dwelling and home occupation
purposes of one or more utilities exceeds the average for residences in the
neighborhood. A home occupation permit may be approved for a local historic
landmark to allow a use that does not meet all of the conditions of Section
17.60.030, upon securing a conditional use permit, per the procedures as
outlined in Chapter 17.68, Article II of this code. However, such use shall
be reviewed and favorably recommended by the historic preservation commission
prior to consideration of approval by the planning and zoning commission.



(Ord. 1397.17.10 § 2, 1993)



17.60.020  Purpose of provisions.



   It is the intent of this chapter to eliminate as home occupations all
uses except those that conform to the standards set forth in this chapter. In
general, a home occupation is an accessory use so located and conducted that
the average neighbor, under normal circumstances, would not be aware of its
existence. The standards for home occupations in this chapter are intended to
ensure compatibility with other permitted uses and with the residential
character of the neighborhood, and a clearly secondary or incidental status
in relation to the residential use of the main building as the criteria for
determining whether a proposed accessory use qualifies as a home occupation.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.13.2, 1987)



17.60.030  Terms and conditions.



   A.   Home occupations are permitted accessory uses in residential
zones only so long as all the following conditions are observed:



   1.   Such occupation shall be conducted solely by resident occupants
in their residence;



   2.   No more than one room or twenty-five percent of the gross area
of one floor of the residence, whichever is less, shall be used for such
purpose. Use of accessory buildings or garages for these purposes is
prohibited;



   3.   No use shall require internal or external alterations or
involve construction features or the use of electrical or mechanical
equipment that would change the fire rating of the structure or the fire
district in which the structure is located;



   4.   No home occupation shall cause an increase in the use of any
one or more utilities (water, sewer, garbage, etc.) so that the combined
total use for dwelling and home occupation purposes exceeds the average for
residences in the neighborhood;



   5.   There shall be no outside storage of any kind related to the
home occupation;



   6.   The use may increase vehicular traffic flow and parking by no
more than one additional vehicle at a time;



   7.   No use shall create noise, dust, vibration, smell, smoke,
glare, electrical interference, fire hazard, or any other hazard or nuisance
to any greater or more frequent extent than that usually experienced in an
average residential occupancy in the district in question under normal
circumstances wherein no home occupation exists;



   8.   No home occupation shall be allowed to post any visible
advertising or sign on the premises.



   B.   Complaints by citizens or residents may be cause for
termination of the home occupation.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.13.3, 1987)



17.60.040  Examples of qualifying uses.



   The following are typical examples of uses which can be conducted
within the limits of the restrictions established in this section and thereby
qualify as home occupations. Uses which may qualify as “home occupations”
are not limited to those named in this section (nor does the listing of a use
in this section automatically qualify as a home occupation): accountant;
architect; artist; attorney-at-law; author; consultant; dressmaking;
individual stringed-instrument instruction; individual tutoring; insurance;
millinery; preserving and home cooking; realtor.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.13.4, 1987)



17.60.050  Prohibited uses.



   The following uses by the nature of the investment of operation have a
pronounced tendency, once started, to rapidly increase beyond the limits
permitted for home occupations and thereby impair the use and value of a
residentially zoned area for residential purposes. Therefore, the following
uses shall not be permitted as home occupations: automobile repair services,
minor or major; barber shop; carpentry work; dance instruction; dental
offices; medical offices; painting of vehicles, trailers or boats; photo
developing; photo studios; private schools with organized classes; radio
repair; television repair; upholstering.



(Ord. 1397.17.36 § 17, 2009: Ord. 1178 § 6.13.5, 1987)



Chapter 17.62
HISTORIC PRESERVATION



Sections:



17.62.010   Purpose.



17.62.020   Applicability.



17.62.030   Historic preservation commission.



17.62.040   Definitions.



17.62.050   Recommendation on designation of landmarks or historic
districts by the historic preservation commission.



17.62.060   Historic designation procedures.



17.62.070   Decision on landmarks or historic designation by city council.



17.62.080   De-listing of landmarks or elimination of historic district
designations.



17.62.090   Modification of contributing or non-contributing properties or
landmark designation.



17.62.100   Certificate of no effect or certificate of appropriateness
required.



17.62.110   Certificate of no effect application procedure.



17.62.120   Exterior modifications eligible for a certificate of no effect.



17.62.125   Review criteria for a certificate of no effect.



17.62.130   Certificate of appropriateness application procedure.



17.62.140   Criteria for approval of a certificate of appropriateness.



17.62.150   Appeal procedure.



17.62.160   Maintenance and repair required.



17.62.170   Adaptive reuse.



17.62.180   Effective date.



17.62.190   Penalty.



17.62.010  Purpose.



   In accordance with the city’s general plan and this title, the city
council may from time to time initiate the process to designate a historic
district, local landmarks, or initiate de-listing, all as defined in Section
17.62.040, within the municipality. The historic classification changes are
for the purpose of meeting the land use needs of the residents of the city in
conformance with the city’s general plan.



   A.   It is hereby declared as a matter of public policy that the
protection, enhancement and perpetuation of landmarks and historic districts
is necessary to promote the economic, cultural, educational and general
welfare of the public.



   B.   Inasmuch as the identity of a people is founded on its past,
and inasmuch as Casa Grande has many significant historic, architectural and
cultural resources that constitute its heritage, this act is intended to:



   1.   Protect and enhance the landmarks and historic districts that
represent distinctive elements of the city’s historic, architectural  and
cultural heritage;



   2.   Foster civic pride in accomplishments of the past;



   3.   Protect and enhance the city’s attractiveness to visitors and
the  support and stimulus to the economy thereby provided; and



   4.   Ensure the harmonious, orderly and efficient growth and
development of the city.



(Ord. 1397.17.47 § 3 (part), 2017; Ord. 1397.17.32  2 (part), 2004)



17.62.020  Applicability.



   This chapter applies to properties located within an area designated as
a historic district and properties designated as individual local landmarks.
The enforcement of, amendments to, and the administration of this chapter
shall be accomplished in accordance with the recommendations contained in the
city's general plan, as adopted from time to time.



(Ord. 1397.17.47 § 3 (part), 2017)



17.62.030  Historic preservation commission.



   There is hereby established a historic preservation commission with the
duties and responsibilities as set forth in Article IV of Chapter 17.08 of
this title.



(Ord. 1397.17.47 § 3 (part), 2017; Ord. 1397.17.32 § 2 (part), 2004)



17.62.040  Definitions.



   The following definitions shall apply specifically and exclusively to
this chapter.



   “Adaptive reuse” means the re-purposing of historic buildings to
new economically viable uses.



   “Alteration” means any construction or change of the exterior of a
building, object, site or structure designated a landmark, or located within
a historic district. For buildings, objects or structures, “alteration”
shall include, but is not limited to, the changing of roofing or siding
materials; changing, eliminating or adding doors, door frames, windows,
window frames, shutters, fences, railings, porches, balconies, swings or
other ornamentation, and the changing of paint color. “Alteration” shall
not include “ordinary repair and maintenance” as defined below.



   “Building” means a structure created to shelter any form of human
activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel or similar structure.
“Building” may refer to a historically-related complex, such as a
courthouse and jail or a house and barn.



   “Cemetery” means any site that contains at least one burial, marked
or previously marked, considered a dedicated cemetery under Arizona State
Statutes, even though suffering neglect or abuse.



   “Construction” means the act of adding an addition to a structure
or the erection of a new principal or accessory structure on a lot or
property.



   “Contributing”  means a classification applied to a building.
site, structure or object  signifying the individual contribution the
resource brings to the community in representation of the qualities that give
the community cultural, historic, architectural or archeological distinction.
A contributing classification can be applied to either a landmark or to those
properties within a historic district that are of individual importance.



   “De-listing” means removing a landmark status from a building,
site, sign, structure or object, or the elimination of a historic district.



   “Demolition” means any act or process that partially or totally
destroys a landmark or a structure within a historic district.



   “Department” means the planning and development department of the
city of Casa Grande.



   “Design guideline” means a specific type of design criteria
approved by the historic preservation commission, to be used to inform owners
of landmark buildings, and buildings located within a historic district of
the construction techniques that can be used in alteration, construction or
demolition activities to achieve compliance with required certificate of
appropriateness review criteria.



   “Director” means the director of the planning and development
department, or his or her designee.



   “Historic district” means an area with definable boundaries
designated as a “historic district” by the city council, and in which a
substantial number of the properties, sites, structures or objects have a
high degree of cultural, historic, architectural or archeological
significance and integrity.



   “HPC” means the historic preservation commission.



   “Landmark” means a property, site, structure or object that is
individually designated by the city council to be worthy of rehabilitation,
restoration and preservation because of its exceptional cultural, historic,
architectural or archeological significance to the city.



   “New floor area” refers to any change in use to an existing
eligible building proposed for adaptive reuse, located within the confines of
the existing interior portion of the exterior walls and roof.



   “Non-contributing” means a designation applied to a site, structure
or object within a historic district, indicating that it is not a
representation of the qualities that give the historic district cultural,
historic, architectural or archeological significance as embodied in the
criteria for designating a historic district.



   “Ordinary maintenance and repair” means regular, customary or usual
care, reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing building,
structure or object, for the purposes of preserving the property and
maintaining it in safe and sanitary condition.



   “Owner” means the property owner of record or their designated
representative.



   “Property” means land and improvements identified as a separate lot
for purposes of city subdivision and zoning regulations.



   “Structure” means anything constructed or erected, the use of which
requires a permanent or semi-permanent location on or in the ground,
including, without limitation, buildings, garages, fences, gazebos,
advertising signs, billboards, antennas, satellite-sending or -receiving
dishes, and swimming pools.



(Ord. 1397.17.47 § 3 (part), 2017; Ord. 1397.17.32 § 2 (part), 2004)



17.62.050  Recommendation on designation of landmarks or historic districts
by the historic preservation commission.



   A.   The HPC may recommend to city council that an individual
property, site, sign, structure or object be designated as a landmark if it:



   1.   Possesses special character, historic or aesthetic interest or
value as part of the cultural, political, economic or social history of the
locality, region, state or nation; or



   2.   Is identified with historic personages; or



   3.   Embodies the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural
style; or



   4.   Is the work of a designer whose work has significantly
influenced an age; or



   5.   Because of a unique location or singular physical
characteristic, represents an established and familiar visual feature of a
neighborhood; and



   6.   The owner of the property, site, sign, structure or object
concurs with the designation.



   B.   The HPC may recommend to the city council that a group of
properties has been designated as an historic district if it:



   1.   Contains several pieces of property that meet one or more of
the criteria for designation of a landmark; and



   2.   By reason of possessing such qualities, it constitutes a
district section of the city; and



   3.   The owners of more than 50% of the property within the boundary
of the proposed historic district concur with the designation.



(Ord. 1397.17.47 § 3 (part), 2017; Ord. 1397.17.32 § 2 (part), 2004)



17.62.060  Historic designation procedures.



   A.   The HPC shall hold a public hearing prior to designation of a
landmark or historic district.



   1.   Notice.



   a.   The HPC shall mail a notice of any proposed designation of a
landmark or historic district to the owner(s) of the proposed landmark, or
owners of real property within the proposed historic district, as well as all
property owners within 300 feet of the landmark or district boundary. The
notice shall describe the proposed designation and the date, time and
location of the public hearing to be held by the HPC.



   b.   Notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of
general circulation at least 15 days prior to the date of public hearing.



   2.   The HPC shall hold a public hearing on the designation, at
which time an opportunity will be provided for interested persons to present
their views. The testimony or documentary evidence at the hearing will become
part of a record regarding the historic, architectural or cultural importance
of the proposed landmark or historic district. The public hearing record may
also contain staff reports, public comments, or other evidence offered during
the hearing.



   B.   The HPC shall recommend to city council that the designation be
approved, approved with conditions, or denied. The HPC may postpone taking
action on the designation; however, any postponement shall be limited to a
maximum of 75 calendar days. This period may be extended with the written
permission of the applicant. In the event it does not make a recommendation
within this timeline, the HPC will be deemed to have recommended denial to
the city council.



   C.   All decisions of the HPC shall specify how the designation
complies or does not comply with the applicable review criteria. This
requirement may be met by the minutes of the meeting if the recommendation is
for approval, or may be met by a letter by the chairman, vice-chairman, or
staff liaison assigned to the HPC, outlining the relevant criteria and
applicability.



   D.   A copy of the decision shall be communicated in writing to the
applicant, if any.



(Ord. 1397.17.47 § 3 (part), 2017)



17.62.070  Decision on landmarks or historic designation by the city council.



   A.   After receipt of the report and recommendation of the HPC, the
city council shall consider the proposed designation of a landmark or
historic district.



   B.   Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given in
the time and manner as specified in Subsection 17.62.060(A)(1) of this
chapter. During any public hearing on the matter, the city council shall
consider oral or written statements from the applicant, city staff, the
public, and its own members.



   C.   The city council may approve, approve with conditions, postpone
or deny the proposed designation. Any postponement shall be limited to a
maximum of 75 days. This period may be extended with the written permission
of the applicant. In the event it does not take action within this timeline,
the city council will be deemed to have determined that the designation was
not in the best interest of the city, and the item or application will be
denied.



   D.   If approved, the city council shall adopt an ordinance that
results in the revision of the historic district or landmark map, and the
ordinance shall be recorded with Pinal County recorder’s office.



   E.   Signs designated as landmarks shall not be considered in
determining a site’s allocation of permitted attached or detached signs
pursuant to the city’s sign code.



(Ord. 1397.17.47 § 3 (part), 2017)



17.62.080  De-listing of landmarks or elimination of historic district
designation.



   A.   Initiation Process.



   1.   De-listing of a Landmark. The HPC, the city council or the
property owner may initiate the de-listing process for an individual landmark
property when the property has ceased to meet the criteria for a
“landmark.”



   2.   Elimination of a District. The HPC or the city council may
initiate elimination of an existing historic district. Property owners of
more than 50% of the area of an existing historic district may initiate the
elimination of a historic district with the submittal of a petition.



   B.   Application. An application shall be filed with the department
for the de-listing or district elimination, which will be forwarded to the
HPC for consideration.



   C.   Review Criteria. The HPC shall hold a public hearing on all
properly filed de-listing or district elimination applications, and make a
recommendation in accordance with the following review criteria.



   1.   District Elimination. The district has lost its special
characteristics or historic features so that it no longer contributes to the
historic character of the community.



   2.   Landmark De-listing.



   a.   The landmark has lost its special characteristics or historic
features to the extent that it no longer contributes to the historic
character of the community; or



   b.   The building, structure, object, sign or site has been
substantially damaged or destroyed by a catastrophic event such that it no
longer meets the criteria for designation as a local landmark or placement on
the state or national historic register.



   D.   HPC Public Hearing Notification Requirements and Recommendation.



   1.   Notification of the public hearing shall be in accordance with
Subsection 17.62.060(A)(1).



   2.   The HPC shall recommend to city council that the application be
approved, approved with conditions, or denied. The HPC may postpone taking
action on the application; however, any postponement shall be limited to a
maximum of 75 days. This period may be extended with the written permission
of the applicant. In the event it does not make a recommendation within this
timeline, the HPC will be deemed to have recommended denial to the city
council.



   3.   All decisions of the HPC shall specify how the designation
complies or does not comply with the applicable review criteria. This
requirement may be met by the minutes of the meeting if the recommendation is
for approval, or may be met by a letter by the chairman, vice-chairman, or
staff liaison assigned to the HPC, outlining the relevant criteria and
applicability.



   4.   A copy of the decision shall be communicated in writing to the
applicant.



   E.   City Council Consideration. City council shall hold a public
hearing and make a decision on  all requests to eliminate a historic
district or de-list a landmark in accordance with the procedures set forth in
Section 17.62.070.



(Ord. 1397.17.47 § 3 (part), 2017)



17.62.090  Modification of contributing or non-contributing property or
landmark designation.



   A.   An owner of a contributing property, located within an historic
district, may request that their property be re-classified as a
non-contributing property. This reclassification shall be automatically
approved by the director upon receipt of a completed application requesting
the re-classification.



   B.   An owner of a non-contributing property, located within an
historic district, may request that their property be re-classified as a
contributing property in accordance with the following procedures.



   1.   If the property had previously been classified as contributing,
but re-classified at the owner’s request, the change back to the
contributing status shall be automatic if no additions were constructed to
the property while classified as non-contributing. The reclassification shall
be automatically approved by the director upon receipt of a completed
application.



   2.   If the property had never been classified as contributing, or
was a prior contributing property that had building additions added while
classified as non-contributing, then the application form requesting
reclassification shall be accompanied by a historic survey prepared by a
qualified historic preservation consultant. The application shall require
review and approval by the HPC.



   C.   Upon complete destruction or demolition of a contributing
property, it shall be automatically reclassified as a non-contributing
property, and any landmark designation shall be automatically removed by
administrative action of the director.



(Ord. 1397.17.47 § 3 (part), 2017)



17.62.100  Certificate of no effect or certificate of appropriateness
required.



   A.   No modifications to the exterior paint color may be made to a
non-contributing property until a certificate of no effect is approved.



   B.   No person shall carry out any exterior alteration, restoration,
reconstruction, demolition, new construction, or moving of a landmark, or a
contributing property within a historic district; nor shall any person make
any material change in the appearance of such a property, including windows,
doors, security doors, roofs, light fixtures, signs, sidewalks, fences,
steps, paving or other exterior elements visible from a public street, which
affect the appearance and cohesiveness of the historic landmark or historic
district, without first obtaining a certificate of no effect from the
department or a certificate of appropriateness from the HPC.



   C.   This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the city from
undertaking any abatement activities pursuant to Title 8 of this code or from
requiring the city to obtain a certificate of no effect or a certificate of
appropriateness for any abatement undertaken pursuant to Title 8.



(Ord. 1397.17.47 § 3 (part), 2017; Ord. 1397.17.32  2 (part), 2004)



17.62.110  Certificate of no effect application procedure.



   A.   Prior to the commencement of any work requiring a certificate
of no effect, the owner shall file an application for such a certificate with
the department.



   B.   No permit shall be issued for such proposed work until a
certificate of no effect has first been issued by the department. The
certificate of no effect required by this act shall be in addition to, and
not in lieu of, any permit that may be required by any other city ordinance,
rule or regulation.



   C.   The director shall approve, approve with modifications, request
additional information, or refer the certificate of no effect within ten
business days after submission of a complete application.



   1.   A copy of any decision shall be communicated in writing to the
applicant.



   2.   If the decision is to request additional information, modify
the application, or deny the application, a written explanation, setting for
the basis of the decision, shall be communicated in writing to the applicant.



   3.   If a certificate of no effect is referred, within 30 days the
application will be forwarded to the historic preservation commission for
consideration as a certificate of appropriateness.



(Ord. 1397.17.47 § 3 (part), 2017; Ord. 1397.17.32 § 2 (part), 2004)



17.62.120  Exterior modifications eligible for a certificate of no effect.



   A.   Changing of exterior paint colors on a non-contributing
property.



   B.   The following exterior modifications to contributing or
landmark properties shall be considered minor work that is eligible for
review under a certificate of no effect.



   1.   Re-painting to a color like or similar  to the existing
exterior paint color.



   2.   Re-roofing with materials that are similar in color and
materials to existing roofing.



   3.   Installing or replacing any of the following:



   a.   Exterior light fixtures;



   b.   Windows that are similar in design to existing windows;



   c.   Doors that are similar in design to existing doors;



   d.   Security screen doors;



   e.   Sun shades to windows;



   f.   Solar panels.



   4.   Other similar work of a minor nature.



(Ord. 1397.17.47 § 3 (part), 2017)



17.62.125  Review criteria for a certificate of no effect.



   The director shall issue a certificate of no effect if:



   A.   It is determined to be compatible with the historic character
of the subject property, as well as with the historic character of the
surrounding district, if applicable.



   B.   In any case the proposed work will not diminish, eliminate or
adversely affect the historic character of the landmark, subject property, or
district.



   C.   Prior, unapproved exterior alterations shall not be used as a
basis for certificate of no effect approval.



(Ord. 1397.17.47 § 3 (part), 2017; Ord. 1397.17.32  2 (part), 2004)



17.62.130  Certificate of appropriateness application procedure.



   A.   Prior to the commencement of any work requiring a certificate
of appropriateness, the owner shall file an application for such a
certificate with the department. The application shall not be required in the
case of a certificate of no effect that is referred to the HPC. Certificate
of appropriateness applications for demolition of unsafe structures may be
initiated by the director or the property owner. Notices of proposed
certificate of appropriateness applications shall be mailed to surrounding
property owners within 300 feet of the subject property, informing them of
the opportunity to review and comment on the application.



   B.   No permit shall be issued for such proposed work until a
certificate of appropriateness has first been issued by the HPC. The
certificate of appropriateness shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of,
any permit that may be required by any other city ordinance, rule or
regulation.



   C.   The HPC shall notice and hold a public hearing on the
application in accordance with the procedures set forth in Subsection
17.62.060(A).



   D.   The HPC shall approve, approve with conditions, postpone,
request additional information, or deny the certification of appropriateness.
Any postponement shall be limited to a maximum of 75 days. This period may be
extended with the written permission of the applicant. In the event the HPC
does not make a recommendation within this timeline, the HPC will be deemed
to have approved the application.



   E.   All decisions of the HPC shall be communicated to the applicant
in writing, and specify whether the application was found to be in compliance
with the relevant certificate of appropriateness review criteria. This
requirement may be met by the minutes of the meeting if the recommendation is
for approval, or may be met by a letter by the chairman, vice-chairman or
staff liaison assigned to the HPC, outlining the relevant criteria and
applicability. All decisions shall also be communicated by the director to
the city council.



(Ord. 1397.17.47 § 3 (part), 2017; Ord. 1397.17.32  2 (part), 2004)



17.62.140  Criteria for approval of a certificate of appropriateness.



   A.   In its review of a certificate of appropriateness application,
the HPC decision shall be based upon the following principles of
compatibility.



   1.   Properties that contribute to the character of the historic
district shall be retained, with their historic features altered as little as
possible.



   2.   New exterior construction shall be compatible with the district
in which it is located.



   3.   Any exterior alteration of existing historic landmark
properties shall be compatible with their historic character.



   B.   In applying the principles of compatibility, the HPC shall
consider the following factors:



   1.   The general design, character and appropriateness of the
proposed alteration or new construction;



   2.   The scale of proposed alteration or new construction in
relation to the property itself, surrounding properties, and the neighborhood;



   3.   The texture, materials and color, and their relation to similar
features of other properties in the neighborhood;



   4.   Visual compatibility with surrounding properties, including
proportion of the property’s front facade, proportion and arrangement of
windows and other openings with the facade, roof shape, and the rhythm of
spacing of properties on streets, including setback;



   5.   The importance of historic, architectural or other features to
the significance of the property; and



   6.   As a guide to rehabilitation work, the commission shall utilize
the current edition of the Secretary of the Interior’s standards for
rehabilitation.



   C.   In considering an application for a certificate of
appropriateness for a contributing property, the HPC shall consider the
following criteria and economic conditions.



   1.   For applications involving alterations to the exterior of the
building or signs, the following shall apply:



   a.   The cost of the required modifications to the materials,
product or design proposed by the applicant. The cost shall include
materials, labor, maintenance, water and energy.



   b.   Historic landmark signs located on the premises do not count
toward the maximum total sign area.



   2.   For applications involving the demolition of a structure, the
following shall apply:



   a.   The property is incapable of earning a reasonable return,
regardless of whether that return represents the most profitable return
possible;



   b.   The property cannot be adapted for any other use, whether by
the current owner or by a purchaser, that could result in a reasonable return;



   c.   Efforts have been made to find a purchaser interested in
preserving the property; and



   d.   The applicant has consulted in good faith with the department,
local preservation groups, and interested parties, in a diligent effort to
seek an alternative that will result in preservation of the property.



   D.   Prior, unapproved exterior alterations shall not be used as a
basis for certificate of appropriateness approval.



   E.   In reviewing an application for a certificate of
appropriateness, the HPC shall not consider changes to interior spaces, but
shall encourage property owner(s) to maintain any interior features that may
have historical interest.



   F.   No member of the HPC shall advise or express an opinion about a
proposed certificate of appropriateness outside of a regular meeting.



(Ord. 1397.17.47 § 3 (part), 2017; Ord. 1397.17.32 § 2 (part), 2004)



17.62.150  Appeal procedure.



   A.   The applicant may appeal a decision by the HPC to the city
council. The city council may review the record of proceedings before the
HPC, but city council review and decision will be de novo on all matters.



   B.   Any appeal application shall be filed within 30 days after the
date of the HPC decision and not thereafter.



   C.   No building permit or demolition permit shall be issued unless
the city council has made a final decision to approve the appeal.



   D.   The city council shall hold a public hearing on the appeal
application within 60 days of filing an appeal application that has been
determined to be administratively complete. The notice and procedures for the
hearing shall be in accordance with the provisions of Subsection
17.62.060(A)(1).



   1.   If the appeal is denied, the city council’s decision shall
state the reasons for the denial.



   2.   A copy of any decision shall be communicated in writing to the
applicant.



(Ord. 1397.17.47 § 3 (part), 2017; Ord. 1397.17.32  2 (part), 2004)



17.62.160  Maintenance and repair required.



   A.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the
ordinary maintenance and repair of any exterior architectural feature of a
landmark or property within a historic district, which does not involve a
change in design, material, color or outward appearance.



   B.   No owner or person with an interest in real property designated
as a landmark or included within a historic district shall permit the
property to fall into a serious state of disrepair so as to result in the
deterioration of any exterior architectural feature that would, in the
judgment of the director, produce a detrimental effect upon the character of
the historic district as a whole, or the life and character of the property
itself. Examples of such deterioration include:



   1.   Deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports;



   2.   Deterioration of roofs or other horizontal members;



   3.   Deterioration of exterior chimneys;



   4.   Deterioration or crumbling of exterior stucco or mortar;



   5.   Ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs or
foundations, including broken windows or doors;



   6.   Deterioration of any feature so as to create a hazardous
condition that could lead to the claim that demolition is necessary for the
public safety.



   C.   Upon making a determination that a person has violated
subsection B of this section, the director shall order, in writing, the
correction of any violation. Such order shall state the nature of the
violation, the provision violated, and the time by which the violation must
be corrected. A decision of the director may be appealed to the board of
adjustment in accordance with Article VI of Chapter 17.68 of this title.



(Ord. 1397.17.47 § 3 (part), 2017; Ord. 1397.17.32  2 (part), 2004)



17.62.170  Adaptive reuse.



   A.   Purpose. The purpose of adaptive reuse is to provide
flexibility in the development standards applicable to landmarks or
commercially zoned properties located within a historic district. This
process is intended to provide incentives that allow these types of buildings
to be modified so that they can remain as economically viable uses while
preserving their historical integrity.



   B.   Adaptive reuse proposals shall either be considered a minor or
major adaptive reuse, as determined by the following.



      1.   Minor Adaptive Reuse. Adaptive reuse of a landmark or
commercially zoned properties shall be minor if the adaptive reuse proposal:



         a.   Is to convert a non-residential use to another use;



         b.   Proposes a structural modification that results in
the addition of net floor area not to exceed 25% of the square footage of the
structure existing as of the effective date established in Section 17.62.180;
or



         c.   Proposes an increase in height beyond the maximum
height permitted in the zoning district by no more than 25% of the structure
existing as of the effective date established in Section 17.62.180.



      2.   Major Adaptive Reuse. Adaptive reuse of a landmark or
commercially zoned properties shall be major unless specifically designated
as a minor adaptive reuse.



   C.   Development Standards



      1.   Minor Adaptive Reuse.



         a.   Setbacks.



            i.   Structural additions shall be allowed to
encroach into the minimum setbacks of the zoning district in which they are
located without the need for a variance or administrative allowance, as long
as the additions do not encroach into the required setbacks more than the
existing structure does as of the effective date established in Section
17.62.180.



            ii.   Structural additions proposed to be located
closer to the property boundaries than the existing structure may encroach
into the minimum setbacks without the need for a variance, subject to
approval of an administrative allowance in accordance with Subsection
17.62.170(C)(3).



         b.   Height.



            i.   Structural additions shall be allowed to
exceed the maximum height of the zone district in which they are located
without the need for a variance or administrative allowance, as long as the
additions do not exceed the maximum building height more than the existing
structure does as of the effective date established in Section 17.62.180.



            ii.   Structural additions proposed to have a
height exceeding the height of the existing structure may exceed the maximum
building height without the need for a variance, subject to approval of an
administrative allowance in accordance with Subsection 17.62.170(C)(3).



         c.   Parking.



            i.   New parking spaces shall not be required,
provided that the number of all existing on-site spaces is maintained and not
reduced.



            ii.   The location and construction of new parking
areas must be designed and located in accordance with the requirements of the
zoning ordinance, except that both tandem parking spaces and those that back
directly out into the street may be approved if the director finds them to be
safe and appropriate.



         d.   Access and Driveways. Existing access and driveways
shall be permitted to remain despite the adaptive reuse, unless the city
engineer, or his or her designee, determines that the existing access points
or driveways create an unsafe traffic condition.



         e.   Open Space and Landscaping. The amount of open
space and landscaping required may be reduced or an alternative compliance
approach used, which may be approved by the director when it is determined
that all reasonable attempts to fulfill the requirements have been exhausted,
and the development is not able to accommodate the landscape or open space
requirements due to the urban infill or historic characteristic of the
development site.



         f.   Nonconforming Uses or Structures.  Notwithstanding
Chapter 17.64, minor adaptive reuse buildings or structures classified as
legal nonconforming uses may be continued, expanded, modified or relocated in
accordance with Subsection 17.62.170(C)(1), without losing their status as
legal nonconforming uses, solely as a result of the minor adaptive reuse.



      2.   Major Adaptive Reuse.



         a.   Setbacks. May be granted up to 20% reduction in
minimum required setbacks, subject to approval of an administrative allowance
in accordance with Subsection 17.62.170(C)(3).



         b.   Height. May be granted up to 10% increase in
maximum building height, subject to approval of an administrative allowance
in accordance with Subsection 17.62.170(C)(3).



         c.   Parking. Parking requirements may be reduced by up
to 20%, subject to approval of an administrative allowance in accordance with
Subsection 17.62.170(C)(3).



         d.   Open Space and Landscaping. Open space and
landscaping requirements may be reduced or modified in accordance with
Subsection 17.62.170(C)(1)(e).



      3.   Administrative Allowance Procedures. Relief from specific
setback and parking requirements, as well as limited height increases, may be
granted by the historic preservation commission in conjunction with the
review of a certificate of appropriateness associated with an adaptive reuse
application, upon finding the following criteria are met:



         a.   Relief from the requirements is necessary to make
the adaptive reuse project economically viable;



         b.   The modification can achieve compatibility with the
surrounding development;



         c.   The proposed relief will allow the new construction
to complement the historical character of the development; and



         d.   The allowance will not result in a material adverse
impact to surrounding properties.



   D.   Construction Standards. All structures proposed for adaptive
reuse require a building permit, and must comply with the city’s adopted
building codes in place at the time of the issuance of a building permit.



(Ord. 1397.17.47 § 3 (part), 2017)



17.62.180  Effective date.



   The provisions of this chapter shall be effective on December 6, 2017.



(Ord. 1397.17.47 § 3 (part), 2017; Ord. 1397.17.32  3, 2004)



17.62.190  Penalty.



   A.   Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor, and shall be punished in
accordance with Section 1.08.010 of this code; provided, however, that prior
to any prosecution for a violation of this chapter, the city must have
followed the procedures set forth in Sections 17.72.020 and 17.72.030.



   B.   Any person who demolishes, alters, constructs or permits a
designated property to fall into a serious state of disrepair in violation of
this chapter shall be required to restore the property and its site to its
appearance prior to the violation.



   1.   Any action to enforce this subsection may be brought by the
city attorney.



   2.   This civil remedy shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of,
any criminal prosecution.



(Ord. 1397.17.47 § 3 (part), 2017; Ord. 1397.17.32  4, 2004)



Chapter 17.64
NONCONFORMING USES



Sections:



17.64.010   Nonconforming uses and structures in general.



17.64.020   Nonconforming parking lots



17.64.030   Applicability to existing lots.



17.64.010  Nonconforming uses and structures in general.



   A.   Any structure or use lawfully existing upon the effective date
of the ordinance codified in this title may be continued at the size and in
the manner of operation existing upon such date except as hereinafter
specified.



   B.   The right to operate and maintain a nonconforming use shall
terminate when the structure or structures housing such use are removed,
razed or remodeled to the extent of fifty percent of the structure's fair
market value as determined by the last equalized assessment roll of the
county, unless such condition was created as described in subsection D of
this section.



   C.   When any lawful and nonconforming use of any structure or land
in any district has been changed to a conforming use, it shall not hereafter
be changed to any nonconforming use.



   D.   Whenever a lawful nonconforming use of a building or structure
has been damaged by fire, flood, explosion, earthquake, war, riot, or act of
God, to an extent greater than fifty percent of its originally appraised
value, it shall not be reconstructed, but such property shall revert to a
conforming use.



   E.   Whenever a lawful nonconforming use of a building or structure
or land is discontinued for a period of ninety days, any future use of the
building or structure or land shall be in conformity with the provisions of
this title.



   F.   Normal maintenance of a building or other structure containing
or related to a lawful nonconforming use is permitted, including necessary
structural repairs provided such structural repairs do not enlarge or
intensify the nonconforming use.



   G.   A lawful nonconforming use shall not be charged except in
conformance with the use requirements of the zone in which it is located.



   H.   Alterations may be made to a structure or building containing
lawful nonconforming residential units when they will improve the liveability
thereof, providing they will not increase the number of dwelling units.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.14.1—6.14.8, 1987)



17.64.020  Nonconforming parking lots.



   A.   Continuation. Legally existing parking areas which have become
nonconforming due to changes in code requirements may be continued, except as
provided in Subsection 17.64.020.B.



   B.   Proposals Which Require Conformance to Existing Standards.



   1.   Parking and maneuvering areas which conform with the
requirements of Chapter 17.56 of this code shall be provided for:



   a.   Construction of a new building.



   b.   Building additions which trigger the requirement to provide
additional on-site parking.



   c.   Building occupancy and/or tenant changes where the new use
requires the provision of more on-site parking than the previous legally
permitted use.



   d.   Enlargement of an existing nonconforming parking lot.



(Ord. 1397.17.41 § 1, 2012)



17.64.030  Applicability to existing lots.



   A.   At the time of enactment of this title, if any owner of a plot
of land consisting of one or more adjacent lots in a subdivision of record
does not own sufficient contiguous land to enable him/her to conform to the
minimum lot width requirements or does not have sufficient lot width to
conform to the minimum lot width requirements, such plot of land may
nevertheless be used as a building site. The dimensional requirements of the
district in which the piece of land is located may be reduced by the smallest
amount that will permit a structure of acceptable size to be built upon the
lot, such reduction to be determined by the board of adjustment.



   1.   In the UR, R-1, RF-1a and R-4 Zones, the reduction shall permit
only a single-family residence.



   2.   In the R-2 Zone, the reduction shall permit only a duplex.



   3.   In the R-3 Zone, the reduction shall permit only a townhouse
cluster or apartment containing no more than four units.



   B.   No lot, even though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots
in the same ownership at the time of passage of the ordinance codified in
this title, shall be reduced in size so that the lot width or size of yards
or lot area per family or any other requirement of this title is not
maintained. This chapter shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired
for a public purpose.



(Ord. 1178 § 6.14.9, 1987)



Chapter 17.68
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES



Sections:



Article I. Procedures for Site Plan Approval.



17.68.010   Requirements and procedures.



17.68.020   Applicability of procedures.



17.68.030   Application for major site plan approval—Requirements.



17.68.040   Application for minor site approval—Requirements.



17.68.050   Notice of major site plan review.



17.68.060   Notice of minor site plan review.



17.68.070   Major site plan review—Consideration process.



17.68.080   Duration of site plan approval.



17.68.090   Procedure for amendment to site plans.



Article II. Procedure for Conditional Use Permit



17.68.100   In general.



17.68.110   Application required.



17.68.120   Planning and zoning considerations and findings.



17.68.130   Notification of commission action.



17.68.140   Appeals.



17.68.150   City council authority.



17.68.160   Violation.



17.68.170   Modifications to approved structures.



Article III. Procedure for Operating a Home Occupation



17.68.180   Notice of intent to operate required.



17.68.190   Complaints cause for termination when.



17.68.200   Appeals.



Article IV. Procedure for Temporary Use Permit



17.68.210   In general.



17.68.215   Temporary agricultural activity in certain zones.



17.68.220   Application and filing fee.



17.68.230   Decision.



17.68.240   Approval made subject to conditions.



Article V. Procedure for Planned Area Development (P.A.D.) Approval



17.68.250   In general.



17.68.260   Application requirements.



17.68.270   Concept plan submittal requirements.



17.68.280   Preliminary development submittal requirements.



17.68.290   Planning commission review and hearing.



17.68.300   City council consideration and hearing—Review and approval.



17.68.310   Final development plan.



17.68.320   Withdrawal of application.



17.68.330   Amendments to approval.



17.68.340   Denial of application.



Article VI. Procedure for Appeals to Board of Adjustment



17.68.350   Appeal authority.



17.68.355   Appeal application.



17.68.360   Stay of proceedings when.



17.68.370   Notice of hearing required.



17.68.380   Board of adjustment action on appeals.



17.68.390   Notice of board decision.



17.68.395   Appeal of a decision of the board of adjustment.



Article VII. Procedure for Issuance of Building Permits and Certificate of
Occupancy



17.68.400   In general.



17.68.410   Building permit application.



17.68.420   Certification of occupancy required prior to certain actions.



Article VIII. Amendment Procedure



17.68.430   In general.



17.68.440   Application requirements.



17.68.450   Notice of hearing.



17.68.460   Hearing and recommendation by planning and zoning commission
when.



17.68.470   Hearing and decision by city council.



Article IX. Rezone Procedure



17.68.480   In general.



17.68.490   Application requirements.



17.68.500   Notice of hearing.



17.68.510   Hearing and recommendation by planning and zoning.



17.68.520   Hearing and decision by city council.



17.68.530   Conditional rezoning.



17.68.540   Public protest against amendment to prevent when.



17.68.550   Right-of-way dedication as condition when.



Article X. Protected Development Rights Plans



17.68.1000   Definitions.



17.68.1001   Protected Development Right Plan approvals.



17.68.1002   Effective date; exceptions.



17.68.1003   Submission procedures and requirements.



17.68.1004   Revocation for non-compliance.



17.68.1005   Duration of Protected Development Right Plan.



17.68.1006   Limitation on extent of Protected Development Right.



17.68.1007   Subsequent changes prohibited; exceptions.



17.68.1008   Council designation of development plan.



17.68.1009   Waiver may not be a condition of approval.



17.68.1010   Protected Development Right; exercise; agreements.



17.68.1011   Resolution of conflict.



Article I. Procedures for Site Plan Approval



17.68.010  Requirements and procedures.



   A.   For the purposes of this chapter, site plans may be classified
as major or minor site plans. All developments within the city, except
individual single-family and duplex residential units, shall be subject to
this article. A major site plan involves one or more of the following:



   1.   Four or more dwelling units in a multiple structure or
structures;



   2.   Fifteen thousand or more square feet of:



   a.   Office space,



   b.   Retail commercial space,



   c.   Service commercial space,



   d.   Industrial space;



   3.   One or more new buildings on one existing, vacant site for:



   a.   Office use,



   b.   Retail commercial use,



   c.   Service commercial use,



   d.   Industrial use;



   4.   Twenty thousand or more square feet of exterior storage of
materials or goods;



   5.   Parking for more than eighty vehicles.



   B.   Any other site plan (except for a Planned Area Development) is
considered a minor site plan. Any Planned Area Development shall be reviewed
according to the regulations of Article V of this chapter. Minor site plans
shall be reviewed through the building permit application process.



   C.   The planning and zoning commission has the right to review, and
require revisions to any proposed major site plan. The purpose of this review
is to relieve demonstrable adverse impacts of the development upon public
safety, health, or welfare; to protect public investments in roads, drainage
facilities, sewage facilities, etc.; to conserve the value of buildings; and
to ensure that the regulations of the city are upheld.



   D.   Any needed variances for major or minor site plans must be
appealed to the board of adjustment.



(Ord. 1178.30 § 2 (part), 1990)



17.68.020  Applicability of procedures.



   A.   The procedures set out in this chapter shall apply to all R-2,
R-3, R-4, B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, I-1 and I-2 rezoning and all non-single family
and duplex development within the city.



   B.   For those rezoning requests that may not comply with the city
general plan the site plan shall be submitted in conjunction with the
rezoning application.



   C.   For those rezoning requests that may comply with the general
plan the site plan shall be submitted prior to any construction or
development and may be submitted with the rezoning application.



   D.   For those areas with desired zoning, the site plan shall be
submitted prior to any construction or development.



(Ord. 1178.30 § 2 (part), 1990)



17.68.030  Application for major site plan approval—Requirements.



   Applications for major site plan approval shall be on a form provided
by the zoning administrator. Major site plans shall be submitted at least
twenty-one days prior to the planning and zoning commission at which they
will be heard. The application shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee
and development plans showing sufficient information for the planning and
zoning commission and city staff to determine whether the proposed
development will meet the development requirements of the city. In all cases
the application shall contain the following:



   A.   General:



   1.   Name of project/development;



   2.   Location of project/development by street address;



   3.   Location map, including area within one-half mile of site;



   4.   Name and mailing address of developer/owner;



   5.   Name and mailing address of engineer/architect;



   6.   Date of plan preparation;



   7.   North point indicator;



   8.   Scale of not less than one inch to one hundred feet; and



   9.   Names and addresses of property owners within two hundred feet
of site;



   B.   Site Plan, including:



   1.   Boundary line of property with dimensions;



   2.   Location, identification and dimension of existing and proposed
data, to a distance of one hundred feet unless otherwise stated:



   a.   Topographic contours at a minimum interval of two feet,



   b.   Adjacent streets and street rights-of-way to a distance of one
hundred fifty feet, except for sites adjacent to major arterial streets where
the distances shall be two hundred feet,



   c.   On-site streets and rights-of-way,



   d.   Ingress and egress points,



   e.   Traffic flow on-site,



   f.   Traffic flow off-site,



   g.   Utilities and utility rights-of-way or easements:



   i.   Electric,



   ii.   Natural gas,



   iii.   Telephone, cable TV,



   iv.   Water,



   v.   Sewer (sanitary treated effluent and storm),



   h.   Buildings and structures,



   i.   Parking facilities, including bicycle racks,



   j.   Water bodies,



   k.   Surface water holding ponds and drainage ditches,



   l.   Surface water drainage arrows,



   m.   Significant rock outcroppings,



   n.   Sidewalks, walkways, driveways, loading areas and docks,
bikeways,



   o.   Provision for handicapped accessibility, including but not
limited to wheelchair ramps, parking spaces, hand rails, and curb openings in
accordance with A.R.S. 34-404 through 34-439,



   p.   Fences and walls,



   q.   Exterior signs,



   r.   Exterior refuse collection areas,



   s.   Exterior lighting,



   t.   Landscaping (detailed plan showing plantings, equipment, etc.),



   i.   Botanical and common names of vegetation to be used,



   ii.   Size of plantings at time of planting and at maturity,



   iii.   Areas to be irrigated;



   3.   Number of employee and non-employee parking spaces, existing
and proposed, and total square footage of each; and



   4.   Site statistics including site square footage, percent of site
coverage (building and parking), dwelling unit density, percent park or open
space;



   5.   A reproducible copy of the site plan with appropriate
signatures shall be submitted upon approval.



   C.   Building Information (on-site):



   1.   Height above mean sea level of the lowest floor when the
structure is proposed to be located in a floodway or floodplain area;



   2.   Gross square footage of existing and proposed structures; and



   3.   Front, rear and side elevations, with a description of exterior
materials to be used.



   D.   Permits:



   1.   A listing of all required federal, state and city permits and
status of applications;



   2.   Certificate of one-hundred-year assured water supply;



   3.   Certificate showing compliance with minimum county and state
water quality standards.



(Ord. 1178.30 § 2 (part), 1990)



17.68.040  Application for minor site approval—Requirements.



   Applications for minor site plan approval shall be submitted with the
building permit application. The application must include scaled plans and
drawings showing sufficient information for city staff to determine whether
the proposed development will meet the development requirements of the city.



(Ord. 1178.30 § 2 (part), 1990)



17.68.050  Notice of major site plan review.



   A notice of major site plan review shall be mailed at least ten days
prior to the planning and zoning commission meeting to each owner of property
situated wholly or partly within two hundred feet of the property to which
the site plan relates. The zoning administrator shall be responsible for
mailing such notices. For the purpose of giving mailed notice, the zoning
administrator shall require the owner of the property affected to furnish the
names and addresses of all property owners within two hundred feet of the
property.



(Ord. 1178.30 § 2 (part), 1990)



17.68.060  Notice of minor site plan review.



   A.   If the city staff shall determine that the proposed site plan
will not be detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the community
nor will cause traffic congestion or seriously depreciate surrounding
property values and the same time is in harmony with the purposes and intent
of this chapter, the plan for the area, and the general plan, the staff may
grant such site plan approval, and such conditions and safeguards may be
imposed as they deem necessary. Staff shall notify the planning and zoning
commission at its next regular meeting of any site plan approvals made by
staff.



   B.   Minor site plan approval applications may be denied by city
staff upon finding and determination by the staff that the conditions
required for approval do not exist.



   C.   When a minor site plan approval application is denied by city
staff, an appeal may be taken to the planning and zoning commission. If
unusual or significantly difficult conditions exist which affect the site
plan, the zoning administrator may determine and require that the site plan
be reviewed and acted upon by the planning and zoning commission.



(Ord. 1178.30 § 2 (part), 1990)



17.68.070  Major site plan review—Consideration process.



   A.   In considering applications for major site plan approval under
this chapter, the planning and zoning commission shall consider the following:



   1.   Relationship of the plan elements to conditions both on and off
the property;



   2.   Conformance to the city's zoning ordinance;



   3.   Conformance to the city's general plan;



   4.   The impact of the plan on the existing and anticipated traffic
and parking conditions;



   5.   The adequacy of the plan with respect to land use;



   6.   Pedestrian and vehicular ingress and egress;



   7.   Building location and height;



   8.   Landscaping;



   9.   Lighting;



   10.   Provisions for utilities;



   11.   Site drainage;



   12.   Open space;



   13.   Loading and unloading areas;



   14.   Grading;



   15.   Signage;



   16.   Screening;



   17.   Setbacks; and



   18.   Other related matters.



   B.   The planning and zoning commission shall consider oral or
written statements from the applicant, the public, city staff members, or its
own members. It may question the applicant and approve, deny, or table the
development proposal. The application may not be tabled for more than two
regular meetings of the commission.



   C.   If the commission shall determine by motion that the proposed
site plan will not be detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the
community nor will cause traffic congestion or seriously depreciate
surrounding property values at the same time is in harmony with the purposes
and intent of this chapter, the plan for the area, and the comprehensive
plan, the commission may grant such site plan approval and impose conditions
and safeguards as they deem necessary.



   D.   Site plan approval applications may be denied by motion of the
commission when such motion or consent shall constitute a finding and
determination by the commission or staff that the conditions required for
approval do not exist.



   E.   A site plan which has been denied by the commission shall not
be reviewed by the council except upon written request by the applicant to
the city council within ten days of the commission's decision, and placed on
next available city council agenda. At such meeting, the council shall
consider oral or written statements from the applicant, city staff, and
public and its own members.



   F.   The council, upon reviewing the applicant's request for site
plan approval may then approve, deny, or table the site plan request. The
request may not be tabled more than two meetings.



(Ord. 1178.30 § 2 (part), 1990)



17.68.080  Duration of site plan approval.



   Site plan approval shall be valid for one year from its date of
approval, or until the zoning on a particular site lapses, whichever occurs
first.



(Ord. 1178.30 § 2 (part), 1990)



17.68.090  Procedure for amendment to site plans.



   A.   Any amendment or modification to an approved site plan shall be
submitted for approval. All amendments shall be shown on a revised site plan
drawing.



   B.   Amendments to minor site plans shall be submitted to city staff
who may approve such amendment(s) if they determine that such amendments meet
the development requirements of the city.



   C.   Amendments to major site plans previously approved by the
planning and zoning commission may be approved by the planning director and
the chairperson of the commission upon finding by the planning director and
chairperson of the commission that the amended site plan is in substantial
compliance with the originally approved site plan. If it is determined that
the amended site plan is not in substantial compliance with the originally
approved site plan, the application shall be resubmitted and shall be subject
to Sections 17.68.030, 17.68.050 and 17.68.070 of this chapter.



(Ord. 1178.30 § 2 (part), 1990)



Article II. Procedure for Conditional Use Permit



17.68.100  In general.



   Certain uses, while generally not suitable in a particular zoning
district, may, under certain circumstances, be acceptable. When such
circumstances exist, a conditional use permit may be granted. Conditions may
be applied to the issuance of the permit and periodic review may be required.
The permit shall be granted for a particular use and not for a particular
person or firm. No conditional use permit shall be granted for a use which is
not specifically designed as such in this chapter.



(Ord. 1178 § 7.5.1, 1987)



17.68.110  Application required.



   The person applying for a conditional use permit shall fill out and
submit to the zoning administrator the appropriate form together with the
required fee. The request for a conditional use permit shall follow the
procedures and applicable requirements for major site plans of Article I of
this chapter.



(Ord. 1178 § 7.5.2, 1987)



17.68.120  Planning and zoning considerations and findings.



   A.   Within thirty days after the conclusion of the public hearing,
the commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the conditional
use permit application.



   B.   The commission, in approving a conditional use permit, shall by
resolution adopted by an affirmative vote of not less than the majority of
all its voting members, find as follows:



   1.   That the site for the proposed use is adequate in size and
topography to accommodate the use, and all yards, spaces, walls and fences,
parking, loading and landscaping are adequate to properly relate the use with
the land and uses in the vicinity;



   2.   That the site for the proposed use relates to streets and
highways adequate in width and pavement type to carry the quantity and kind
of traffic generated by the proposed use;



   3.   That the proposed use will have no adverse effect upon the
abutting property;



   4.   That the proposed use shall be in conformance with the general
plan;



   5.   That the conditions stated in the approval are deemed necessary
to protect the public health, safety and general welfare. The conditions may
include but are not limited to:



   a.   Regulation of use,



   b.   Special yards, spaces and buffers,



   c.   Special fences, solid fences and walls,



   d.   Surfacing of parking areas,



   e.   Requiring street, service road or alley dedications and
improvements or appropriate bonds,



   f.   Regulations of points of vehicular ingress and egress,



   g.   Regulation of signs,



   h.   Requiring maintenance of the grounds,



   i.   Regulation of noise, vibrations, odors,



   j.   Regulation of hours for certain activities,



   k.   Time period within which the proposed use shall be developed,



   l.   Duration of use,



   m.   Requiring the dedication of access rights, and



   n.   Other conditions as will make possible the development of the
city in an orderly and efficient manner;



   6.   The commission shall, in addition to any other conditions,
impose the following general conditions upon every conditional use permit
granted:



   a.   The right to a use and occupancy permit shall be contingent
upon the fulfillment of all general and special conditions imposed by the
conditional use permit procedure,



   b.   That all of the special conditions shall constitute
restrictions running with the land and shall be binding upon the owner of the
land, his successors or assigns,



   c.   That all conditions specifically stated under any conditional
use listed in this chapter shall apply and be adhered to by the owner of the
land, his successors or assigns,



   d.   That all of the special conditions shall be consented to in
writing by the applicant,



   e.   That the resolution granting the application, together with all
consent forms, shall be recorded by the county recorder;



   7.   The commission shall, in addition to any other conditions,
impose the following conditions upon every conditional use permit granted for
wireless telecommunication facilities:



   a.   The setback requirements shall be thirty-five feet from any
property line, plus an additional one foot for every foot of height above
thirty-five feet,



   b.   The structure is to be designed, constructed and/or colored in
order to correspond with the aesthetic, view-shed and other characteristics
of the area in which they are to be placed,



   c.   Appropriate landscaping and other screening shall be required
along any street frontage,



   d.   Appropriate measures shall be used to screen any exposed
mechanical equipment such as, but not limited to, cables, etc.,



   e.   Placement of the facility shall be in conformance with any
applicable requirements of the city planning, building, fire, and engineering
departments,



   f.   Placement of the facility shall be in conformance with any
applicable requirements of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and/or
the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA),



   g.   Where possible, service providers will be encouraged to
co-locate (share) their facilities on existing towers;



   8.   The commission shall, in addition to any other conditions,
impose the following conditions upon every conditional use permit granted for
bed and breakfast establishments:



   a.   The bed and breakfast establishment must be operator-occupied;



   b.   The length of guests' stays is limited to fifteen days within
any thirty-day period;



   c.   On-site (off-street), dust-free surfaced parking is to be
provided on the lot in the ratio of one space per potential guest room, plus
two spaces for the resident operator;



   d.   Construction and operation of a bed and breakfast establishment
shall comply with all applicable city of Casa Grande building, planning, fire
and engineering department requirements, plus any requirements of the Pinal
County Health Department and state of Arizona;



   e.   Detached signs are limited to one per parcel, and shall be a
wall-mounted or a low-profile, monument-style sign, not to exceed three feet
in height above grade, and not to exceed six square feet in area, designed
and constructed to complement building's exterior.



   C.   Applications for conditional use permits may be approved or
denied by motion of the commission. If an application is denied, the denial
shall constitute a finding that the applicant has not shown that the
conditions required for approval do exist. No application for a conditional
use permit which has been denied wholly or in part shall be resubmitted for a
period of six months from the date of the order of denial, except on grounds
of new evidence or proof of change of conditions found to be valid by the
commission.



(Ord. 1397.17.16 § IV, 1997: Ord. 1397.17.14 § IX, 1996: Ord. 1178 §
7.5.3, 1987)



17.68.130  Notification of commission action.



   The applicant shall be notified in writing of the action taken by the
commission within seven days of its action. If the application has been
granted, the permit shall be issued upon the signature of the chairman of the
planning and zoning commission and the zoning administrator, and any
conditions, automatic termination date, or period of review shall be stated
on the permit.



(Ord. 1178 § 7.5.4, 1987)



17.68.140  Appeals.



   A.   A written appeal shall be taken to the city council by the
applicant or any person, firm, corporation, group or association owning real
property within one hundred fifty feet of the conditional use applicant's
property, aggrieved or affected by the decision of the commission with
respect to any conditional use.



   B.   The appeal shall be filed in duplicate with the zoning
administrator within ten days from the date of action by the commission.



   C.   The appeal shall specifically state the grounds therefore and
wherein the commission failed to conform to the requirements of these
regulations, appellate has otherwise been aggrieved or affected by the
actions of the commission.



   D.   The zoning administrator shall immediately transmit one copy of
the appeal to the commission.



   E.   The zoning administrator shall inspect the appeal for defects,
and validate the appeal within forty-eight hours of receipt. If the appeal is
defective in any particular for noncompliance, the zoning administrator shall
immediately send notice to applicant   of the fact and the type and nature
of the defect or defects.



(Ord. 1178 § 7.5.5, 1987)



17.68.150  City council authority.



   The city council may by resolution reverse or affirm, wholly or in
part, or may modify any decision, determination or requirement of the
commission, but before doing so, the city council must set the matter for
hearing, give notice of the hearing as is provided in Section 17.68.520 of
this chapter and must make a written finding of fact setting forth wherein
the Commission's findings were in error. A majority vote of the membership of
the council shall be required to grant in whole or in part any appealed
application for conditional use permit acted upon by the commission.



(Ord. 1178 § 7.5.6, 1987)



17.68.160  Violation.



   Violations to the conditions of a conditional use permit shall
constitute a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the
regulations of Sections 17.72.010 through 17.72.060 of this title.



(Ord. 1178 § 7.5.7, 1987)



17.68.170  Modifications to approved structures.



   Any proposed additions, enlargements or modifications of the structures
approved in any conditional use permit or any proposed extension of the use
into areas not approved in any such permit, shall be subject to Sections
17.68.030, 17.68.040, 17.68.060 and Article II of this chapter.



(Ord. 1178 § 7.5.8, 1987)



Article III. Procedure for Operating a Home Occupation



17.68.180  Notice of intent to operate required.



   Any individual applying for a business license with the intent of
operating the business from his/her home, shall acknowledge by signature
his/her understanding of the requirements and conditions of Chapter 17.60 of
this title.



(Ord. 1178 § 7.6.1, 1987)



17.68.190  Complaints cause for termination when.



   As per Section 17.60.030 of this title, complaints by citizens or
residents may be cause for termination of the home occupation. Upon receipt
of a complaint, a home occupation may be ordered terminated by the zoning
administrator upon a finding that the home occupation is incompatible or
disruptive to the neighborhood in which it is located.



(Ord. 1178 § 7.6.2, 1987)



17.68.200  Appeals.



   Any person may appeal the zoning administrator's action to the board of
adjustment within fifteen days as per Article II of this chapter.



(Ord. 1178 § 7.6.3, 1987)



Article IV. Procedure for Temporary Use Permit



17.68.210  In general.



   Uses permitted subject to special temporary use permit are those
temporary uses which are required for the proper function of the community or
are temporarily required in the process of establishing a permitted use, or
constructing a public facility. Such uses shall be so conducted that they
will not be detrimental in any way to the surrounding properties or to the
community. Uses permitted subject to a special temporary use permit may
include:



   A.   Christmas tree sales;



   B.   Carnivals, circuses, special events of not over seventy-two
consecutive hours;



   C.   Garage sales (limited to sixty consecutive hours);



   D.   Parking and storage of earth moving or construction equipment;



   E.   Storage of materials incidental to the carrying on of a public
works project, subdivision or construction project;



   F.   Tent revival meetings;



   G.   Tract home or lot sales office;



   H.   Construction - garage or shed for subdivision construction;



   I.   Such other uses as the board may, by resolution, deem to be
within the intent and purpose of this section.



(Ord. 1178 § 7.7.1, 1987)



17.68.215  Temporary agricultural activity in certain zones.



   In addition to the temporary uses allowed in Section 17.68.210 above,
the growing of field crops and raising of livestock shall be an allowable
temporary use for properties zoned I-1, I-2, or PAD, provided the application
meets all of the following requirements:



   A.   The property contains a minimum of 40 acres.



   B.   Subject property has not been residentially subdivided.



   C.   The permit may be granted for any period of time not to exceed
five years.



   D.   Application must address methods of dust mitigation, using best
management practices consistent with all local, state, and federal law or
regulations.



   E.   Application must be found to not have a significant adverse
impact upon surrounding properties.



   F.   Provision of irrigation water to subject property must not
create conflicts with, or increase the cost of, future public infrastructure,
including, but not limited to, street and sidewalk extensions.



   G.   Any application of pesticides or other regulated materials
shall follow all applicable local, state, and federal laws or regulations.



   H.   Any permit being requested under this section shall require a
public hearing.  Public notice of the public hearing shall consist of the
following:



   1.   A notice of time, date, place, and purpose of the hearing shall
be published in a newspaper of general circulation that is published or
circulated within the city at least fifteen days prior to the date of the
hearing; and



   2.   If the subject property is within five hundred feet of a
residential structure, as measured from property line to property line, a
notice of time, date, place, and purpose of the hearing shall be mailed to
all property owners within one thousand feet of the subject property. For all
other subject properties, the notice shall be mailed to all property owners
within three hundred feet of the subject property.



   I.   The permit may be revoked by the zoning administrator for
violation of any provision of this chapter or for any violation of the
requirements of the permit. If a permit is revoked by the zoning
administrator, the applicant shall have the right to appeal the zoning
administrator's decision to the board of adjustment per the process outlined
in Section 17.68.350.



   J.   Application must be in compliance with and follow all other
requirements of Sections 17.68.220, 17.68.230, and 17.68.240 below.



(Ord. 1397.17.38 § 1, 2011)



17.68.220  Application and filing fee.



   Application for a special temporary use permit may be made by the
property owner or his authorized agent. The application shall be filed with
the zoning administrator who shall charge and collect a filing fee for each
application, as provided in Section 17.72.080 of this title, except that the
filing fee may be waived by the zoning administrator for charitable,
religious, patriotic or philanthropic organizations. The zoning administrator
may also require any information deemed necessary to support the approval of
a special temporary use permit including site plans as per Section 17.68.030
of this title.



(Ord. 1178.29 § 2, 1990)



17.68.230  Decision.



   Application for special temporary use permit shall be reviewed by the
zoning administrator, who shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove
such application, except when an application for a special temporary use
permit requires a public hearing pursuant to Section 17.68.215. Approval or
conditional approval shall be given only when, in the judgment of the zoning
administrator, such approval is within the intent and purposes of this
section. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the zoning administrator may
file an appeal with the board of adjustment. If an application for a special
temporary use permit requires a public hearing pursuant to Section 17.68.215,
the zoning administrator shall place the application on a future board of
adjustment agenda for a public hearing.  After said public hearing, the
board of adjustment shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove of
such application.



(Ord. 1397.17.38 § 2, 2011; Ord. 1178 § 7.7.3, 1987)



17.68.240  Approval made subject to conditions.



   In approving such permit, the approval shall be subject to a time limit
and other conditions deemed necessary to assure that there will be no adverse
effect upon adjacent properties. The conditions may include the following:



   A.   Regulation of hours;



   B.   Regulation of lights;



   C.   Requirement of bonds or other guarantees for cleanup or removal
of structure or equipment;



   D.   Such other conditions deemed necessary to carry out the intent
and purpose of this article.



(Ord. 1178 § 7.7.4, 1987)



Article V. Procedure for Planned Area Development (P.A.D.) Approval



17.68.250  In general.



   Any development proposal which meets the requirements of Chapter 17.40
shall be reviewed according to the provisions of this article. All P.A.D.
applications shall be reviewed and approved by the planning and zoning
commission and city council prior to any physical development on the subject
property.



(Ord. 1178 § 7.8.1, 1987)



17.68.260  Application requirements.



   A.   The applicant is encouraged to meet with appropriate city staff
prior to making application for P.A.D. approval to discuss the development
concept, the review and approval process, and the submittal requirements.



   B.   The applicant shall obtain the necessary application forms from
the planning director. Application forms properly completed and accompanied
by the required fee shall be submitted to the planning director. Concept plan
exhibits shall accompany the application. The concept plan shall be submitted
at least seven days prior to meeting with city staff.



(Ord. 1178 § 7.8.2, 1987)



17.68.270  Concept plan submittal requirements.



   The concept plan shall indicate proposed land uses, general circulation
patterns, property boundaries, existing land uses on adjacent properties,
special site conditions or problems. A computation table showing proposed
land use allocations in acres and percent of total site area shall be
included on the concept plan.



(Ord. 1178 § 7.8.3, 1987)



17.68.280  Preliminary development submittal requirements.



   Based upon comments received regarding the concept plan, the applicant
shall prepare a preliminary development plan. A preliminary development plan
shall be submitted at least twenty-one days prior to the hearing by the
planning and zoning commission. The following information shall be submitted
to the planning director:



   A.   Legal description of property and indication of gross area;



   B.   Nature of the applicant's interest in the land to be developed;



   C.   A generalized location map showing surrounding land use and
traffic circulation patterns;



   D.   Site conditions - an analysis of the existing site conditions
which indicates at a minimum:



   1.   Topographic contours with intervals of no more than two feet,
to a distance of one hundred feet beyond the property boundary,



   2.   Location and extent of major vegetative cover (if any),



   3.   Location and extent of perennial or intermittent streams and
water ponding areas,



   4.   Existing drainage patterns,



   5.   Other information considered relevant by the applicant or city
staff;



   E.   Proposed allocations of land use expressed as a percentage of
the total area, as well as in acres. Uses to be indicated include:



   1.   Arterial streets,



   2.   Open space (public),



   3.   Open space (private),



   4.   Residential (if appropriate),



   5.   A stratification of residential uses in terms of single-family
detached units, patio homes, townhouses, garden apartments, etc.



   6.   Commercial (if appropriate),



   7.   Industrial (if appropriate);



   F.   A land use plan at a scale not smaller than one inch equals one
hundred feet, indicating land uses, acres and development densities of each
land use and the most nearly equivalent zoning categories; all arterial and
collector street circulation elements, pedestrian and/or bicycle circulation
elements, exact perimeter locations of any/all arterial streets and major
collector streets; open spaces; and recreational areas;



   G.   Plans indicating the approximate alignment and sizing of water
lines, sanitary sewers, and storm sewers (if any), as well as easements for
all utilities, if necessary. Also indicated should be proposed surface
drainage patterns;



   H.   A final plat of the proposed development;



   I.   Conceptual architectural renderings indicating the elevations
and exterior wall finishes of proposed buildings types;



   J.   Conceptual landscaping plans, indicating landscaping theme
character of the development;



   K.   A traffic analysis report, if deemed necessary by the city;



   L.   Phasing plan, if development is to take more than one year.



(Ord. 1178 § 7.8.4(A), 1987)



17.68.290  Planning commission review and hearing.



   A.   Notice of Hearing. The commission shall hold a public hearing
on the preliminary development plan. A notice of the time, date, place and
purpose of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation, published or circulated within the city at least fifteen days
prior to the date of the hearing. A similar notice shall be mailed at least
fifteen days before the day of the hearing to each owner of property situated
wholly or partly within two hundred feet of the property to which the P.A.D.
relates. The planning director shall be responsible for placing and mailing
such notices. For purposes of giving mailed notice, the planning director
shall require the applicant to furnish the names and addresses of all
property owners within two hundred feet of the property.



   B.   Review. In considering applications for P.A.D. approval, the
commission shall consider the following:



   1.   Interrelationship with the plan elements to conditions both on
and off the property;



   2.   Conformance to the general plan guide;



   3.   The impact of the plan on the existing and anticipated traffic
and parking conditions;



   4.   The adequacy of the plan with respect to land use;



   5.   Pedestrian and vehicular ingress and egress, including
handicapped accessibility;



   6.   Architectural design;



   7.   Landscaping;



   8.   Provisions for utilities;



   9.   Site drainage;



   10.   Open space and/or public land dedications;



   11.   Grading;



   12.   Other related matters.



   C.   The commission shall consider oral or written statements from
the applicant, the public, city staff, or its own members. It may question
the applicant and approve, disapprove, or table the preliminary development
plan. The application may not be tabled for more than two regular meetings of
the commission.



   D.   If the commission shall determine by motion that the proposed
preliminary development plan will not be detrimental to the health, safety,
or welfare of the community, will not cause traffic congestion or depreciate
surrounding property values and, at the same time, is in harmony with the
purposes and intent of this title, the plan for the area, and the general
planning guide, the commission may recommend granting preliminary development
plan approval, along with necessary conditions and safeguards, including
provisions, as applicable, for public land dedications.



   E.   The commission shall notify the council, in writing, of its
recommendation.



(Ord. 1178 § 7.8.4(B), 1987)



17.68.300  City council consideration and hearing—Review and approval.



   A.   Consideration and Hearing. The city council, after receipt of
the report and recommendation of the planning and zoning commission, may
consider the P.A.D. request. If requested in writing by any member of the
public or the city council, the council shall hold a public hearing on the
request. A notice of the time, date, place and purpose of the hearing shall
be published in the official newspaper of the city at least fifteen days
prior to the date of the hearing. A preliminary development plan which has
been recommended for denial by the commission shall not be reviewed by the
council except upon written request by the applicant and shall require a
public hearing.



   B.   Review and Approval. In its deliberations on the preliminary
development plan, the council shall consider oral or written statements from
the applicant, city staff, the public, and its own members. The council's
review shall encompass the same spectrum of considerations as did the
Commission's. The city council may approve the preliminary development plan,
deny the request, or table the request. The application may not be tabled for
more than two meetings in succession. Conditions may be applied to the
approval and/or periodic review of the approval may be required. Approvals,
if granted, shall be for a particular development, not for a particular
applicant.



   C.   Public Protests Against P.A.D. If there is a written protest
against the preliminary development plan signed by the owners of twenty
percent or more of the property within one hundred fifty feet of the proposed
P.A.D., the preliminary development plan shall not be approved except upon
the affirmative vote of three-fourths of all members of the city council. If
the above protest requirements are not met, approval may be by majority vote
of the membership of the city council.



   D.   Duration of P.A.D. Zoning. Approval of a P.A.D. rezoning
request shall be conditioned upon the recording of the final subdivision plat
and any related material within one year of the date of approval action taken
by the city council. If, at the expiration of this period, the final
subdivision plat and any related material have not been recorded, the
property shall revert to its former zoning classification without council or
commission action.



   E.   The city may authorize extensions when deemed necessary.



(Ord. 1178 § 7.8.4(C), 1987)



17.68.310  Final development plan.



   A.   Approval. Final P.A.D. development plan approval and the
issuance of a development permit for any portion of a P.A.D. shall occur only
when:



   1.   A reproducible copy of the approved preliminary development
plan with appropriate signatures is submitted;



   2.   The design and construction specifications for all utilities,
property and street improvements have been approved by the city engineer;



   3.   A site plan, subject to the requirements of Article I of this
chapter, for the specific portion of the P.A.D. in question has been
submitted and has been approved by the planning and zoning commission, as in
conformance with the preliminary development plan. Upon approval of the site
plan, a reproducible copy shall be submitted;



   4.   Architectural elevations of the buildings, with materials
lists, are submitted and approved by the planning and zoning commission;



   5.   A landscaping plan is submitted and approved by the planning
and zoning commission;



   6.   A performance bond, cash escrow agreement, or other acceptable
instrument has been deposited with the city in an amount as set by the city
council based upon the city engineer's recommendation. This financial
guarantee shall be used to ensure the full completion, as specified, of:



   a.   Public and private streets and utilities,



   b.   Landscaping, and



   c.   Privately-owned and maintained recreational facilities;



   7.   Any land dedication agreements made as part of the preliminary
development plan approval are fulfilled.



   B.   Platting Requirements. All applicants for a planned area
development permit shall be required to file with Pinal County a final plat
of the Planned Area Development complying with all of the requirements of
Title 16 of this code except to the extent that the council may give specific
permission to the effect that specific portions of Title 16 need not be
complied with. Such required plats shall contain on their face a
cross-reference to the P.A.D. development plan.



(Ord. 1178 § 7.8.5, 1987)



17.68.320  Withdrawal of application.



   Any application for a planned area development permit may be withdrawn
by the applicant at any time prior to filing the final plat upon written
notification to the planning director and/or city clerk. The P.A.D. shall be
null and void upon receipt of such notice by the city.



(Ord. 1178 § 7.8.6, 1987)



17.68.330  Amendments to approval.



   A.   Minor Changes. Minor changes in the location and placement of
buildings may be authorized by the planning director and city engineer where
unforeseen circumstances such as engineering requirements, dictate such
change. When in question, the planning director and the city engineer may
determine whether the changes shall be classified as a minor or major, or may
refer the question to the planning and zoning commission, if they deem it
necessary.



   B.   Major Changes. All changes not considered Minor Changes as
defined under Section 17.68.330 A, shall be considered Major Changes. All
Major Changes shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for
their review and approval in accordance the procedure and requirements
defined under Article V of this Code, except that only Major Changes
requesting a change of land use, changes to the proposed arterial or
collector roadway transportation circulation system, loss of open space,
increase in residential density, the addition of cluster type development, or
any request pertaining to a Large Single Retail Use or Large Multiple Use
Shopping Centers shall be required to be forwarded to the City Council for
final approval. All other Major Changes shall be decided upon by the Planning
and Zoning Commission.



(Ord. 1397.17.29 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord. 1178 § 7.8.7, 1987)



17.68.340  Denial of application.



   If an application for planned area development approval is denied at
either the preliminary development plan or final development plan stage, a
new application for a P.A.D. approval by the same applicant on the same site
or portion of the site cannot be filed prior to ninety days after the date of
denial.



(Ord. 1178 § 7.8.8, 1987)



Article VI. Procedure for Appeals to Board of Adjustment



17.68.350  Appeal authority.



   The board of adjustment shall have the authority to hear the following
appeals:



   A.   Appeals from any aggrieved person, property owner, or any
officer or department of the city affected by a decision of the planning
director, pertaining to this title.



   B.   Appeals from any person aggrieved by the city’s decision
regarding dedications or exactions.



   C.   Appeals of notices and orders issued for city code violations.



   D.   Appeals of code enforcement abatement actions and/or abatement
assessments in accordance with Section 8.12.360.



(Ord. 1397.17.48 § 2 (part), 2018; Ord. 1178.68 § 2 (part), 1995)



17.68.355  Appeal application.



   A perfected appeal application shall be submitted for any appeal within
thirty days of the decision being appealed. Appeals filed beyond this
thirty-day date shall not be accepted. The appeal application shall contain
information as may be required for the board to make a proper decision on the
matter. The planning director shall transmit to the board of adjustment the
complete record of the action for which the appeal is made.



(Ord. 1397.17.48 § 2 (part), 2018)



17.68.360  Stay of proceedings when.



   An appeal to the board of adjustment shall stay all proceedings of the
action appealed; unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies
to the board that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate of stay, the
stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property.
In such cases, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining
order granted by the superior court on notice to the planning director, with
due cause shown.



(Ord. 1397.17.48 § 2 (part), 2018; Ord. 1178.68 § 2 (part), 1995)



17.68.370  Notice of hearing required.



   A.   No appeal may be granted by the board of adjustment until a
public hearing has been held on the application.



   B.   A notice of time, date, place and purpose of the hearing shall
be published in a newspaper of general circulation, published or circulated
within the city at least fifteen days prior to the date of the hearing.



   C.   If the appeal relates to a decision on a specific site, a
notice shall be posted on, or close to, the site affected, in a location that
allows for the public to read the notice from the public right-of-way. The
notice shall be in the form required by the planning department and shall
contain sufficient information to inform the public of the nature of the
variance.



   D.   If the appeal relates to a decision on a specific site, a
notice shall be mailed, at least fifteen days prior to the hearing, to each
owner of the property situated within two hundred feet of the property to
which the variance relates. The planning director shall be responsible for
mailing the notice. Failure to receive notice by individual property owners
will not necessarily invalidate the proceedings.



   E.   Notice of the time, date, place and purpose of the hearing
shall be sent to the applicant at least fifteen days prior to the hearing
date.



(Ord. 1397.17.48 § 2 (part), 2018; Ord. 1178.68 § 2 (part), 1995)



17.68.380  Board of adjustment action on appeals.



   A.   Within forty-five days of the date of application, but no
sooner than fifteen days from the date of public notice, the board shall hear
and decide arguments relating to the appeal of the decision in question. The
board shall consider oral or written statements from city staff, the
appellant, his/her agent or attorney, and the public. The board shall also
study the record of the action from which the appeal is taken.



   B.   In determining appeals related to the administration of the
requirements of this title, code violations or abatement procedures, the
board of adjustment shall determine:



   1.   Whether there has been an error in the interpretation and/or
administration of the specific provision(s) of city code that are applicable
to the appeal; and



   2.   In the case of appeals of abatement actions, whether the costs
being assessed for the abatement are excessive.



   C.   In determining appeals related to required exactions and
dedications, the city will bear the burden of proving that the dedications or
exactions to be imposed on a property bear an essential nexus between the
requirement and a legitimate governmental interest, and that the proposed
dedication or exaction is roughly proportional to the impact of the use,
improvement or development proposed by the applicant.



   D.   The board may, by a vote of five members of the board, approve
an appeal. An appeal request that is not approved shall be deemed to be
denied. Appeal requests may be tabled by a simple majority of those board
members present. Any postponement shall be limited to a maximum of
seventy-five days; unless extended with the written permission of the
applicant.



   E.   The board may impose such conditions and safeguards as it deems
necessary to satisfactorily correct the situation in question, but it shall
not attempt to infringe upon matters not specifically contained in the appeal.



   F.   The board of adjustment shall forward a report of its findings,
and any conditions imposed on approved variances, promptly to the planning
and zoning commission and the city council. Transmitted meeting minutes will
satisfy this requirement.



(Ord. 1397.17.48 § 2 (part), 2018; Ord. 1397.17.43 § 3, 2012; Ord. 1178.68
§ 2 (part), 1995)



17.68.390  Notice of board decision.



   The board shall issue a written notice of its decision to the
appellant. The notice shall state the facts of the matter as determined by
the board, the reasons for its decision, and any conditions applied to the
decision.



(Ord. 1397.17.48 § 2 (part), 2018; Ord. 1178.68 § 2 (part), 1995)



17.68.395  Appeal of a decision of the board of adjustment.



   If the applicant is dissatisfied with any decision of the board of
adjustment, the applicant may file a complaint for a trial de novo with the
superior court within thirty days of the board's decision.



(Ord. 1397.17.48 § 2 (part), 2018; Ord. 1178.68 § 2 (part), 1995)



Article VII. Procedure for Issuance of Building Permits and Certificate of
Occupancy



17.68.400  In general.



   No person, firm or corporation shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter,
repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish any building or structure
in the city, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a separate
building permit for each building or structure from the building official as
set forth in the Uniform Building Code of the city. Such building official,
for the purposes of this title alone shall be considered to be acting on
behalf of, and at the direction of, the zoning administrator.



(Ord. 1178 § 7.10.1, 1987)



17.68.410  Building permit application.



   In order to facilitate the administration of the provisions of this
title and the Uniform Building Code of the city, each application for a
building permit shall comply with the requirements as set forth in the
Uniform Building Code at Section 301(b) as follows:



   A.   Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for
which application is made;



   B.   Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done, by
lot, block, tract, and house and street address, or similar description that
will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work;



   C.   Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is
intended;



   D.   Be accompanied by plans and specifications as required in
Subsection (c) of this Section;



   E.   State the valuation of the proposed work;



   F.   Be signed by the permittee, or his authorized agent, who may be
required to submit evidence to indicate such authority;



   G.   Give such other information as reasonably may be required by
the building official;



   H.   In addition thereto, said application shall contain the
following:



   1.   A drawing or plat, in duplicate, drawn to scale and showing the
lot, the proposed buildings (to include projection) thereon, the dimensions
of lot and building,and the exact location of the proposed building on the
lot;



   I.   The present use of any existing building on the same lot;



   J.   Such information on front yard depths and other yard sizes on
other lots, together with such other information as the zoning administrator
shall require for the proper enforcement of the zoning ordinance.



(Ord. 1178 § 7.10.2, 1987)



17.68.420  Certification of occupancy required prior to certain actions.



   A.   A certificate of occupancy, stating that all of the provisions
of this title have been fully complied with, shall have been obtained from
the zoning administrator before:



   1.   Any structure for which a building permit is required is used
or occupied, including any conversion of any building to provide additional
dwelling units;



   2.   Any use of an existing structure is changed to a use of a
different classification;



   3.   Any use of a nonconforming use is changed.



   B.   In the case of a structure or use established, altered,
enlarged, or moved after conditional approval thereof by the planning and
zoning commission, such certificate shall be issued only if all the
conditions thereof shall have been satisfied.



   C.   Application for a certificate of occupancy shall be made and
filed with the zoning administrator when any structure or use for which a
certificate is required is ready for use or occupancy. Within three days
after the filing thereof the zoning administrator or his designee shall
inspect such structure or use, and if found to be in conformity with all
provisions of this title, shall sign and issue a certificate of occupancy.



   D.   No permit or license required by the city or other governmental
agency shall be issued by any department, officials or employees of the city
or such governmental agency, unless the application for such permit or
license is accompanied by a certificate of occupancy issued by the zoning
administrator.



(Ord. 1178 § 7.10.3, 1987)



Article VIII. Amendment Procedure



17.68.430  In general.



   In accordance with the provisions of the Arizona State Statutes, the
city council may from time to time adopt amendments to the ordinance codified
in this title. An amendment to the ordinance codified in this title may
involve changes in its text or wording, including but not limited to changes
in the regulations regarding uses, setbacks, heights, lot areas, definitions,
administration, and/or procedures. Ordinance amendments do not, however,
include rezoning of property. Amendments may be initiated by the council, the
planning and zoning commission, or by petition of a person whose property
would be affected by the amendment.



(Ord. 1178 § 7.1.1, 1987)



17.68.440  Application requirements.



   If an individual or other party initiates a request for an amendment to
the ordinance codified in this title, the request must be made on a form
provided by the zoning administrator. The request must state the exact
section of the ordinance proposed for amendment, the proposed substitute
wording, and the reasons for requesting the amendment. Graphic material
should also be submitted if it will assist in understanding the benefits of
the amendment. The submittal must be made to the zoning administrator and the
processing fee paid at least thirty days prior to the date of public hearing
by the planning and zoning commission.



(Ord. 1178 § 7.1.2, 1987)



17.68.450  Notice of hearing.



   No amendment to the ordinance codified in this title shall be adopted
until public hearings have been held thereon by the planning and zoning
commission and the city council. A notice of the time, date, place and
purpose of the hearings shall be published at least once in a newspaper of
general circulation, published or circulated within the city at least fifteen
days prior to the date of the first hearing which shall be held by the
planning and zoning commission and at least fifteen days prior to a
subsequent hearing by the city council. The hearing date shall be set for not
more than thirty days after the application of amendment has been received by
the zoning administrator and all appropriate processing fees are paid in full.



(Ord. 1178 § 7.1.3, 1987)



17.68.460  Hearing and recommendation by planning and zoning commission when.



   An amendment not initiated by the planning and zoning commission shall
be referred to the commission for study and public hearing. In its
deliberations on the matter, the commission shall consider oral and written
statements from the petitioner, the public, city staff, and its own members.
The commission may approve, disapprove, or table an amendment application.
The commission shall notify the city council, in writing, of its
recommendation within sixty days of the public hearing.



(Ord. 1178 § 7.1.4, 1987)



17.68.470  Hearing and decision by city council.



   The city council, after receipt of the report and recommendation of the
planning and zoning commission, shall set a date within thirty days for a
public hearing on the amendment request. An amendment which has been
recommended for denial by the commission shall not be reviewed by the council
except upon the written request of the applicant. In its deliberations on the
matter, the council shall consider oral or written statements from the
petitioner, the public, city staff members, and its own members. The council
may approve the request by ordinance, deny the request, or table the request.



(Ord. 1178 § 7.1.5, 1987)



Article IX. Rezone Procedure



17.68.480  In general.



   In accordance with the provisions of the Arizona Revised Statutes, the
city council may from time to time change the zoning of parcels of and within
the municipality. These changes in zoning classification are for the purpose
of meeting the land use needs of the residents of the city in conformance
with the city's general plan. Rezoning may be initiated by the city council,
the planning and zoning commission, the owner of the property proposed for
rezoning, the lessee having a leasehold interest of not less than five years
exclusive of an option to renew, or the agent of any of the foregoing, duly
authorized in writing, or by petition of the person whose property would be
affected by the rezoning.



(Ord. 1178 § 7.2.1, 1987)



17.68.490  Application requirements.



   An application for rezoning shall be made on a form provided by the
zoning administrator. On the application form shall be indicated the legal
description of the property, the present zoning classification, and the
recommended use of this property by the city's general plan. With the
application, the applicant shall submit a “one inch equals one hundred
feet” scale diagram of the rezoning and surrounding area. The applicant
shall present evidence to the planning director of ownership or type of
controlling interest in the property (e.g., option to purchase). This
application shall be completed, verified by a notary public, and submitted
along with the established fee to the planning director at least twenty- one
days prior to the public hearing by the planning and zoning commission.



(Ord. 1178 § 7.2.2, 1987)



17.68.500  Notice of hearing.



   A.   No rezoning may be adopted until a public hearing has been held
on the matter by the planning and zoning commission, and if required under
Section 17.68.520 by the city council.



   B.   A notice of the time, date, place, and purpose of the hearings
shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation, published or
circulated in the city at least fifteen days prior to the date of the first
hearing and at least fifteen days prior to the date of any subsequent hearing.



   C.   A similar notice shall be made at least fifteen days before the
day of the first hearing to each owner of property situated wholly or partly
within two hundred feet of the property to which the rezoning relates. The
zoning administrator shall be responsible for placing and mailing such
notices. For the purpose of giving mailed notice, the planning director shall
require the applicant to furnish the names and addresses of all owners of
property within two hundred feet of the property to be rezoned. The zoning
administrator shall make a copy of the notice and a list of the owners and
addresses to which the notice was sent as a part of the record of
proceedings. The failure to receive notice by individual property owners if
notices were published and mailed fifteen days prior to the hearing shall not
necessarily invalidate the proceedings.



   D.   In proceedings involving rezoning of land which abuts other
municipalities or unincorporated areas of Pinal County, or a combination
thereof, copies of the notice of the public hearing shall be transmitted to
the planning agency of such governmental unit abutting such land.



(Ord. 1178 § 7.2.3, 1987)



17.68.510  Hearing and recommendation by planning and zoning.



   A rezoning not initiated by the planning and zoning commission shall be
referred to the commission for study and public hearing. In its deliberations
on the matter, the commission shall consider oral or written statements from
the applicant, the public, city staff, and its own members. The commission
may recommend approval or disapproval, or it may table the rezoning
application. The application may not be tabled more than two meetings in
succession. The planning and zoning commission shall notify the city council,
in writing, of its recommendation. The recommendation shall include the
reasons for the recommendation and be transmitted to the council not more
than fifteen days after the public hearing in which the recommendation was
made.



(Ord. 1178 § 7.2.4, 1987)



17.68.520  Hearing and decision by city council.



   A.   The city council may, after receipt of the report and
recommendation of the planning and zoning commission, consider the rezoning
request. If requested in writing by any member of the public or of the city
council, the council shall hold a public hearing on the request. A rezoning
which has been recommended for denial by the commission shall not be reviewed
by the council except upon written request by the applicant, and shall then
require a public hearing.  Such written request must be made to the planning
director within forty-five days of the commission's decision.  Notice of the
time and place of the hearing shall be given in the time and manner provided
for giving of notice of the hearing by the commission as specified in Section
17.68.500 of this chapter. During any public hearing on the matter, the
council shall consider oral or written statements from the applicant, city
staff, the public and its own members.



   B.   The council may approve any request for rezoning by ordinance,
deny the request, or table the request. The application may not be tabled
more than two meetings. If approved, the city engineer shall revise the
official zoning map accordingly. If the application is denied there may be no
reapplication for the same site for a period of ninety days.



(Ord. 1178.35, § 2, 1990)



17.68.530  Conditional rezoning.



   A.   Approval of a rezoning request shall be conditioned upon the
start of construction beginning with one year of the date of approval action
taken by the city council, which shall be thirty days after the second
reading. If, at the expiration of this period, the start of construction has
not begun for the use based upon the commission's approved site plan for
which the zoning was conditionally approved, the property shall revert to its
former zoning classification without council or commission action.



   B.   The city may authorize extensions when deemed necessary.



(Ord. 1178 § 7.2.6, 1987)



17.68.540  Public protest against amendment to prevent when.



   A.   If there is a written protest against a change in the zoning
classification of a par- cel of land, which is signed by the owners of twenty
percent or more of the area of lots included in the proposed change of zon-
ing, or signed by those owners of twenty percent or more of the area within a
distance of one hundred fifty feet of the perimeter of the change of zoning,
not including street rights-of-way, the change shall not be approved except
upon the affirmative vote of three-fourths of all of the members of the city
council.



   B.   If any members of the governing body are unable to vote on such
a question because of conflict of interest, then the required number of votes
for passage of the question shall be three-fourths of the remaining
membership of the council, provided, that such required number of votes shall
in no event be less than a majority of the full membership of the council.



(Ord. 1178 § 7.2.7, 1987)



17.68.550  Right-of-way dedication as condition when.



   The planning and zoning commission may require as a condition to the
change of zone, the dedication of right-of-way necessary for roadways as
prescribed by the circulation plan contained in the city general plan. The
commission may also require dedication of land for future roadway
construction that is greater than that called for in the circulation plan of
the general plan if it is deemed to be in the best interest of the city.



(Ord. 1178 § 7.2.8, 1987)



Article X. Protected Development Rights Plans



17.68.1000  Definitions.



   In this Article, unless the context otherwise requires:



   A.   "Construction Permits" or "Building Permits" mean those permits
issued for the construction of the project, such as but not limited to,
infrastructure improvements, building foundations, buildings, paving of
vehicular use areas, or similar types of improvements related to the
construction and implementation of the project.  Permits for (a) clearing,
grubbing, and grading of a site; (b) construction of a section of sidewalk;
(c) installation of screening; (d) paving of an access driveway but not the
parking associated with use; or (e) any similar type of work are not included
in the definition of Construction Permits or Building Permits for purposes of
this Article, unless specifically stated otherwise by this Article or the
process requiring the applicability of this Article.



   B.   "Development Plan" means a subdivision final plat in
conformance with Title 16 or a PAD plan in conformance with Title 17 of a
project site submitted by a Landowner that provides detailed information as
to how a proposed project will be developed in compliance with City
ordinances and regulations.



   C.   "Landowner" means any owner of a legal or equitable interest in
real property, including the heirs, devisees, successors, assigns and
personal representative of the owner, or a representative authorized by a
Landowner to submit to a city or town a development application for a
property for approval.



   D.   "Property" means all real property subject to zoning
regulations and restrictions by a city or town.



   E.   "Protected development right" means the right to undertake and
complete the development and use of property under the terms and conditions
of a Protected Development Right Plan and this Article, without compliance
with subsequent changes in zoning regulations and development standards
during the term of the Protected Development Right, except as provided by
A.R.S. § 9-1204 and Section 17.67.1007.



   F.   "Protected Development Right Plan" means a Development Plan
identified as a Protected Development Right Plan at the time of the
Landowner's submission, that, if approved by the Council, grants to the
Landowner a Protected Development Right to undertake and complete the
development and use of the property as shown thereon for a specified period
of time. A Protected Development Right Plan, at a minimum, shall describe
with a reasonable degree of certainty all of the following:



   1.   The proposed uses of the site.



   2.   The boundaries of the site.



   3.   Significant topographical and other natural features affecting
development of the site.



   4.   The number of dwelling units or other structures, and



   5.   The location of all existing and proposed utilities and a
provision for other infrastructure on the site, including water, sewers,
roads and pedestrian walkways.



   G.   "Non-Phased Protected Development Right Plan" means Protected
Development Right Plan which, at a minimum, shall describe with a reasonable
degree of certainty all of the elements of a Protected Development Right Plan
as set forth in Subsection F, above, as well as all of the following:



   1.   The requirements for final site development approval and for
issuance of a building permit.



   2.   The general location on the site of the proposed buildings,
structures and other improvements.



   3.   The square footage and height of the proposed buildings and
other structures.



   A final subdivision plat that meets the requirements of Chapter 16.12
of the Casa Grande Municipal Code and A.R.S. § 9-463.01 and was identified
and submitted by the Landowner for approval through the process established
in this Article shall be a Non-Phased Protected Development Right Plan.



   H.   "Phased Protected Development Right Plan" means a Development
Plan for a master planned development in accordance with the requirements of
a Planned Area Development in Title 17, consisting of at least one hundred
and sixty (160) acres, and containing the elements articulated in Subsection
F above.



(Ord. 1397.17.30 § 1 (part), 2002)



17.68.1001  Protected Development Right Plan approvals.



   A Protected Development Right shall be granted upon approval by the
Council of a Development Plan identified at the time it is submitted as a
Protected Development Right Plan.



(Ord. 1397.17.30 § 1 (part), 2002)



17.68.1002  Effective date; exceptions.



   A.   A Protected Development Right shall be deemed established with
respect to a property on the Effective Date of the Council's approval of the
Protected Development Right Plan.



   B.   A Protected Development Right Plan approved with a condition or
stipulation that a variance be obtained does not confer a Protected
Development Right until the necessary variance is obtained.  Approval of a
Protected Development Right Plan does not guarantee approval of a variance.



(Ord. 1397.17.30 § 1 (part), 2002)



17.68.1003  Submission procedures and requirements.



   When a Development Plan is required to be processed in accordance with
this Article, preparation, application, and approval shall be as follows:



   A.   Phased Protected Development Right Plan. A Phased Protected
Development Right Plan shall be submitted to the City in accordance with the
PAD plan approval process described in Chapter 17.68, Article V.



   B.   Non-Phased Protected Development Right Plan.  A Non-Phased
Protected Development Right Plan shall be submitted to the City as described
for preliminary and final plat approval in Titles 16 and 17.



   C.   Council Consideration.



   1.   The Mayor and Council shall consider for approval Protected
Development Right Plan submitted in accordance with this Article and Arizona
Revised Statutes (A.R.S.) §§ 9-1201 through 1205, inclusive.



   2.   A Protected Development Right is subject to the terms and
conditions imposed by the Council on the Protected Development Right Plan
approval and nothing in this Article is intended to or shall preclude the
Council from establishing such terms and conditions.



   3.   Nothing in this Article is intended to or shall preclude the
City's other additional requirements for submittal or approval of Development
Plans for any land use category or district and such requirements may
include, but are not limited to, traffic reports or studies, drainage reports
or studies, master street plans, development phasing schedules and phased
public infrastructure schedules.



   D.   Subsequent Reviews and Approvals.  After the approval of a
Protected Development Right Plan, the plan will be subject to subsequent
reviews and approvals by the Council, as set forth in the original resolution
of approval, to ensure compliance with the terms and conditions of the
original approval.



   E.   Later Detailed Plan Submittals.  The Landowner shall submit a
more detailed plan for each phase of a phased development in order to obtain
final site development approval to develop the property.



(Ord. 1397.17.30 § 1 (part), 2002)



17.68.1004  Revocation for non-compliance.



   The City may revoke, upon notice to the Landowner and public hearing,
its approval of the Protected Development Right Plan for failure to comply
with applicable terms and conditions imposed on the approval as well as
Landowner's failure to submit a more detailed plan for each phase of a Phased
development for final site development approval.



(Ord. 1397.17.30 § 1 (part), 2002)



17.68.1005  Duration of Protected Development Right Plan.



   A.   A Protected Development Right established under a Protected
Development Right Plan is valid for three years for a Non-Phased development
or five years for a Phased development.



   B.   A city or town may extend for a maximum of two additional years
the duration of a Protected Development Right obtained through approval of a
Protected Development Right Plan, if a longer time period is warranted by all
relevant circumstances, including the size, type and phasing of the
development on the property, the level of investment of the Landowner,
economic cycles and market conditions.  The decision to extend the time
period for a Protected Development Right is in the discretion of the City. 
However, a Protected Development Right shall not remain established for more
than five years for a Non-Phased development or seven years for a phased
development.



   C.   A Protected Development Right terminates at the end of the
applicable period established under this section.  If a building permit has
been issued before the date of termination of a Protected Development Right,
the Protected Development Right remains valid until the building permit
expires, but in no event for longer than one year.  On expiration, only
principal structures for which footings or foundations have been completed
may be finished under the Protected Development Right.  On the expiration of
a Protected Development Right, development may continue based on a valid
building permit and according to standards in effect at that time.  An
unexpired building permit issued for a property with a Protected Development
Right neither expires nor shall be revoked merely because a Protected
Development Right expires under the time limitations specified in this
section.



(Ord. 1397.17.30 § 1 (part), 2002)



17.68.1006  Limitation on extent of Protected Development Right.



   A Protected Development Right is established only for the specific
elements of the development or other specific matters shown on the approved
Protected Development Right Plan.  A Protected Development Right is not
established for any elements or other matters, or portions of any elements of
the development or other matters not shown on the approved Protected
Development Right Plan.



(Ord. 1397.17.30 § 1 (part), 2002)



17.68.1007  Subsequent changes prohibited; exceptions.



   A.   A Protected Development Right established under this section
precludes the enforcement against the property to which the Protected
Development Right applies of any legislative or administrative land use
regulation by a city or town or pursuant to an initiated measure that would
change, alter, impair, prevent, diminish, delay or otherwise impact the
development or use of the property as set forth in an approved Protected
Development Right Plan, except under any one or more of the following
circumstances:



   1.   With the written consent of the affected Landowner.



   2.   On findings, by ordinance or resolution, and after notice and a
public hearing, that natural or man-made hazards on or in the immediate
vicinity of the property, if uncorrected, would pose a serious threat to the
public health, safety and welfare if the project were to proceed as approved
in the Protected Development Right Plan.



   3.   On findings, by ordinance or resolution, and after notice and a
hearing, that the Landowner or his representative intentionally supplied
inaccurate information or made material misrepresentations that made a
difference in the approval of the Protected Development Right Plan by the
City.



   4.   On the enactment of a state or federal law or regulation that
precludes development as approved in the Protected Development Right Plan, in
which case the governing body of the City, after notice and a hearing, may
modify the affected provisions, on a finding that the change in state or
federal law has a fundamental effect on the Protected Development Right Plan.



   B.   A Protected Development Right does not preclude the enforcement
of a subsequently adopted overlay zoning classification that imposes
additional requirements and that does not affect the allowable type or
density of use, or ordinances or regulations that are general in nature and
that are applicable to all property subject to land use regulation by the
City, such as building, fire, plumbing, electrical and mechanical codes.



   C.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article, the
establishment of a Protected Development Right does not preclude, change or
impair the authority of a city or town to adopt and enforce zoning ordinance
provisions governing nonconforming property or uses.



   D.   This Article does not alter or diminish the authority of a city
or town to exercise its eminent domain powers.



(Ord. 1397.17.30 § 1 (part), 2002)



17.68.1008  Council designation of Development Plan.



   The Council may designate, by ordinance or resolution, a Development
Plan as a Protected Development Right Plan even if not identified as a
Protected Development Right Plan at the time of Landowner submission.  The
Council must make a finding on the record that its granting of a Protected
Development Right to undertake and complete the development shown on the
Development Plan will promote reasonable certainty, stability and fairness in
the land use planning and regulatory process and that it will secure the
reasonable investment-backed expectations of the Landowner.



(Ord. 1397.17.30 § 1 (part), 2002)



17.68.1009  Waiver may not be a condition of approval.



   A city or town shall not require a Landowner to waive a Protected
Development Right as a condition of development approval.



(Ord. 1397.17.30 § 1 (part), 2002)



17.68.1010  Protected Development Right; exercise; agreements.



   A.   A Protected Development Right obtained under this Article is
not a personal right but attaches to and runs with the applicable property. 
After approval of a Protected Development Right Plan, all successors to the
original Landowner are entitled to exercise the Protected Development Rights.



   B.   Nothing in this Article precludes judicial determination, based
on common law principles or statutory provisions, that a vested right exists
in a particular case or that a compensable taking has occurred.  Except as
expressly provided in this Article, nothing herein shall be construed to
alter the existing common law of vested rights.



   C.   Nothing in this Article shall preclude, change or limit the
ability of the City to enter into a development agreement as authorized in
A.R.S. § 9-500.05.



(Ord. 1397.17.30 § 1 (part), 2002)



17.68.1011  Resolution of conflict.



   In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this Article and
A.R.S. §§ 9-1201 through 9-1205, inclusive and as they may be amended, the
statutory provisions shall govern.



(Ord. 1397.17.30 § 1 (part), 2002)



Chapter 17.72
ENFORCEMENT



Sections:



17.72.010   Use of land in violation prohibited.



17.72.020   Order to correct violation.



17.72.030   Right of appeal.



17.72.040   Enforcement authority.



17.72.050   Violation—Penalty.



17.72.060   City held harmless.



17.72.010  Use of land in violation prohibited.



   No person shall locate, erect, construct, reconstruct, enlarge, change,
maintain, or use any building or structure, or use any land in violation of
this title.



(Ord. 1178 § 8.1.1, 1987)



17.72.020  Order to correct violation.



   The zoning administrator shall order, in writing, the correction of any
violation. Such order shall state the nature of the violation, the ordinance
provision violated, and the time by which the violation must be corrected.
After such order has been served, no work shall proceed on any structure or
tract of land covered by such an order except to correct such violation or to
comply with the order.



(Ord. 1178 § 8.1.2, 1987)



17.72.030  Right of appeal.



   Decisions of the zoning administrator may be appealed to the board of
adjustment in accordance with Article VI. of this chapter.



(Ord. 1178 § 8.1.3, 1987)



17.72.040  Enforcement authority.



   In addition to or in lieu of the procedures outlined above, this title
shall be enforceable in a court of proper jurisdiction, and any or all
appropriate remedies at law or in equity shall be available for the
enforcement thereof.



(Ord. 1178 § 8.1.4, 1987)



17.72.050  Violation—Penalty.



   Any and all persons who shall violate any of the provisions of this
title or fail to comply therewith, or who shall fail to comply with any
lawful order or regulation made thereunder, shall severally for each and
every violation and noncompliance respectively, forfeit and pay a fine of not
less than fifty dollars, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars, and/or be
imprisoned not to exceed the time of four months for each offense, the
violation constituting a Class 2 misdemeanor under the Criminal Code of the
laws of the state of Arizona. In addition, the costs of any such action may
be imposed at the discretion of the court. The imposition of one penalty for
any violation of this title shall not excuse the violation or permit it to
continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy the
violations and defects within a reasonable time; and each day that the
prohibited condition is not corrected or remedied shall constitute a separate
offense; and the court shall impose a fine on a per diem basis for each day
that the violation is maintained. Application of the above penalty shall not
be held to preclude the forced removal of prohibited conditions.



(Ord. 1178 § 8.1.5, 1987)



17.72.060  City held harmless.



   This title shall not be construed to hold the city, its planning
director, zoning administrator, city engineer or any other city official,
responsible for any damage to persons or property by reason of any inspection
or reinspection authorized herein or the failure to so inspect or reinspect
or by reason of the issuance to a building permit as herein required.



(Ord. 1178 § 8.1.6, 1987)


