
Florence, AZ Code of Ordinances


TOWN OF FLORENCE, ARIZONA
CODE OF ORDINANCES




2019 S-16 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through 5-6-2019




 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: www.amlegal.com



ORGANIZATION AND SPECIAL FEATURES OF THE CODE



Titles. This code of ordinances is divided into eight, numbered titles that
cover a particular topic of village law. The titles are designated using only
odd numbers. Even numbers are reserved to accommodate any needed expansion
during future updates. The eight titles of the code are as follows:



   Title I:  General Provisions. Provides continuity throughout the code
and helps curtail the occurrence of duplicate provisions. Title I provisions
apply to all other titles and are usually not repeated in the code except
where a variation in another provision compels it. The usual content of Title
I, are general definitions, rules of construction, reviver clauses, the
effect of amendment or repeal, severability, and a general penalty.



   Title III:  Administration. Contains provisions pertaining to
administrative matters, policies and procedures.



   Title V:  Public Works.  Town changed the name of this title to
Utilities. Contains provisions regulating types of regulations such as water
and sewer use.



   Title VII:  Traffic Code. Contains provisions relating to traffic and
parking.



   Title IX:  General Regulations. Contains a variety of general,
regulatory provisions governing subjects such as animals, fire prevention and
the like.



   Title XI:  Business Regulations. Contains provisions pertaining to
businesses, general licensing procedures and other similar types of business
regulations.



   Title XIII:  General Offenses.  Contains offense or prohibitory
conduct provisions.



   Title XV:  Land Usage. Contains provisions on the use of land,
including  zoning, building, subdivision and flood plain regulations.



Tables of Special Ordinances. The Town of Florence elected to exclude the
Table of Special Ordinances.



Parallel Reference Tables. These tables are included near the end of the code
and provide the following:



   A numerical list of all state law provisions and citations that are
referred in the code, with a corresponding reference to the section of the
code containing that specific state law cite.



   A numerical list of all sections of the town’s previous code book
used to compile this current code of ordinances, with a corresponding
reference to the current code section containing that old code provision.



   A numerical list of all ordinances used to compile the code of
ordinances, which will include the ordinance number, the passage date of the
ordinance and the code section where the ordinance is codified.



Index. The index contains a list of entries of all code provisions currently
in effect and refers the user to the appropriate section number in the code
where the provision may be found. The Index will be generated at the final
stage of production.



Division of Titles, Chapters and Section Numbering.



   Each title is divided into chapters and often further divided into
subchapters. Numbering is reserved between subchapters to allow for future
expansion. (For an example, notice how Chapter 30 is constructed to allow
additional provisions to be added to each of the four subchapter categories.)
All chapters and subchapters consist of numbered sections. The section number
identifies the title, chapter and section of the provision cited. (The title
and chapter number appear to the left of the decimal point, and the section
number appears to the right of the decimal point.) For example, the
number“30.20" refers to section 20 of Chapter 30  in Title III, while
“92.02 refers to section 02 of Chapter 92 in Title IX. Furthermore, the
section- number suffix “.99" is always reserved for penalty provisions.
Thus, 150.999 designates the penalty provision for Chapter 150.



General Penalty.



   A general penalty has been supplied in § 10.99. This general penalty
applies to areas of the code where a penalty is needed but is not otherwise
specifically provided by another provision of the code.



Cross-references and Statutory References.



   Cross-references direct the user to another part of the code of
ordinances which may be relevant to the topic at hand. Statutory references
refer the user to certain state law provisions relevant to the topic at hand,
and which in most cases are separately published.



Legislative Histories.



   Legislative histories are found throughout the code and give the source
of origin of particular provisions. Histories are placed in parentheses
directly following sections or divisions of the code. Most typically,
histories provide the derivation of any ordinances, statutes or prior code
sections.



Page Numbering



   Each title of the code is separately paginated, which allows individual
titles to be amended without having to renumber the entire code. For example,
if the village adds more pages to Title III during a supplement, the pages in
Title III will be renumbered accordingly. However, the remaining titles (V
through XV) will be unaffected because their self-contained pagination is
independent from Title III.



   Page numbers in the code are located at the top corner of each page,
except when at the start of a new title, chapter or the like. In those
instances, the lead number is found at the bottom center of the page.



Headers



   Bold-printed headers appear at the top of each regular page of the
code. Headers on even-numbered pages display the name of the town and of the
title being consulted. Headers on odd-numbered pages display the name of the
chapter being consulted.



TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Captions



   10.05   Definitions



   10.06   Rules of interpretation



   10.07   Severability



   10.08   Reference to chapters and sections



   10.09   Reference to offices



   10.10   Errors and omissions



   10.11   Official time



   10.12   Reasonable time; calculation of time



   10.13   Ordinances repealed



   10.14   Ordinances unaffected



   10.15   Reserved



   10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinances



   10.17   Conflicting provisions



   10.18   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10.19   Section histories; statutory references



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall
constitute and be designated “The Code of the Town of Florence, Arizona”,
and may be so cited.  The code may also be cited as “The Florence Town
Code”.



§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   The rules and the definitions set forth in this chapter shall
be observed in the construction of this code and the ordinances of the town
unless the construction would be inconsistent with either the manifest intent
of the Council or the context of this code or the ordinances of the town.



   (B)   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication
required, the same rules of construction, definition and application shall
govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation
of state law.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule.  All words and phrases shall be construed and
understood according to the common and approved usage of the language; but
technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar
and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood
according to the peculiar and appropriate meaning.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



      ACTS BY AGENTS.  A requirement that an act be done which may by
law also be done by an agent, include the acts performed by an authorized
agent.



      CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, MUNICIPALITY or TOWN.  The Town of
Florence, Arizona.



      CITY-SCAPE and TOWN-SCAPE are synonymous.



      CODE,THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  This municipal code
as modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or
sections.



      COMPUTATION OF TIME.  The time in which an act is required to be
done is computed by excluding the first day and including the last day,
unless the last day is a holiday, and then it is also excluded. In cases in
which notice of a decision by the municipality must be given to a petitioner
and in which the petitioner must file a notice of appeal of the decision
within a time certain of less than ten days, the time is computed starting
with the day after the day during which the notice of decision is received by
the petitioner by personal service or registered or certified mail.



      COUNCIL.  The Council of the Town of Florence, Arizona.



      COUNTY.  Pinal County, Arizona.



      DAY.  The period of time between any midnight and the midnight
following.



      DAYTIME  The period of time between sunrise and sunset.



      DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY.  Any provision requiring a municipal
officer or a municipal employee to do some act is to be construed to
authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize
subordinates to perform the required act.



      DEPARTMENT, BOARD, COMMISSION, OFFICE, OFFICER or EMPLOYEE. 
Whenever any department, board, commission, office, officer or employee is
referred to, it shall mean a department, board, commission, office, officer
or employee of the town unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.



      EMERGENCY VEHICLE.  Vehicles of the Fire, Police and Public
Service Departments and legally authorized ambulances and emergency vehicles
of the State of Arizona, Pinal County, or any political subdivisions thereof,
and vehicles of public service corporations.



      EMERGENCY WORK. Any work performed to prevent or alleviate
physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency,
which has or may result in a disruption of service, and which is necessary to
protect the health, safety and welfare of persons or property.



      ENGINEER.  The Engineer of the municipality.



      GENDER.  Words of the masculine gender include the feminine.



      IN THE MUNICIPALITY or WITHIN THE MUNICIPALITY includes all
territory over which the municipality now has, or hereafter acquires,
jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers.



      IN THE TOWN or WITHIN THE TOWN.  All territory over which the
town now has, or shall hereafter acquire, jurisdiction for the exercise of
its police powers or other regulatory powers.



      JOINT AUTHORITY.  All words purporting to give a joint authority
to three or more town officers or other persons shall be construed as giving
the authority to a majority of the officers or other persons unless it shall
be otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the authority.



      MAJORITY.  When used in reference to the Town Council, means 51%
of those members in attendance provided that a quorum of the Council is also
present.



      MAY is to be construed as being permissive.



      MONTH.  A calendar month.



      MOTOR VEHICLE. Every self-propelled device in, upon or by which
any person or property is, or may be, transported upon a public highway,
excepting aircraft and devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or
tracks.



      MUNICIPALITY.  The Town of Florence, Pinal County, Arizona.



      MUST is to be construed as being mandatory.



      NIGHTTIME.  The period of time between sunset and sunrise.



      NUMBER.  Words used in the singular include the plural. Words in
the plural include the singular.



      OATH.  Includes affirmation or declaration.



      OCCUPANT includes tenant.



      OR may be read AND and AND may be read OR.



      OWNER.  As applied to a building or land, includes any part
owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety
of the whole or a part of the building or land.



      PERSON.  Shall extend and be applied to firms, corporations or
voluntary associations, as well as to individuals, unless plainly
inapplicable.



      PERSONAL PROPERTY.  Includes every species of property, except
real property as defined in this section.



      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING.  The words PRECEDING and FOLLOWING mean
next before and next after, respectively.



      PROPERTY.  Real and personal property.



      REAL PROPERTY.  Lands, tenements and hereditaments.



      REASONABLE TIME.  Any provision that requires any act to be done
in a reasonable time, or reasonable notice to be given, refers to the time
only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of the duty, or
compliance with the notice.



      SHALL or MAY.  SHALL is mandatory and MAY is permissive.



      SHALL HAVE BEEN.  Includes past and future cases.



      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  Includes a mark when the signer
cannot write, the signer’s or subscriber’s name being written near the
mark by a witness who writes his or her own name near the signer's or
subscriber's name; but a signature or subscription by mark can be
acknowledged or can serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement
only when two witnesses so sign their own names thereto.



      STATE.  The State of Arizona.



      SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by
a heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of
the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter
of the heading.  Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.



      TENANT or OCCUPANT.  When applied to a building or land, shall
include any person holding a written or an oral lease or who occupies the
whole or part of the building or land, either alone or with others.



      TENSES.  The present tense includes the past and future tenses,
and the future includes the present.



      TOWN ATTORNEY.  The Attorney of the municipality.



      TOWN CLERK.  The municipal Town Clerk.



      TOWN MANAGER.  The Town Manager of the municipality.



      WEEK consists of seven consecutive days.



      WRITTEN.  Any representation of words, letters or figures,
whether by printing or otherwise.



      YEAR.  A calendar year, except where otherwise provided.



(Prior Code, Ch. 1, § 1-2)



Statutory references:



   Application of municipal ordinances to municipally owned, leased and
the like, property, see A.R.S. § 9-401



   Definitions and construction of statutes generally, see A.R.S. §§
1-211 through 1-215



   Extraterritorial jurisdiction, see A.R.S. §§ 9-240(B)(21) and 9-402



§ 10.06  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   The construction of all ordinances of this municipality shall be by the
following rules, unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the intent
of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance:



   (A)   And/or.  “Or” may be read “and”, and “and” may be
read “or” if the context requires it.



   (B)   Acts by agents.  When this code or an ordinance requires an
act to be done which may by law as well be done by an agent as by the
principal, the requirement shall be construed to include all such acts when
done by an authorized agent.



   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses.



      (1)   Words of the masculine gender include the feminine;
words in the singular number include the plural, and words in the plural
number include the singular.



      (2)   The present tense includes the past and future tenses,
and the future includes the present.



   (D)   General terms.  A general term following specific enumeration
of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so
limited.



§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY.



   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Council that the
titles, chapters, subchapters, sections, sentences, clauses and phrases of
this code shall be severable, and if any provision of this code is held
unconstitutional for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of the
code.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO CHAPTERS AND SECTIONS.



   (A)   All references to chapters or sections are to the chapters and
sections of this code unless otherwise specified.



   (B)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section
hereof, the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.09  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the town exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.10  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any
words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and
the word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published.  No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.11  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within the town for the transaction of all
municipal business.



§ 10.12  REASONABLE TIME; CALCULATION OF TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done as provided in this
code or in any order issued pursuant to any ordinance, when expressed in
days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last,
except that if the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or holiday it shall be
excluded; and when the time is expressed in hours, the whole of Saturday,
Sunday or a holiday, from midnight to midnight, shall be excluded.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
code, except as otherwise provided in § 10.14.  However, all rights, duties
and obligations created or imposed by the repealed ordinances shall continue
and exist in all respects as if this code had not been adopted and enacted.



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   The adoption and enactment of this code shall not be construed to
repeal or in any way to modify or affect:



   (A)   Any special ordinance or ordinances regarding franchises,
annexations, dedications or zoning;



   (B)   Any ordinance making an appropriation;



   (C)   Any ordinance affecting any bond issue or by which any bond
issue may have been authorized;



   (D)   The running of the statute of limitations in force at the time
this code becomes effective;



   (E)   The continued existence and operation of any department,
agency, commission or office heretofore legally established or held;



   (F)   Any bond of any public officer;



   (G)   Any taxes, fees, assessments or other charges incurred or
imposed; and



   (H)   Any ordinances authorizing, ratifying, confirming, approving
or accepting any compact or contract with any other municipality, the State
of Arizona or any county or subdivision thereof, or with the United States or
any agency or instrumentality thereof.



§ 10.15  RESERVED.



§ 10.16  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES.



   (A)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or
provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause or provision unless it shall be expressly
so provided.



   (B)   The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or
penalty incurred before the repeal took effect nor any suit, prosecution or
proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for any offense committed under
the ordinance repealed.



§ 10.17  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.



   If any provision of this code conflicts with any other provision of
this code, any other local legislation, or any state or federal law, the
provision which is more stringent or restrictive in nature shall apply unless
the context clearly requires or indicates otherwise.



§ 10.18  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing
chapter or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically
repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.



   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a
new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of
this code, the proper number of the chapter or section.  In addition to the
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.



§ 10.19  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are
listed following the text of the code section.  Example:  (Ord. 10, passed
5-13-1960; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Am.
Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)



   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this
indicates that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the
statute.  Example:  (A.R.S. § 9-240)  (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Am.
Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1985)



      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory
reference” following the text of the section, this indicates that the
reader should refer to that statute for further information.  Example:



   § 39.01  PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



      The municipality shall make available to any person for
inspection or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state
law.



   Statutory reference:



      Inspection of public records, seeA.R.S. § 39-121



   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the town published in a prior year and subsequently amended,
the prior code section number shall be indicated in the history by “(Prior
Code, §     ).”



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person found guilty of violating any provisions of this
code, except as otherwise provided in this code, upon conviction thereof, may
be punished by a fine not to exceed $500, exclusive of any applicable
surcharges and penalty assessments required by local or state law, and by up
to 30 days in jail, or both. The court may, in its discretion, impose a
period of probation upon anyone convicted of a violation of any provisions of
this code of up to 12 months.



      (1)   In addition to any monetary civil sanction, the Civil
Hearing Officer shall order the defendant to abate the civil code infraction,
unless it has been abated by the date of a finding of responsibility
therefore.



      (2)   The Civil Hearing Officer shall have the authority,
within his or her discretion, to suspend the payment of any civil sanction
imposed.



      (3)   In any case involving a civil code infraction relating
to the occupancy or use of land, any monetary civil sanction imposed pursuant
to this section upon a defendant who holds an ownership interest in the land
shall be recordable as a lien upon the land and shall run with the land. The
town, at its sole option, may record a notice of civil sanction and abatement
order with the Pinal County Recorder and thereby cause compliance by any
person(s) or entity thereafter acquiring the property. When the property is
brought into compliance by the owner or responsible party, a satisfaction of
notice of civil sanction and abatement order shall be filed at the request
and expense of the owner or responsible party.  It shall be the property
owner’s responsibility to secure the satisfaction of notice of civil
sanction and abatement order from the town.



   (B)   Any violation of or failure or refusal to do or perform any
act required by Title VII of this code constitutes a civil traffic offense
which shall result in a civil penalty not to exceed $250. In addition, the
court shall levy penalty assessments pursuant to A.R.S. §§ 12-116.01 and
12-116.02. Civil traffic violations are subject to the provisions of A.R.S.
§§ 28-1592 et seq., as amended.



   (C)   Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this
code which is classified as a Class one misdemeanor, upon conviction thereof,
may be punished by a fine not to exceed $2,500, by imprisonment for a period
not to exceed six months, by a term of probation not to exceed three years or
by any combination of the fine, imprisonment and probation.



   (D)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, any person
found to have violated any provision of this code or amendments thereto,
which pursuant to this section is classified as a civil code infraction, and
who has been twice previously found to have violated the provision within the
preceding 24 months, shall, in addition to any penalty prescribed for the
civil code infraction, be guilty of a Class one misdemeanor and shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $2,500, by imprisonment for a period not to
exceed six months, by a term of probation not to exceed three years or by any
combination of the fine, imprisonment and probation.



Statutory reference:



   Maximum penalty for civil traffic violations, see A.R.S. § 28-1598



   Misdemeanor penalty authorized, see A.R.S. § 9-240(B)(28)(b)



TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   TOWN COUNCIL



      31.   TOWN OFFICIALS



      32.   TOWN ORGANIZATIONS



      33.   DISASTER PREPAREDNESS, EMERGENCY SERVICES AND THE LIKE



      34.   PERSONNEL



      35.   TAXATION



CHAPTER 30: TOWN COUNCIL



Section




General Provisions




   30.01   Composition



   30.02   Terms



   30.03   Election of Mayor



   30.04   Powers, duties of Mayor



   30.05   Selection of Vice Mayor



   30.06   Temporary presiding officer



   30.07   Compensation of Mayor and Council



   30.08   Travel reimbursement




Rules of Order and Procedure




   30.20   Suspension of rules



   30.21   Regular meetings



   30.22   Location of meetings



   30.23   Special meetings



   30.24   Agenda



   30.25   Order of business



   30.26   Adjournment



   30.27   Voting




Ordinances and Contracts




   30.45   Action taken by ordinance



   30.46   Adopting ordinances by reference



   30.47   Reading and passage of ordinances and resolutions



   30.48   Emergency measures; effective date



   30.49   Signatures required on ordinance



   30.50   Publishing ordinances



   30.51   Posting of ordinance with penalties



   30.52   Recording of certain ordinances



   30.53   Codification of ordinances




Elections




   30.70   Primary election



   30.71   General election nomination



   30.72   Election to office



   30.73   Dates of election



   30.74   Initiative and referendum



   30.75   Circulation of initiative and referendum petitions




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 30.01  COMPOSITION.



   The Town Council consists of a Mayor and six Council members.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2, Art. II, § 2-26)  (Ord. 16, passed 11-15-1979; Ord.
653-17, passed 4-3-2017; Ord. 653-17A, passed 4-17-2017)



Statutory reference:



   Size of Town Council, see A.R.S. § 9-231



§ 30.02  TERMS.



   Council members hold office for staggered terms of four years each and
until their successors are elected and qualified.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2, Art. II, § 2-27)  (Res. 78, passed 11-15-1979; Ord.
653-17, passed 4-3-2017; Ord. 653-17A, passed 4-17-2017)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to so provide, see A.R.S. § 9-232.02



§ 30.03  ELECTION OF MAYOR



   (A)   Direct election of the Mayor. Beginning with the election to
be held on March 26, 1996, the Mayor of the town shall be directly elected by
the qualified electors of the town.



   (B)   Term of office. The term of office of the Mayor shall be four
years.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2, Art. II, § 2-32)  (Ord. 175-94, passed 2-7-1994; Ord.
653-17, passed 4-3-2017; Ord. 653-17A, passed 4-17-2017)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see A.R.S. § 9-232.03



§ 30.04  POWERS, DUTIES OF MAYOR.



   The powers and duties of the Mayor shall include the following:



   (A)   He or she shall be the Chairperson of the Council and preside
over its meetings. He or she may make and second motions and shall have a
voice and vote in all its proceedings.



   (B)   He or she shall execute and authenticate, by his or her
signature, the instruments as the Council, or any statutes, ordinances or
this code shall require.



   (C)   He or she shall make the recommendations and suggestions to
the Council as he or she may consider proper.



   (D)   He or she shall perform the other duties required by state
statute and this code as well as those duties required as chief executive
officer of the municipality.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2, Art. II, § 2-30) (Ord. 653-2017, passed 4-3-2017; Ord.
653-17A, passed 4-17-2017)



Statutory reference:



   Duties of Mayor, see A.R.S. § 9-236



§ 30.05  SELECTION OF VICE MAYOR.



   At the same meeting at which Council is seated, the Council shall
designate one of its members as Vice Mayor, who shall serve at the pleasure
of the Council. The Vice Mayor shall perform the duties of the Mayor during
his or her absence or disability.



(Ord. 653-17, passed 4-3-2017; Ord. 653-17A, passed 4-17-2017)



§ 30.06  TEMPORARY PRESIDING OFFICER.



   (A)   In the absence or disability of both the Mayor and Vice Mayor,
the Council meeting shall be called to order by the Town Clerk, whereupon,
the Town Clerk shall immediately call for the selection of a temporary
presiding officer. The Council members present shall, by majority vote,
select a temporary presiding officer for that meeting, who shall have all the
powers, duties and responsibilities of the Mayor during his or her absence or
disability.



   (B)   Upon arrival of the Mayor or Vice Mayor, the Vice Mayor or
temporary presiding officer shall immediately relinquish the chair upon the
conclusion of the business immediately before the Town Council.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2, Art. II, § 2-29)  (Ord. 381-05, passed 5-16-2005; Ord.
653-17, passed 4-3-2017; Ord. 653-17A, passed 4-17-2017)



Statutory reference:



   Town Council generally, see A.R.S. §§ 9-232.039-231et seq.



§ 30.07  COMPENSATION OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL.



   The Mayor and each Council member shall receive the following
compensation on a monthly basis:



   (A)   The Mayor shall receive $950 for each month of service.



   (B)   Each Council member shall receive $650 for each month of
service.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2, Art. II, § 2-31)    (Res. 181, passed 7-2-1984; Ord.
178-94, passed 4-4-1994; Ord. 395-05, passed 7-19-2005; Ord. 560-11, passed
6-6-2011; Ord. 572-12,  passed 3-5-2012; Ord. 653-17, passed 4-3-2017; Ord.
653-17A, passed 4-17-2017; Ord. 659-18, passed 6-18-2018)



§ 30.08  TRAVEL REIMBURSEMENT.



   In addition to monthly compensation, each Council member shall be
reimbursed for the following:



   (A)   Gasoline for liaison duties outside the town limits on the
same basis as town employees and as allowed by the annual budget.



   (B)   Training and conferences as are deemed beneficial to the town
and as allowed by the annual budget.



(Ord. 653-17, passed 4-3-2017; Ord. 653-17A, passed 4-17-2017)




RULES OF ORDER AND PROCEDURE




§ 30.20  SUSPENSION OF RULES.



   Any of the provisions of this subchapter may be temporarily suspended
in connection with any matter under consideration by a roll-call vote of
three-fourths of the members present, except that this section shall not be
construed to permit any action that is contrary to state statutes.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2, Art. II, § 2-41)



§ 30.21  REGULAR MEETINGS.



   The Council shall hold regular meetings on the first and third Monday
of each month at 6:00 p.m., provided that when the day fixed for any regular
meeting of the Council falls upon a day designated by law as a legal holiday,
the meeting shall be held at the same hour on the next succeeding day not a
holiday. The Council will not hold regular meetings on the first Monday in
July nor the third Monday in December. If town business requires the town to
hold a meeting on either of these dates, the meeting will be a special
meeting.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2, Art. II, § 2-42)  (Ord. 44, passed 5-5-1983; Ord. 66,
passed 2-13-1985; Ord. 201-95, passed 8-21-1995; Ord. 305-01, passed
4-16-2001; Ord. 496-08, passed 12-1-2008; Ord. 654-17, passed 4-17-2017)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to prescribe rules of order, see A.R.S. § 9-234



   Regular meeting time to be established by ordinance, see A.R.S. § 9-233



§ 30.22  LOCATION OF MEETINGS.



   All Council meetings, whether regular or special, shall be held in the
Town Hall unless the Council shall determine that it is necessary or
expeditious to hold a meeting in another location, in which case the date,
hour, agenda and location of the meeting shall be posted in accordance with
A.R.S. Title 38, Chapter 3, Art. 3.1, §§ 38-431 et seq.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2, Art. II, § 2-43)  (Ord. 66, passed 2-13-1985)



Statutory reference:



   Place of meetings to be determined by ordinance, see A.R.S. § 9-233



§ 30.23  SPECIAL MEETINGS.



   (A)   The Mayor or the Town Manager, or at the request of two
Council members, may call a special meeting of the Town Council for a time
not earlier than 24 hours after the later of:



      (1)   The notice being given to all Council members; or



      (2)   The agenda being posted, except in the case of an actual
emergency. In the event of an actual emergency, such notice as is practicable
under the circumstances shall be given. Notice of all the Town Council
meetings must be made pursuant to state law.



   (B)   Special meetings are held for the purpose of presentation,
discussion, citizens comment or action of the Town Council on issues deemed
necessary to further the business of the town.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2, Art. II, § 2-44)  (Ord. 15, passed 10-12-1979; Ord.
381-05, passed 5-16-2005; Ord. 626-15, passed 4-6-2015)



Statutory references:



   Authority of Mayor to call meeting, see A.R.S. § 9-233



   Notice of meetings, see A.R.S. § 38-431.02



§ 30.24  AGENDA.



   Prior to each Council meeting, or on or before a time fixed by the
Council for preparation and distribution of an agenda, whichever is earlier,
the Town Clerk shall collect all written reports, communications, ordinances,
resolutions, contracts and other documents to be submitted to the Council,
and prepare an agenda according to the order of business and shall furnish
each Council member, the Mayor and the Town Attorney with a copy.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2, Art. II, § 2-45)



§ 30.25  ORDER OF BUSINESS.



   The business of the Council shall be taken for consideration and
disposition in the following order.



   (A)   Call to Order. The Mayor shall take the chair precisely at the
hour appointed for the meeting and shall immediately call the Council to
order. In the absence of the Mayor, the Vice-Mayor shall call the Council to
order. In the absence of both the Mayor and Vice-Mayor, the Town Clerk shall
call the Council to order and an acting Mayor shall be selected to chair the
meeting. Upon the arrival of the Mayor or the Vice-Mayor, the Vice-Mayor or
acting Mayor shall immediately relinquish the chair upon the conclusion of
the business immediately before the Council. The Mayor shall preserve order
and decorum, decide all questions of order and conduct of the meeting, using
as a guideline only the parliamentary rules contained in town's adopted rules
of order, or Robert's Rules of Order, or the Town of Florence Council rules
of procedure. Strict adherence to Robert's Rules of Order is not necessary.



   (B)   Roll call. Before proceeding with the business of the Council,
the Town Clerk, or his or her deputy, shall call the roll of the members, and
the names of those present shall be entered in the minutes. If a quorum is
not present, the members present must adjourn.



   (C)   Moment of silence.



   (D)   Pledge of Allegiance.



   (E)   Call to the public. Oral comments or suggestions from the
citizens of the town who are present at Council meetings and wish to comment
on issues before the Council involving the establishment of policies,
procedures, programs, the expenditure of public funds and acquisition, use
and maintenance of public facilities and improvements, shall be heard by the
Council. All remarks shall be addressed to the Council as a whole and shall
be limited to three minutes per person, unless additional time is granted by
the Mayor or by consensus of the Council. No person other than the individual
recognized by the Council shall be allowed to speak either in person or by
proxy through the reading of written documents. However, the Council shall
receive and later consider, at its discretion, any and all written petitions
or communications which any member of the public wishes to present to it. At
the conclusion of all public comments, the Mayor or any Council member may:



      (1)   Respond to citizen criticism;



      (2)   Ask staff to review the matter;



      (3)   Ask the matter be placed on a future Council agenda; and



      (4)   Thank the individual for his or her comments.



   (F)   Public hearings/presentation.



   (G)   Consent agenda. Routine matters requiring Council approval,
but which do not require discussion, may be approved during the portion of
the meeting by one all-encompassing motion, provided however, that any item
may be removed from the consent agenda and shall be separately heard at the
start of the unfinished or new business agenda. If any member of the Council
or public requests.



   (H)   Unfinished business. The Council shall consider any business
that has been previously considered and which is still unfinished.



   (I)   New business. The Council shall consider any business not
heretofore considered, including introduction of ordinances.



   (J)   Reports by officers. Municipal officials and committees shall
present any report required by the Council.



   (K)   Call to the public. Oral comments or suggestions from the
citizens of the town who are present at Council meetings and wish to comment
on issues within the jurisdiction of the Town Council, shall be heard by the
Council. All remarks shall be addressed to the Council as a whole and shall
be limited to three minutes per person, unless additional time is granted by
the Mayor or by consensus of the Council. No person other than the individual
recognized by the Council shall be allowed to speak either in person or by
proxy through the reading of written documents. However, the Council shall
receive and later consider, at its discretion, any and all written petitions
or communications which any member of the public wishes to present to it. At
the conclusion of all public comments, the Mayor or any Council member may:



      (1)   Respond to citizen criticism;



      (2)   Ask staff to review the matter;



      (3)   Ask the matter be placed on a future Council agenda; and



      (4)   Thank the individual for his or her comments.



   (L)   Call to the Council. Oral comments or suggestions from
individual Council members reading items or staff action will be allowed at
this time. This is not intended to allow discussion or action on any item,
but merely to provide the Council a chance to express its opinions regarding
the need for future action by Council or staff.



(Ord. 585-12, passed 9-17-2012; Ord. 626-15, passed 4-6-2015)



§ 30.26  ADJOURNMENT.



   The Council may, by a majority vote of those present, adjourn from time
to time to a specific date and hour. A motion to adjourn shall always be in
order and decided without debate.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2, Art. II, § 2-47)



§ 30.27  VOTING.



   (A)   The Mayor shall vote as a member of the Council.



   (B)   Upon the request of any member of the Council, the ayes and
nays upon any question shall be taken and entered in the minutes.



   (C)   All members of the Council in attendance at a duly called
meeting that requires formal Council action must vote, unless the issue
involves the conduct of that Council member or a matter in which that Council
member has declared a conflict of interest. In all other cases, a failure to
vote shall be recorded as an affirmative vote.



   (D)   Any member of the Council who voted with the majority may move
for reconsideration of any action at the same or next available Council
meeting. After a motion for reconsideration has once been acted upon, no
other motion for reconsideration thereof shall be made without the unanimous
consent of the Council.



   (E)   On a tie vote, a motion requiring a majority vote for adoption
is a lost motion. When all members of Council are present, a tie vote on
whether to grant an appeal from official action shall be considered a denial
of the appeal, unless the Council takes other action to further consider the
matter.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2, Art. II, § 2-48)  (Ord. 381-05, passed 5-16-2005)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see A.R.S. § 9-234




ORDINANCES AND CONTRACTS




§ 30.45  ACTION TAKEN BY ORDINANCE.



   In addition to other acts required by law or by specific provision in
the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Florence, those acts of the town shall
be by ordinance which:



   (A)   Adopt, amend, or repeal another ordinance or Town Code or
establish, alter or abolish any town department, office or agency;



   (B)   Provide for a fine or penalty or establish rules or
regulations for violation of which a fine or other penalty is imposed;



   (C)   Levy any tax or assessment; and/or



   (D)   Sell or lease public property.



(Ord. 639-15, passed 9-21-2015)



§ 30.46  ADOPTING ORDINANCE BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   The Council may enact the provisions of a code or public
record theretofore in existence without setting forth such provisions, but
the adopting ordinance shall be published in full. At least three paper
copies of the code or public record shall be filed in the Office of the Town
Clerk and kept available for public use and inspection. A code or public
record enacted by reference may be amended in the same manner.



   (B)   No penalty clause may be enacted by reference thereto. A
penalty clause contained in a code or public record adopted by reference
shall be set forth in full in the adopting ordinance.



(Ord. 639-15, passed 9-21-2015)



§ 30.47  READING AND PASSAGE OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.



   (A)   All proposed ordinances and resolutions shall be subject to
the following requirements for passage at any meeting of the Council:



      (1)   Copies of proposed ordinances and proposed resolutions
shall be in the possession of the Mayor and Council at least 72 hours prior
to the meeting;



      (2)   By request of the Mayor or any member of Council, a full
reading of the ordinances or resolution heretofore mentioned shall be
ordered, otherwise such ordinance or resolution heretofore mentioned shall be
read by number and title only. The measure may be passed and adopted after
the required reading(s); and



      (3)   Copies of titles of proposed ordinances and resolutions
heretofore mentioned shall be available to the public for examination at Town
Hall 72-hours prior to when the Council convenes to act upon the ordinance or
resolution.



   (B)   No ordinance, except those that are budgetary, otherwise
statutorily required, or those declared to be an emergency, shall be put on
an agenda for final passage on the same day on which it was introduced. All
ordinances, except those that are budgetary, otherwise statutorily required,
or those declared to be an emergency, shall have two separate readings, each
on different days.



(Ord. 639-15, passed 9-21-2015)



§ 30.48  EMERGENCY MEASURES: EFFECTIVE DATE.



   An emergency measure must be passed by the affirmative vote of
three-fourths of all members of the Council for the immediate preservation of
the public peace, health or safety of the town. An emergency measure shall
take effect immediately upon its passage. Approval must be by a vote taken by
ayes and noes, and approved by the Mayor. The emergency measure shall state
in a separate section the reasons why it is necessary that it should become
immediately operative.



(Ord. 639-15, passed 9-21-2015)



§ 30.49  SIGNATURES REQUIRED ON ORDINANCE.



   Every ordinance passed by the Council shall, before it becomes
effective, be signed by the Mayor, approved as to form by the Town Attorney,
and attested by the Town Clerk.



(Ord. 639-15, passed 9-21-2015)



§ 30.50  PUBLISHING ORDINANCES.



   (A)   All ordinances, except those necessary for the immediate
preservation of the peace, health or safety of the town, and resolutions
having the effect of ordinances, shall be published for two consecutive weeks
in the official newspaper of the town before they become effective and
operative.



   (B)   Emergency ordinances necessary for the immediate preservation
of the peace, health or safety of the town which have been passed by the
necessary three-fourths vote of all members of the Council and become
effective and operative immediately shall also be published two consecutive
weeks in the official newspaper of the town within 20 days after their
passage.



(Ord. 639-15, passed 9-21-2015)



§ 30.51  POSTING OF ORDINANCE WITH PENALTIES.



   Every ordinance imposing any penalty, fine, forfeiture or other
punishment shall, after passage, be posted by the Town Clerk in three or more
public places within the town and an affidavit of the person who posted the
ordinance shall be filed in the Office of the Town Clerk as proof of posting.



(Ord. 639-15, passed 9-21-2015)



§ 30.52  RECORDING OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES.



   Ordinances that extend or change the boundaries of the town, zoning, or
establish or vacate streets, alleys, or subdivisions, after publication and
adoption shall be recorded in the office of the Pinal County Recorder, after
being so recorded, the same shall constitute public notice to all parties.



(Ord. 639-15, passed 9-21-2015)



§ 30.53  CODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES.



   Ordinances affecting town rules and operations shall be codified in the
Florence Code of Ordinances, more commonly known as Town Code.



(Ord. 639-15, passed 9-21-2015)




ELECTIONS




§ 30.70  PRIMARY ELECTION.



   Any candidate for a municipal office who shall receive at the primary
election a majority of all the votes cast shall be declared to be elected to
the office for which he or she is a candidate, effective as of the date of
the general election, and no further election shall be held as to the
candidate. Nothing on the ballot in any election shall be indicative of the
support of the candidate.



(Prior Code, Ch. 6, § 6-1)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to so provide, see A.R.S. § 9-821.01



§ 30.71  GENERAL ELECTION NOMINATION.



   If at any primary election held as provided in § 30.70, there be any
office or offices for which no candidate is elected, then as to the office or
offices, the election shall be considered to be a primary election for
nomination of candidates for the office or offices, and the second or general
municipal election shall be held to vote for candidates to fill the office or
offices. Candidates to be placed on the ballot at the second or general
municipal election shall be those not elected at the first election, shall be
equal in number to twice the number to be elected to any given office or less
than that number if there be less than that number named on the primary
election ballot, and persons who receive the highest number of votes for the
respective offices at the first election shall be the only candidates at the
second election, provided that if there be any person who, under the
provisions of this section, would have been entitled to become a candidate
for any office except for the fact that some other candidate received an
equal number of votes therefore, all the persons receiving an equal number of
votes shall likewise become candidates for the office.



(Prior Code, Ch. 6, § 6-2)



§ 30.72  ELECTION TO OFFICE.



   The candidates equal in number to the persons to be elected who receive
the highest number of votes shall be declared elected.



(Prior Code, Ch. 6, § 6-3)



§ 30.73  DATES OF ELECTION.



   Beginning with elections held in 2014 and later and notwithstanding any
other law to the contrary, a candidate election other than a special election
to fill a vacancy or a recall election may only be held on the following
dates and only in even-numbered years:



   (A)   Primary Election will be the tenth Tuesday before the first
Tuesday after the first Monday in November.



   (B)   General Elections, if required, will be the first Tuesday
after the first Monday in November.



   (C)   Beginning with elections held in 2014 and later that are not
candidate elections, including a special election to fill a vacancy or a
recall election, may only be held on the following dates:



      (1)   The second Tuesday in March.



      (2)   The third Tuesday in May.



      (3)   The tenth Tuesday before the first Tuesday after the
first Monday in November.



      (4)   The first Tuesday after the first Monday in November.
Notwithstanding any other law, an election must be held on this date for the
approval of an obligation or other authorization requiring or authorizing the
assessment of secondary property taxes, except as provided by A.R.S. Title 48.



(Prior Code, Ch. 6, § 6-4)  (Ord. 242-97, passed 7-21-1997; Ord. 627-15,
passed 3-16-2015)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to establish election date, see A.R.S. § 9-231



§ 30.74  INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM.



   This section shall comply with and be automatically updated to current
applicable Arizona Revised Statutes to include A.R.S. §§ 19-124 and 19-141
and other relevant sections as they may apply.



   (A)   Power reserved; time of election.  There is reserved to the
qualified electors of the town, the power of the initiative and the
referendum as prescribed by the state Constitution. Any initiative or
referendum matter may be voted on at the next ensuing primary or general
election, or at a special election called by the Mayor and Council.



   (B)   Time of filing.



      (1)   Initiative petitions shall be filed at least 120 days
prior to the election at which they are to be voted upon.



      (2)   Referendum petitions shall be filed within 30 days of
the adoption of the ordinance or resolution to be referred. If the Town Clerk
is unable to provide petitioners with a copy of the ordinance or resolution
at the time of the application for an official number or on the same business
day of the application, the 30 day period shall be calculated from the date
the ordinance or resolution is available.



   (C)   Sample ballots and publicity pamphlets.  The following
procedures relating to sample ballots and publicity pamphlets are hereby
adopted for conducting elections at which an initiative or referendum is to
be voted upon:



      (1)   A publicity pamphlet, containing the entire text of the
official ballot, shall be mailed by the Town Clerk to each household within
the town in which a registered voter resides, not less than ten days prior to
the election to which the sample ballot pertains.



      (2)   The pamphlet shall contain the proposition as it will
appear on the ballot together with a summary of each proposition. Each
summary shall be followed by any arguments supporting the proposition
followed by any arguments opposing the proposition.



      (3)   Arguments supporting and opposing the propositions
appearing on the ballot shall be filed with the office of the Town Clerk not
less than 90 days prior to the election at which the propositions are to be
voted upon. Arguments supporting or opposing propositions appearing on the
ballot shall meet the following requirements:



         (a)   Arguments must relate to the propositions proposed
by the initiative or referred by referendum which will appear on the ballot.



         (b)   Arguments must identify the proposition to which
they refer and indicate whether the argument is in support of or opposition
to the proposition.



         (c)   Arguments may not exceed 300 words in length.



         (d)   Arguments must be signed by the person submitting
them. Arguments submitted by organizations shall be signed on behalf of the
organization by one executive officer of the organization authorized to take
the action, or if a political committee, by the Chairperson or Treasurer. All
persons signing documents shall indicate their residence or post office
address and a telephone number.



         (e)   No person or organization shall submit more than
one argument for each proposition to be voted upon.



         (f)   Each argument shall be accompanied by a deposit to
offset proportional costs of printing. This requirement shall not be waived
on any account.  For deposit amount, see Town of Florence Schedule of Fees.



(Prior Code, Ch. 6, § 6-5)  (Ord. 334-03, passed 3-3-2003)



§ 30.75  CIRCULATION OF INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM PETITIONS.



   (A)   No person shall circulate an initiative or referendum petition
relating to a municipality issue unless that person is a qualified elector
within the municipality.



   (B)   In determining the number of signatures required to file an
initiative petition, the computation shall be based upon the total number of
electors of the municipality registered to vote on the date that the
initiative petition is filed with the municipality Town Clerk.



(Prior Code, Ch. 11, Art. I, § 11-3)  (Ord. 263-98, passed 9-21-1998) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 31: TOWN OFFICIALS



Section




General Provisions




   31.001   Offices created



   31.002   Vacancies; holding more than one office



   31.003   Additional powers and duties




Town Clerk




   31.020   Records generally



   31.021   Public inspection of records



   31.022   Monthly reports



   31.023   Minutes



   31.024   Ordinances, resolutions, budgets and notices



   31.025   Election official



   31.026   Administrative duties




Town Attorney




   31.045   Duties generally



   31.046   Drafting, approval of documents



   31.047   Recommendations on legislation



   31.048   Litigation




Town Manager




   31.065   Office created



   31.066   Appointment and qualifications



   31.067   Official bond



   31.068   Compensation



   31.069   Council interference with appointments or removals



   31.070   Removal of Town Manager



   31.071   Power and duties of Town Manager



   31.072   Emergency expenditures



   31.073   Absence of Town Manager



   31.074   Vacancy




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 31.001  OFFICES CREATED.



    There are hereby created the Offices of Town Clerk, Town Attorney,
Magistrate, Associate Magistrate and Town Manager.



   (A)   The following position(s) shall be appointed by the Council
and shall serve “at will” at the pleasure of the Council and shall have
only the rights and benefits as established in their individual employment
contracts and as otherwise established under state and federal law and town
ordinance.



      (1)   Town Manager;



      (2)   Town Magistrate;



      (3)   Town Attorney; and



      (4)   Town Clerk.



   (B)   The following position(s) shall be appointed and removed by
the Town Manager and shall perform the duties of the office under the
direction and supervision of the Magistrate. These positions shall have no
term of office, shall be “at will”, and shall report directly to the
Magistrate: Associate Magistrate.



   (C)   The Council may create other offices as it may deem necessary
and that are not provided for in this code or state statutes.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2, Art. III, § 2-86)  (Ord. 29, passed 5-21-1981; Ord.
192-95, passed 4-17-1995; Ord. 340-03, passed 6-2-2003; Ord. 381-05, passed
5-16-2005; Ord. 439-06, passed 8-21-2006; Ord. 452-06, passed 1-2-2007 ; Ord.
506-09, passed 5-18-2009)



§ 31.002  VACANCIES; HOLDING MORE THAN ONE OFFICE.



   Any vacancy that shall occur in any municipal office shall be filled by
appointment by the Council, provided that one person may hold more than one
office and that at the discretion of the Council, the functions of a
municipal official may be validly performed and discharged by a deputy or
another municipal official, or an otherwise qualified individual not holding
office but employed at the pleasure of the Council.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2, Art. III, § 2-87)



§ 31.003  ADDITIONAL POWERS AND DUTIES.



   In addition to any powers and duties prescribed in this code, each
officer shall have further powers, perform further duties and hold other
offices as may be provided by the Council through ordinance, resolution or
order.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2, Art. III, § 2-88)




TOWN CLERK




§ 31.020  RECORDS GENERALLY.



   The Town Clerk shall keep a true and correct record of all business
transacted by the Council and any other records that either pertain to the
business of the municipality or that the Council directs. The Town Clerk
shall number, plainly label and file separately in a suitable cabinet all
resolutions, notices, deeds, surveys, leases, paid and unpaid vouchers,
inventories, letters, orders and other documents of whatever nature.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2, Art. III, § 2-101)



§ 31.021  PUBLIC INSPECTION OF RECORDS.



   The Town Clerk shall keep convenient for public inspection all public
records and public documents under his or her control, as provided by state
statute.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2, Art. III, § 2-102)



Statutory reference:



   Inspection of public records, see A.R.S. § 39-121



§ 31.022  MONTHLY REPORTS.



   The Town Clerk shall prepare and collect from municipal officers and
employees, the monthly reports prepared in the manner and to include the
information as may serve the Council.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2, Art. III, § 2-103)  (Ord. 381-05, passed 5-16-2005)



§ 31.023  MINUTES.



   The Town Clerk shall prepare, or cause to be prepared, all minutes of
Council proceedings and ensure their correctness and accuracy.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2, Art. III, § 2-104)



Statutory reference:



   Council journal required, see A.R.S. § 9-234



§ 31.024  ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, BUDGETS AND NOTICES.



   The Town Clerk shall process, record, file, publish and, if required by
state statute, post all ordinances, resolutions, budgets and notices that may
be passed by the Council.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2, Art. III, § 2-105)



Statutory reference:



   Publication of proceedings and ordinances, see A.R.S. §§ 9-811et seq.
and 39-204



§ 31.025  ELECTION OFFICIAL.



   The Town Clerk shall be the municipal election official and perform
those duties required by state statute.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2, Art. III, § 2-107)



§ 31.026  ADMINISTRATIVE DUTIES.



   The Town Clerk shall perform those administrative responsibilities and
duties that are conferred upon him or her by the Council in addition to those
specified in this code.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2, Art. III, § 2-109)




TOWN ATTORNEY




§ 31.045  DUTIES GENERALLY.



   The Town Attorney shall act as the legal counselor and advisor of the
Council and other municipal officials, and shall give his or her opinion in
writing when requested.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2, Art. III, § 2-131)



§ 31.046  DRAFTING, APPROVAL OF DOCUMENTS.



   The Town Attorney shall draft or approve all deeds, contracts,
conveyances, ordinances, resolutions and other legal instruments when
required by the Council. He or she shall approve as to form, in writing, all
drafts of contracts and all official or other bonds before final approval or
acceptance thereof by the Council.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2, Art. III, § 2-132)



§ 31.047  RECOMMENDATIONS ON LEGISLATION.



   The Town Attorney shall return, within ten days, all ordinances and
resolutions submitted to him or her for consideration by the Council with his
or her approval or disapproval as to form noted thereon, together with his or
her reasons thereof.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2, Art. III, § 2-133)  (Ord. 381-05, passed 5-16-2005)



§ 31.048  LITIGATION.



   The Town Attorney shall prosecute and defend all suits, actions or
causes where the municipality is a party, and shall report to the Council,
when required, the condition of any suit or action to which the municipality
is a party.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2, Art. III, § 2-134)




TOWN MANAGER




§ 31.065  OFFICE CREATED.



   The Office of Town Manager is created.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2, Art. III, § 2-156)  (Ord. 230-97, passed 2-10-1997)



§ 31.066  APPOINTMENT AND QUALIFICATIONS.



   The Town Manager shall be appointed by a majority vote of the Town
Council for an indefinite term. He or she shall be chosen by the Council
solely on the basis of his or her executive and administrative qualifications
with special reference to his or her actual experience in or his or her
knowledge of accepted practices in respect to the duties of his or her office
hereinafter set forth. At the time of his or her appointment, he or she need
not be a resident of the municipality or the state, but during his or her
tenure of office he or she shall reside within the municipality. No Council
member shall receive the appointment during the term for which he or she
shall have been elected.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2, Art. III, § 2-157)  (Ord. 230-97, passed 2-10-1997;
Ord. 381-05, passed 5-16-2005)



§ 31.067  OFFICIAL BOND.



   The Town Manager shall furnish a surety bond in the sum as fixed by the
Council. To be approved by the Council, the bond to be conditioned on the
faithful performance of his or her duties. The premium of the bond shall be
paid by the municipality.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2, Art. III, § 2-158)  (Ord. 230-97, passed 2-10-1997)



Statutory reference:



   Town Manager authorized, see A.R.S. § 9-303



§ 31.068  COMPENSATION.



   The Town Manager shall receive the compensation as the Council shall
fix from time to time.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2, Art. III, § 2-159)  (Ord. 230-97, passed 2-10-1997)



§ 31.069  COUNCIL INTERFERENCE WITH APPOINTMENTS OR REMOVALS.



   Neither the Council nor any of its members shall direct or request the
appointment of any person to, or his or her removal from, office by the Town
Manager or any of his or her subordinates, or in any manner take part in the
appointment or removal of officers and employees in the administrative
services of the municipality under the jurisdiction of the Town Manager.
Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Council and its members shall deal
with the administrative service solely through the Town Manager and neither
the Council nor any Member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of
the Town Manager, either publicly or privately.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2, Art. III, § 2-160)  (Ord. 230-97, passed 2-10-1997)



§ 31.070  REMOVAL OF TOWN MANAGER.



   The Town Council may remove the Town Manager at any time by a majority
vote of its members without cause. The Town Manager has the right per A.R.S.
§ 38-431.03(A)(1) to have the matter heard in a public meeting. The Town
Council shall give the Town Manager seven days written notice of the meeting.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2, Art. III, § 2-161)  (Ord. 381-05, passed 5-16-2005)



§ 31.071  POWER AND DUTIES OF TOWN MANAGER.



   (A)   The Town Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of
the town, may head one or more departments and shall be responsible to the
Town Council for the proper administration of all affairs of the town.



   (B)   To that end, the Town Manager shall have the power and shall
be required to:



      (1)   Appoint and, when necessary for the good of the public,
suspend or remove all officers and employees of the town pursuant to §
31.001. The Town Manager may authorize the head of a department or office to
appoint, suspend or remove subordinates in the department or office. All
appointments and removals of officers and employees shall be based solely on
the merit, qualifications or disqualifications of the official concerned
without regard to political beliefs or affiliations;



      (2)   Oversee the preparation of the budget annually and
submit it to the Town Council together with a message describing the
important features and be responsible for its administration after adoption;



      (3)   Prepare and submit to the Town Council as of the end of
the fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative
activities of the Town Council for the preceding year;



      (4)   Keep the Town Council advised of the financial condition
and future needs of the town, and make recommendations as may be deemed
desirable;



      (5)   Recommend to the Town Council a standard schedule of pay
for each appointed office and position in the town service, including
minimum, intermediate and maximum rates;



      (6)   Recommend to the Town Council, from time to time,
adoption of the measure as may be deemed necessary or expedient for the
health, safety or welfare of the community or for the improvement of
administrative services;



      (7)   Direct and supervise the administration of all
departments, offices and agencies of the town, except as otherwise provided
by ordinance or law;



      (8)   Consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments
or units under his or her jurisdiction, with the approval of the Town Council;



      (9)   Attend all meetings of the Town Council unless excused
there from and take part in the discussion of all matters coming before the
Town Council. The Town Manager shall be entitled to notice of all regular and
special meetings of the Town Council;



      (10)   Supervise the purchase of all materials, supplies and
equipment for which funds are provided in the budget, let contracts necessary
for operation or maintenance of the town services for amounts identified in
the town's purchasing policy;



      (11)   See that all laws and ordinances are duly enforced;



      (12)   Investigate the affairs of the town or any department
or division thereof. Investigate all complaints in relation to matters
concerning the administration of the government of the town, and in regard to
service maintained by the public utilities in the town, and see that all
franchises, permits and privileges granted by the town are faithfully
observed;



      (13)   Devote his or her entire time to the discharge of all
official duties; and



      (14)   Perform other duties as may be required by the Town
Council, not inconsistent with law or ordinances.



   (C)   Authority to receive criminal justice record information:



      (1)   The Town Manager or designee is authorized to request
and receive criminal history information from the Arizona Department of
Public Safety, as provided in A.R.S. § 41-1750, for the purpose of
evaluating the fitness of any and all prospective employees, contract
employees and for town volunteers.



      (2)   Each candidate for any paid town position, prospective
town employee, contract employee and town volunteers who work at on-site town
locations and have duties that include working with youths or potentially
vulnerable populations, or who may have access to confidential information or
town assets, shall submit a full set of fingerprints to the town for the
purpose of obtaining a state and federal criminal records check, pursuant to
A.R.S. § 41-1750 and Pub. Law 92-544, being 86 Stat. 1115. The Arizona
Department of Public Safety is authorized to exchange this fingerprint data
with the Federal Bureau of Investigation. The contract employees and
volunteers to which this section applies are those who will provide services
at on-site town locations and/or will have duties that include working with
youth or potentially vulnerable populations, or who may have access to
confidential information or town assets.



      (3)   The Town Manager or designee shall submit the
fingerprints of the individuals for whom criminal history is sought to the
Arizona Department of Public Safety, along with any and all prescribed fees.
The Florence Police Department shall assist, as necessary, in obtaining the
fingerprints required by this section.



      (4)   The town will comply with any relevant state and federal
laws, rules and regulations that may relate to the dissemination of the
criminal history information, which is the subject of this section.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2, Art. III, § 2-162)  (Ord. 381-05, passed 5-16-2005;
Ord. 458-07, passed 2-20-2007; Ord. 582-12, passed 8-20-2012)



§ 31.072  EMERGENCY EXPENDITURES.



   In case of a circumstance creating a public emergency, the Town Manager
may award contracts and make purchases for the purpose of meeting the
emergency, but the Town Manager shall file promptly with the Town Council a
report showing the emergency and the necessity for the action, together with
an itemized account of all expenditures.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2, Art. III, § 2-163)  (Ord. 381-05, passed 5-16-2005)



§ 31.073  ABSENCE OF TOWN MANAGER.



   To perform his or her duties during his or her temporary absence or
disability, the Town Manager may designate by letter filed with the Town
Clerk, and distributed to Council, a qualified administrative officer of the
town. In the event of failure of the Town Manager to make the designation,
the Council may, by resolution, appoint any administrative officer of the
town to perform the duties of the Town Manager until he or she shall return
or his or her disability shall cease.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2, Art. III, § 2-164)  (Ord. 381-05, passed 5-16-2005)



§ 31.074  VACANCY.



   Any vacancy in the Office of the Town Manager shall be filled within 90
days after the effective date of the vacancy.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2, Art. III, § 2-165)  (Ord. 381-05, passed 5-16-2005)



CHAPTER 32: TOWN ORGANIZATIONS



Section




General Provisions




   32.001   Powers of Council



   32.002   Membership



   32.003   Appointing Committee and appointments



   32.004   Term of office



   32.005   Removal from office



   32.006   Duties



   32.007   Officers



   32.008   Temporary presiding officer



   32.009   Meetings



   32.010   Voting



   32.011   Agenda



   32.012   Fees




Library Advisory Board




   32.030   Established



   32.031   Reserved



   32.032   Powers and duties



   32.033   Meetings




Redevelopment Commission




   32.050   Established



   32.051   Membership



   32.052   Powers and duties




Historic District Advisory Commission




   32.070   District Advisory Commission




Parks and Recreation Advisory Board




   32.085   Established



   32.086   Membership



   32.087   Powers and duties



   32.088   Meetings




Planning and Zoning Commission




   32.105   Established



   32.106   Powers and duties



Arts and Culture Commission



   32.120   Membership



   32.121   Duties



Youth Commission



   32.200   Membership



   32.201   Duties



   32.202   Meetings



Cross-reference:



   Board of Adjustment, see § 150.008




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 32.001  POWERS OF COUNCIL.



   (A)   The Council may create the boards, commissions and committees,
standing or special, as it deems necessary. In addition, the Council may
provide aid and assistance from the administrative staff of the municipality
to any board, commission or committee as may be necessary.



   (B)   Any board, commission and committee created by the Council
shall be responsible to the Council and shall function in an advisory
capacity to the Council.



   (C)   Any board, commission and committee created by the Council
shall serve at the will of the Council and may be dissolved by the Council at
any time that the Council determines that the board, commission or committee
has fulfilled the function for which it was created or that its advice and
service is no longer needed by the Council.



   (D)   There shall be the following boards, commissions and
committees:



      (1)   Library Advisory Board;



      (2)   Redevelopment Commission;



      (3)   Historic District Advisory Commission;



      (4)   Parks and Recreation Advisory Board;



      (5)   Planning and Zoning Commission;and



      (6)   Arts and Culture Commission.



(Prior Code, Ch. 6, Art. V, § 2-211)  (Ord. 99, passed 9-21-1987; Ord.
381-05, passed 5-16-2005; Ord. 628-15, passed 4-6-2015)



§ 32.002  MEMBERSHIP.



   (A)   All boards, commissions and committees of the municipality
shall have five members unless a motion, resolution or ordinance creating the
board, commission or committee specifies a different number of members.



   (B)   Each board, commission or committee shall as nearly as
possible have an integrated or balanced membership with representatives of
each race, sex and geographical area of the municipality.



   (C)   The Council shall, in making the appointment, take into
consideration each person's knowledge, background, interest, experience and
availability to perform the work and duties of the board, commission or
committee. The applicant's political affiliation shall also be considered in
making the appointment.



   (D)   No member of any board, commission or committee may
concurrently serve on any other board, commission or committee of the
municipality.



   (E)   All members shall be bona fide residents of the municipality
and a registered voter, if 18 years of age or older, unless a motion,
resolution or ordinance creating a board, commission or committee specifies
otherwise, and shall serve without pay or compensation, except that a member
shall be reimbursed for his or her actual and necessary expenses incurred in
the performance of his or her official duties, provided that the expenses are
approved by the Council prior to being incurred. Town employees or appointed
officers shall not be eligible for appointment to any board, commission and
committee, but may be requested to provide staff support thereto.



(Prior Code, Ch. 6, Art. V, § 2-212)  (Ord. 99, passed 9-21-1987; Ord.
266-98, passed 10-19-1998; Ord. 381-05, passed 5-16-2005; Ord. 628-15, passed
4-6-2015)



§ 32.003  APPOINTING COMMITTEE AND APPOINTMENTS.



   (A)   The Mayor may create an Appointing Committee, and designate a
Chairperson for board, commission and committee appointments. This
subcommittee shall be made up of three members of the Council or appropriate
board, commission or committee. The Mayor may appoint himself or herself to
the Appointing Committee. The purpose of the Appointing Committee is to
interview applicants and recommend candidates to the Council.



   (B)   If no subcommittee is created, the Council shall conduct
interviews and appoint individuals to the appropriate board, commission or
committee. All members of boards, commissions and committees created under
this subchapter shall be appointed by members of the Council.



   (C)   Upon a vacancy occurring on any board, commission or committee
for any reason, a new member shall be appointed by the Council to fill only
the unexpired term.



   (D)   The Council may appoint alternates to serve on boards,
commissions and committees when a vacancy occurs. Alternates may attend
meetings but shall not participate until the times as a vacancy has occurred
and the alternate has filled the vacancy. If the Council appoints more than
one alternate for a particular board, commission or committee, the Council
shall designate the alternates as first alternate, second alternate, and so
on, such that immediately upon a vacancy, the first alternate shall fill the
vacancy without the need for further Council action.



(Prior Code, Ch. 6, Art. V, § 2-213)  (Ord. 99, passed 9-21-1987; Ord.
381-05, passed 5-16-2005)



§ 32.004  TERM OF OFFICE.



   (A)   Unless otherwise stated in the resolution, minutes or
ordinance creating a board, commission or committee under this subchapter, an
appointment shall be for a term of three years, and the term for appointment
shall commence on January 1 of the applicable year. Any member of a board,
commission or committee may be removed at any time before the expiration of
his or her term upon the majority vote of the Council of the municipality at
any regular or special Council meeting at which a quorum is present, and the
removal was placed upon the agenda as a regular item for consideration and
voted upon at the meeting.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) above and
unless the motion, resolution or ordinance creating the board, commission or
committee says otherwise, the Council shall initially appoint members to each
board, commission or committee of the municipality so that members shall have
overlapping terms; that is, an odd number of members, in the case of a five
member board, three members, on the board, commission or committee shall be
appointed so that their term will expire on January of one year and two
members on January of the subsequent year.



   (C)   Each member shall serve until his or her successor is duly
appointed and qualified.



   (D)   Before the Council shall appoint any new member to any board,
commission or committee, the board, commission or committee shall recommend
to the Appointing Committee, or if no Appointing Committee is created by the
Mayor, the Council, for its consideration, at least one qualified person for
each vacant position. The recommendations shall be advisory only and shall
not bind the Council to make the appointment. Each board, commission or
committee shall make recommendations in writing prior to 30 days before the
expiration of a regular member's term or within 30 days after a vacancy
otherwise occurs, and in the event that the board, commission or committee
shall fail or neglect to make the recommendation within the periods, then the
Council shall be free to appoint any qualified person to fill the vacancy on
the board, commission or committee.



(Prior Code, Ch. 6, Art. V, § 2-214)  (Ord. 99, passed 9-21-1987; Ord.
381-05, passed 5-16-2005)



§ 32.005  REMOVAL FROM OFFICE.



   Any one of the following shall constitute the resignation of a member
and authorize the appointment of a new member to fill the unexpired portion
of the term so vacated:



   (A)   Absence from three consecutive regular meetings of the board,
commission or committee;



   (B)   Ceasing to be a resident of the municipality;



   (C)   Insanity when judicially determined;



   (D)   Conviction of a felony or an offense involving a violation of
his or her official duties; and



   (E)   A violation of the town's Code of Ethics.



(Prior Code, Ch. 6, Art. V, § 2-215)  (Ord. 99, passed 9-21-1987; Ord.
381-05, passed 5-16-2005)



§ 32.006  DUTIES.



   (A)   Each board, commission or committee shall have the powers and
duties as prescribed by the statutes and laws of the state pertaining to the
board, commission or committee, this chapter and as prescribed by the Council.



   (B)   When a public hearing is conducted by a board, commission or
committee, it shall make a written report and recommendation on the matters
to the Council, within 15 days after completing its hearing, provided that if
the Council requests an immediate report, the board, commission or committee
shall make its report within seven days after the request.



   (C)   The Council shall not take any action on any matter within the
jurisdiction of any board, commission or committee until after the receipt
from the board, commission or committee of its report and recommendations;
provided, however, the recommendations shall not be binding upon the Council
and are advisory only.



   (D)   The Mayor, Council or Town Manager of the municipality shall
have the right to refer matters within the jurisdiction of the board,
commission or committee for consideration, report and recommendation.



(Prior Code, Ch. 6, Art. V, § 2-216)  (Ord. 99, passed 9-21-1987; Ord.
381-05, passed 5-16-2005)



§ 32.007  OFFICERS.



   Each board, commission or committee shall elect its own Chairperson,
Vice Chairperson and officers at the first meeting following January 1 of
each year, unless state law or town ordinance established an alternate
procedure for a specific board, commission or committee. The Chairperson, or
a designate of choice, shall report in person to the Council each December on
matters of public interest and need in relation to resources, services or
activities.



(Prior Code, Ch. 6, Art. V, § 2-217)  (Ord. 381-05, passed 5-16-2005; Ord.
628-15, passed 4-6-2015)



§ 32.008  TEMPORARY PRESIDING OFFICER.



   (A)   In the absence or disability of the chairperson or vice
chairperson on any board, commission or committee, the meeting shall be
called to order by the staff liaison, whereupon, the staff liaison shall
immediately call for the selection of a temporary presiding officer. The
board, commission or committee members present shall, by majority vote,
select a temporary presiding officer for that meeting, who shall have all the
powers, duties and responsibilities of the chairperson during the absence or
disability.



   (B)   Upon arrival of the chairperson or vice chairperson, the vice
chairperson or presiding officer shall immediately relinquish the chair upon
the conclusion of the business immediately before the board, commission or
committee.



(Prior Code, Ch. 6, Art. V, § 2-218)  (Ord. 381-05, passed 5-16-2005)



§ 32.009  MEETINGS.



   (A)   All boards, commissions and committees may be called by the
chairperson or in his or her absence the vice chairperson, or at the request
of three board, commission or committee members shall call a special meeting
for a time not earlier than 24 hours after the later of:



      (1)   The notice being given to all board, commission or
committee members; or



      (2)   The agenda is posted.



   (B)   Notice of all the meetings must be made pursuant to state law.



(Prior Code, Ch. 6, Art. V, § 2-219)  (Ord. 381-05, passed 5-16-2005)



§ 32.010  VOTING.



   (A)   A board, commission and committee member may abstain from
voting only upon a declaration that he or she has a conflict of interest, in
which case the member shall take no part in the deliberations on the matter
in question.



   (B)   All members of boards, commissions and committees in
attendance at a duly called meeting that requires formal action must vote,
unless the issue involves the conduct of that board, commission or committee
member or a matter which that member has declared a conflict of interest. In
all other cases, a failure to vote shall be recorded as an affirmative vote.



   (C)   The Chairperson shall preside over the meetings. He or she may
make and second motions and shall have a voice and vote in all its
proceedings.



(Prior Code, Ch. 6, Art. V, § 2-220)  (Ord. 381-05, passed 5-16-2005)



§ 32.011  AGENDA.



   At least 24 hours prior to each board, commission or committee meeting,
the agenda shall be distributed to members and posted in accordance with all
state and town laws.



(Prior Code, Ch. 6, Art. V, § 2-221)  (Ord. 381-05, passed 5-16-2005)



§ 32.012  FEES.



   Boards, commissions and committees shall be authorized to establish and
recommend a uniform schedule of fees for the services within their
jurisdiction with all receipts to be paid into the general fund of the
municipality. The fee schedules shall become effective upon approval of the
Town Manager.



(Prior Code, Ch. 6, Art. V, § 2-222)  (Ord. 381-05, passed 5-16-2005; Ord.
641-15, passed 12-7-2015)




LIBRARY ADVISORY BOARD




§ 32.030  ESTABLISHED.



   There is established a Library Advisory Board.



(Prior Code, Ch. 6, Art. V, § 2-226)  (Ord. 140, passed 3-5-1990)



§ 32.031  RESERVED.



§ 32.032  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The powers and duties of the Library Advisory Board shall be:



   (A)   Adopt the rules and regulations necessary for the conduct of
its business, provided the rules and regulations are not in conflict with the
state law or municipal ordinance;



   (B)   Advise and consult through the Board Chairperson with the
Library Director as to items to be included on the agenda of the meeting of
the Board prior to preparation and distribution of the agenda by the Library
Director. Any item timely requested by any Board member shall be included on
the agenda.



   (C)   Review and approve the official minutes of all Library
Advisory Board meetings;



   (D)   Advise the Council, through the Library Director, concerning
essential library policies, including hours of operation, standards of
service, book selection, charges, use of facilities and other related matters;



   (E)   Advise and assist the Library Director in the formulation of
library system goals and objectives and to monitor and evaluate progress
toward these goals and objectives;



   (F)   Monitor community needs, population and readership changes,
and advise on policies necessary to adjust to the changes and to meet
periodically with community groups and individuals to ensure that established
goals meet and reflect community needs;



   (G)   Assist and advise the Library Director in establishing
priorities in the budget for those items, other than administrative
functions, relating to library policy. The recommendations of the Board shall
be forwarded to the Council through the Library Director when the tentative
budget is presented. The recommendation shall reflect the approval or
disapproval of a majority of the members of the Board; and



   (H)   Establish, support and participate in a planned public
relations program to better inform the general public of the services offered
by the public library. This public relations program shall be a continuous
and ongoing project of the Library Advisory Board.



(Prior Code, Ch. 6, Art. V, § 2-230)  (Ord. 140, passed 3-5-1990; Ord.
381-05, passed 5-16-2005)



§ 32.033  MEETINGS.



   (A)   Except when not practical, all meetings will be conducted in
the public library.



   (B)   Regularly scheduled meetings of the Board shall be held
monthly at a time to be fixed by the Board. At the discretion of the Board,
meetings may be suspended during the months of June, July and August.



(Prior Code, Ch. 6, Art. V, § 2-229)  (Ord. 140, passed 3-5-1990; Ord.
176-94, passed 3-7-1994; Ord. 381-05, passed 5-16-2005)




REDEVELOPMENT COMMISSION




§ 32.050  ESTABLISHED.



   The Town Council has established a Redevelopment Commission pursuant to
A.R.S. §§ 36-1476 et seq.



(Prior Code, Ch. 6, Art. V, § 2-271)  (Ord. 306-01, passed 5-7-2001; Ord.
381-05, passed 5-16-2005)



§ 32.051  MEMBERSHIP.



   (A)   The Mayor and Town Council shall serve as the Redevelopment
Commission.



   (B)   The Mayor shall serve as Chairperson and the Vice-Mayor shall
serve as Vice- Chairperson.



   (C)   Commissioners may or may not be residents of the municipality,
and may or may not be serving concurrently on another town boards,
commissions or committees.



   (D)   Commission members shall be appointed for a term of office of
four years.



(Prior Code, Ch. 6, Art. V, §§ 2-272 and 2-274)  (Ord. 306-01, passed
5-7-2001; Ord. 381-05, passed 5-16-2005; Ord. 628-15, passed 4-6-2015)



§ 32.052  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Redevelopment Commission shall be an agent of the town for exercise
of powers prescribed in A.R.S. § 36-1476.



(Prior Code, Ch. 6, Art. V, § 2-273)  (Ord. 306-01, passed 5-7-2001; Ord.
381-05, passed 5-16-2005)




HISTORIC DISTRICT ADVISORY COMMISSION




§ 32.070  DISTRICT ADVISORY COMMISSION.



   (A)   Composition.  Upon designation of the First Historic
District, the Council shall appoint seven residents of the community to an
Advisory Commission. This Commission shall contain at least four property
owners from the designated district. Three or fewer places on the Commission
may be filled by individuals with qualifications in one of the following
areas: historic preservation, architecture, planning, history, archaeology or
a related field. Three or fewer places on the Commission may also be filled
by elected or appointed representatives of the municipality and its various
commissions and authorities. Finally, three or fewer places on the Commission
may be filled by at-large residents of the municipality.



   (B)   Duties.  The Historic District Advisory Commission shall
review all building and demolition permit applications for the Historic
District for the modification, addition, alteration, movement, demolition or
new construction of all existing or proposed structures within the district.



      (1)   No building or demolition permit application for the
Historic District shall be granted by the municipality until the Historic
District Advisory Commission has had the opportunity to review the permit
application. However, this review shall occur within 30 days of the date of
the building or demolition permit application, or a favorable recommendation
shall be deemed to have been given to the application. In considering the
application, the Advisory Commission shall consider the purpose of the
proposal, the architectural features of the proposal, the architectural
character of structures in the immediate vicinity, the views from the site of
the proposal, the height of existing structures, the prevailing setbacks, the
proportion of the structure and surrounding structures in the immediate
vicinity, the rhythm of these structures, the site utilization present in the
immediate vicinity and other criteria which the Commission considers relevant.



      (2)   After reviewing the application for a building or
demolition permit, the Advisory Commission may accept, reject or accept with
conditions, the proposal. If the Commission accepts the application, the
building or demolition permit may be issued if all other municipal
requirements have been met.



      (3)   If the Commission rejects the application, the building
or demolition permit shall not be issued. The Commission shall forward to the
applicant and to the Town Manager a letter stating that the application has
been rejected.



      (4)   If an application for a building or demolition permit is
rejected by the Commission, the applicant may appeal this decision to the
Council. If the applicant appeals the Commission's rejection, the following
procedure shall be utilized:



         (a)   The applicant for a building or demolition permit
files an appeal with the Town Manager within five days of receiving notice
that the Advisory Commission has rejected the application.



         (b)   This appeal shall be placed by the Town Manager on
the agenda of the next regularly scheduled Council meeting.



         (c)   Prior to this Council meeting, both the applicant
for a building or demolition permit and a representative of the Advisory
Commission shall prepare statements outlining their positions concerning the
issue. These statements shall be supplied to the Council prior to its meeting.



         (d)   Upon receipt of these statements, the Council
shall uphold, modify or reverse the decision of the Historic District
Advisory Commission. It shall also direct the Town Manager concerning the
issuance of a building or demolition permit.



      (5)   If the Historic District Advisory Commission accepts
with conditions an application for either a building or demolition permit
within a historic district, the applicant may either accept these conditions
or may appeal them to the Council using the procedure described above. If the
applicant accepts the conditions, these conditions shall become a part of the
building or demolition permit application.



      (6)   The duties of the Historic District Advisory Commission
shall not be limited to the originally designated Historic District. Instead,
if this district is ever enlarged or decreased in size or if additional
districts are ever formed, only one Historic District Advisory Commission
shall be appointed by the Council.



      (7)   The Historic District Advisory Commission may also
prepare or have prepared cultural or architectural resource surveys and
inventories of the community or parts of it. It may also review and comment
on applications for enlarging or decreasing the size of the original historic
district or on the creation of new historic districts.



      (8)   Finally, it may apply for, receive and expend funds for
which it is eligible which will enhance the objective of preserving the
unique historical character of the municipality.



   (C)   Exemptions to Commission review.  The following improvements
shall not require review by the Historic District Advisory Commission in
order to obtain a building or demolition permit:



      (1)   Emergency repairs which are needed to preserve the
structural integrity of the structure. This exception will, however, only be
granted in the case of an actual emergency as certified by the Town Manager.



      (2)   Emergency demolitions which are required to preserve the
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the municipality. These
emergencies shall also be certified by the Town Manager.



   (D)   Additional requirements.  In addition to the requirements for
plans and other details which the municipality has for issuing a building or
demolition permit, the Historic District Advisory Commission may require the
following:



      (1)   A plan, drawn to scale, which shows the location of all
existing structures on the property and the location of all proposed changes,
a plan showing the location of all existing and proposed parking areas,
driveways, easements and/or rights-of-way and other information deemed
necessary by the Commission.



      (2)   Drawings showing one or more elevations of the proposed
changes.



      (3)   A cost and/or benefit analysis of a proposed project or
demolition which contains:



         (a)   An estimate of the dollar value of the subject
property, both real and personal;



         (b)   A review of the requirements for making any
existing historic structures structurally sound;



         (c)   A qualified estimate of the cost of rehabilitating
the structures, if any, existing on the subject property; and



         (d)   An analysis of the return which would be required
on the subject project which would be needed to make rehabilitation of the
existing structure economically attractive.



      (4)   The requirements for this information will be defined by
the Commission, in writing, to the applicant for a building or demolition
permit at least ten days prior to the meeting at which the application will
be reviewed. Failure by the applicant to provide this information will be
sufficient bases for denying the application. This information shall become
part of the Commission's record of the meeting and may be used to establish
conditions for the issuance of a building or demolition permit.



(Prior Code, Ch. 6, Art. V, § 2-275)  (Ord. 381-05, passed 5-16-2005)




PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD




§ 32.085  ESTABLISHED.



   There is hereby established a Parks and Recreation Advisory Board.



(Prior Code, Ch. 6, Art. V, § 2-290)  (Ord. 381-05, passed 5-16-2005)



§ 32.086  MEMBERSHIP.



   The Board shall elect a Chairperson and a Vice Chairperson. The Parks
and Recreation Director will serve as an information resource only and not as
a voting member of the Board.



(Prior Code, Ch. 6, Art. V, § 2-291)  (Ord. 381-05, passed 5-16-2005)



§ 32.087  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The powers and duties of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall
be:



   (A)   Advise the Council and Parks and Recreation Director on the
rules and regulations relating to the operation, use, care and maintenance of
areas and structures owned, leased or otherwise acquired by the municipality
for use as parks and recreational centers;



   (B)   Advise the Council and assist the Parks and Recreation
Director in the development of a continuing plan for the municipal park
system and its recreation program. The Town Manager, through the Director,
shall, from time to time, send the plans and programs to the Board for its
review. The results of the reviews shall be forwarded to the Council;



   (C)   Advise the Council and the Parks and Recreation Director in
establishing general priorities at budget time for those items, other than
administrative functions, relating to park development and recreation
programs; and



   (D)   Receive, accept and acquire, subject to the final action by
the Council, by gift, bequest or devise, real and personal property of every
kind, nature and description in the name of the municipality, for park and
recreational purposes subject to the terms of the gift.



(Prior Code, Ch. 6, Art. V, § 2-292)  (Ord. 381-05, passed 5-16-2005)



§ 32.088  MEETINGS.



   (A)   The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall hold monthly
meetings.



   (B)   A special meeting may be called by the Director of the Parks
and Recreation Department or by a majority of the Parks and Recreation
Advisory Board members.



(Prior Code, Ch. 6, Art. V, § 2-293)  (Ord. 381-05, passed 5-16-2005; Ord.
628-15, passed 4-6-2015)




PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION




§ 32.105  ESTABLISHED.



   The Planning and Zoning Commission of the municipality is hereby
established.



(Prior Code, Ch. 6, Art. V, § 2-301)  (Ord. 381-05, passed 5-16-2005)



Statutory reference:



   Planning Agency authorized, see A.R.S., §§ 9-461.01



§ 32.106  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   It shall be the duty of the Planning and Zoning Commission to:



   (A)   Formulate, create and administer any lawful plan duly adopted
by the Council for the present and future growth of the municipality
pertaining to the use of land and buildings for any purpose, together with
all incidental activities usually associated therewith and commonly known as
“planning and zoning”;



   (B)   Make or cause to be made a continuous study of the best
present and future use to which land and buildings shall be put within the
municipality and in cooperation with adjacent areas; and



   (C)   Recommend to the Council revisions in the plans which, in the
opinion of the Commission, are for the best interest of the citizens of the
municipality.



(Prior Code, Ch. 6, Art. V, § 2-302)  (Ord. 381-05, passed 5-16-2005)



ARTS AND CULTURE COMMISSION



§ 32.120  MEMBERSHIP.



   To carry out the responsibilities and duties set forth herein, there is
hereby created an Arts and Culture Commission to consist of five voting
members and one alternate. The Commission shall strive to include one
Florence business owner, one Florence resident who is a visual artist, and
three Florence residents of the town at large.



   (A)   The members of the Arts and Culture Commission shall be
appointed and shall serve for a term of office pursuant to the requirements
of § 32.004. If a vacancy occurs on the Commission, the Town Council shall
appoint the alternate member to complete the unexpired term. The unexpired
term does not count against total appointment time. Members shall serve until
their successors have been appointed.



   (B)   The initial chairperson of the Commission shall be appointed
by the Mayor and Town Council for a term of one year. Subsequent chairpersons
shall be elected by the members of the Commission pursuant to the
requirements of § 32,007. No member shall serve on the Commission for more
than two consecutive three-year terms. All officers shall be elected from
among the membership of the Commission.



   (C)   Three of the five members of the Commission shall constitute a
quorum for conducting Commission business, and action may be had upon a
majority vote of the quorum.



   (D)   The Commission may organize committees and adopt rules and
procedures necessary to accomplish its purpose.



(Ord. 621-14, passed 9-2-2014)



§ 32.121  DUTIES.



   The Commission shall act as an advisory body to the Town Council and
make recommendations regarding, but not limited to:



   (A)   Policies, priorities and plans for promoting, advancing and
maintaining public art in Florence;



   (B)   Allocation and budgeting of funds for public art through the
annual public art project plan;



   (C)   Encouraging the promotion of Arizona artists in town art
projects by setting annual goals to be identified in the annual public art
project plan and approved by Town Council;



   (D)   Encouraging citizen input and involvement in the design and
selection of public art;



   (E)   Coordinating with the private sector and other governmental
agencies in promoting arts and cultural excellence as a tool for the
encouragement of economic development, business relocation, and tourism; and



   (F)   Organizing and promoting public art that celebrates the town
and its unique cultural heritage.



(Ord. 621-14, passed 9-2-2014)



YOUTH COMMISSION



§ 32.200  MEMBERSHIP.



   To carry out the responsibilities and duties set forth herein, there is
hereby created a Youth Commission to consist of five voting members and two
alternates.



   (A)   The members of the Youth Commission shall be appointed and
shall serve two year terms. The initial appointment shall have two members
who serve a one year term. Terms will expire October 1. If a vacancy occurs
on the Commission, the first alternate member will complete the unexpired
term, followed by the second alternate member. Alternate members will assume
the unexpired term of the vacating member. Members shall serve until their
successors are appointed.



   (B)   Membership qualifications. All members must live within the
town limits of Florence, be between the ages of 14 to 18 years old (or be in
the ninth to twelfth grade) and have at least a 2.00 Grade Point Average.
Members may serve until their nineteenth birthday.



   (C)   The Commission may organize committees and adopt rules and
procedures necessary to accomplish its purpose.



(Ord. 664-18, passed 8-20-2018)



§ 32.201  DUTIES.



   The Commission shall act as an advisory body to the Town Council and
the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board and make recommendations regarding,
but not limited to:



   (A)   Policies, priorities, and plans for promoting, advancing, and
maintaining youth activities;



   (B)   Encouraging the promotion of youth leadership;



   (C)   Setting annual goals to be identified in the Strategic Plan as
Youth Commission projects and approved by Town Council;



   (D)   Review and approve the official minutes from all Youth
Commission meetings; and



   (E)   Establish, support, and participate in planned public relation
events to better inform the public of youth programs, services, and views.



(Ord. 664-18, passed 8-20-2018)



§ 32.202  MEETINGS.



   The Youth Commission shall hold monthly meetings.



(Ord. 664-18, passed 8-20-2018)



CHAPTER 33: DISASTER PREPAREDNESS, EMERGENCY SERVICES AND THE LIKE



Section




General Provisions




   33.01   Emergency declaration




Emergency Operations Plan




   33.15   Emergency Operations Plan; adopted by reference



   33.16   Scope, status of plan



   33.17   Immunity




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 33.01  EMERGENCY DECLARATION.



   The Mayor may, by proclamation, declare that an emergency or local
emergency exists pursuant to A.R.S. § 26-311(A).



(Prior Code, Ch. 5, Art. I, § 5-2)



Statutory reference:



   Authorized action upon declaration of emergency, see A.R.S. § 26-311(B)




EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN




§ 33.15  EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN; ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The Town of Florence’s Emergency Operations Plan is hereby adopted by
reference and incorporated herein as if set out in full.



(Prior Code, Ch. 5, Art. II, § 5-26)  (Ord. 104, passed 1-18-1988)



Statutory reference:



   Adopted by reference, see A.R.S. §§ 9-801et seq.



§ 33.16  SCOPE, STATUS OF PLAN.



   The emergency plan adopted by the Council in this subchapter will be
the immediate basis for the conduct and coordination of emergency operations
in the municipality under the following disaster conditions:



   (A)   Upon declaration of a state of war by the President of the
United States;



   (B)   Upon declaration of a state of emergency in an area, including
the municipality, by the Governor of the state; or



   (C)   Upon the order of the Mayor or his or her authorized
representative, provided that the existence or threatened existence of a
local emergency has been duly proclaimed in accordance with all applicable
laws and ordinances.



(Prior Code, Ch. 5, Art. II, § 5-27)  (Ord. 104, passed 1-18-1988)



§ 33.17  IMMUNITY.



   The municipality, its officers, agents, employees and volunteers duly
enrolled or registered with the municipal emergency services, and
unregistered persons placed into service during a state of war emergency, are
immune from liability as provided in A.R.S. § 26-314.



(Prior Code, Ch. 5, Art. II, § 5-28)  (Ord. 104, passed 1-18-1988)



CHAPTER 34: PERSONNEL



Section




General Provisions




   34.01   Bargaining, strikes and work interruptions prohibited




Personnel System




   34.15   Creation and scope



   34.16   Conditions of employment



   34.17   Rules and regulations



   34.18   Political contributions




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 34.01  BARGAINING, STRIKES AND WORK INTERRUPTIONS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   The municipality shall not bargain collectively with any
municipal employee, group of municipal employees, municipal employee
organizations or any representative of any municipal employee organization
with respect to wages, hours, working conditions or any other employee
related matter.



   (B)   It is hereby declared to be contrary to the public interest
and a threat to the public health and safety and unlawful for any municipal
employee, municipal employee organization or non-municipal employee
(representing a labor union), directly or indirectly, to instigate,
institute, encourage, authorize or participate in a strike, cessation of
work, slowdown, speed-up or other form of job action or work interruption and
any municipal employee who participates in any way in the activity shall
automatically be deemed to have abandoned his or her position and shall be
deemed terminated from his or her employment and shall no longer hold the
position or be entitled to any of the rights or emoluments thereof, except as
to any rights already vested in any municipal or state employee retirement
program. Neither the employee's supervisor, Town Manager, nor Council shall
reinstate an employee if the employee has in fact engaged in conduct
prohibited by this section. Violations of this section are punishable as
provided in § 10.99.



   (C)   Those employees whose job includes supervisory
responsibilities are prohibited from joining the same collective bargaining
unit as non-supervisory employees. Employees whose jobs include supervisory
responsibilities shall be those positions set forth as management personnel
in municipal Res. 84, including but not limited to police sergeants, who are
hereafter designated by the Council as supervisors and management personnel.
Violations of this subsection are punishable as provided in § 10.99.



(Prior Code, Ch. 14, Art. I, § 14-2)  (Ord. 34, passed 10-19-1981) 
Penalty, see § 10.99




PERSONNEL SYSTEM




§ 34.15  CREATION AND SCOPE.



   There is hereby adopted a merit system for the classified employees of
the municipality, the provisions of which shall apply to all employees of the
municipality except elected officials, officers of the municipality appointed
by, and who shall serve “at will”, at the pleasure of the Council,
persons engaged under contract to supply expert, professional or technical
services, temporary employees, volunteer firefighters and volunteer personnel
who receive no regular compensation from the municipality.



(Prior Code, Ch. 14, Art. II, § 14-31)  (Ord. 192-95, passed 4-17-1995)



§ 34.16  CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT.



   (A)   The appointment, promotion and tenure of every employee shall
be conditioned solely on merit and fitness and the satisfactory performance
of the duties and responsibilities assigned.



   (B)   No employee or applicant for employment shall be discriminated
against on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, handicap,
religion, sex or political affiliation.



(Prior Code, Ch. 14, Art. II, § 14-32)



Statutory reference:



   Employment discrimination prohibited, see A.R.S. § 41-1463



§ 34.17  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Council may adopt, by resolution, rules and regulations to give
effect to this subchapter, which may be modified or changed from time to
time, but the rules and regulations shall follow the generally accepted
principles of good personnel administration.



(Prior Code, Ch. 14, Art. II, § 14-33)



§ 34.18  POLITICAL CONTRIBUTIONS.



   No officer, official or employee of the municipality shall use any
influence or pressure upon any employee to obtain any assessment or
contribution of money or time, either direct or indirect, for any political
campaign or personal gain.



(Prior Code, Ch. 14, Art. II, § 14-34)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 35: TAXATION



Section



   35.01   Privilege licence tax; adopted by reference



§ 35.01  PRIVILEGE LICENCE TAX; ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The Town of Florence’s privilege licence tax and any amendments
thereto is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if set out
in full.  A copy of this document is on file in the Town Clerk’s office.



(Ord. 454-07, passed 1-2-2007 ; Ord. 511-09, passed 8-3-2009)



TITLE V: UTILITIES



   Chapter



      50.   WATER



      51.   WASTEWATER



      52.   SOLID WASTE



CHAPTER 50: WATER



Editor’s note:



   Many of the sections set forth in this Chapter 50 have analogous or
corresponding sections set forth in Chapter 51 of this code. Since the
content of the two chapters closely overlap, the reader should also refer to
Chapter 51 while referencing this Chapter 50.



Section




General Provisions




   50.001   Definitions



   50.002   Public Works Department; duties; Public Works Director



   50.003   Authority of Public Works Director to make decisions



   50.004   Water and Wastewater Division duties



   50.005   Ownership of main extension, service pipes and appurtenant
equipment



   50.006   Shutoff valves



   50.007   Obstruction of water system



   50.008   Tampering with and damaging water system



   50.009   Only authorized persons to turn on water



   50.010   Unauthorized possession, sale or fabrication of Water and
Wastewater Division keys or hydrant wrench



   50.011   Fire hydrants; generally; purpose and use



   50.012   Fire hydrants; obstructing access; unlawful use; tampering
with or injuring



   50.013   General construction water; from fire hydrants; un-metered
water to be estimated



   50.014   Interruption of service



   50.015   Street Works; utility relocation, notice to Water and
Wastewater Division



   50.016   Condemned buildings



   50.017   Protection of water supply and sewerage systems



   50.018   Water and/or sewer main restrictions



   50.019   Hydrant and/or meter restrictions



   50.020   Restoration of permitted improvements



   50.021   Restoration of paved areas



   50.022   Water and Wastewater Division; right of entry for
inspection; credentials



   50.023   Duty of other town departments to aid Water and Wastewater
Division



   50.024   Construction of paving districts



   50.025   Permit required for consumer to supply water to others



   50.026   Waste of water; failure of consumer to make repairs to
pipes, valves and fixtures



   50.027   Rules and regulations; authority of Director



   50.028   Rules and regulations to apply outside of town; exception




Main Extensions and Construction




   50.045   Connections with distribution system



   50.046   Construction; ownership and maintenance



   50.047   Policy of town generally



   50.048   Extensions in subdivisions, single lot, sublot developments
and all other developments



   50.049   Construction water through metered service connections;
rates



   50.050   Repayments; mains by developers (approach mains)



   50.051   Engineering costs; inspection of construction



   50.052   Utility improvements district assessments; sale




Service Connections




   50.070   Connection to water mains required



   50.071   Building to have separate service connections; exceptions



   50.072   Unauthorized connection with water mains



   50.073   Application for service generally; information required



   50.074   Service and materials to be property of Water and
Wastewater Division; consumer to pay for damages



   50.075   Service connection on existing mains



   50.076   Developers to install service connections on new mains in
new subdivisions



   50.077   Connection of existing service to new main



   50.078   Changes to existing service connection



   50.079   Service pipes; location



   50.080   Service pipes; excavations under sidewalk, installation



   50.081   Special connections for fire prevention services;
installation and fees; use



   50.082   Service connection fees




Meters




   50.100   Services to be metered



   50.101   Location of meters



   50.102   Resetting of meters inside buildings



   50.103   Cost of changing size of meter or service



   50.104   Removal of meters



   50.105   Replacement of meters



   50.106   Maintenance and repair; consumer to pay for damages



   50.107   Testing meter accuracy




Deposits, Rates, Billing Procedures and Miscellaneous Charges




   50.120   Guarantee and service deposits



   50.121   Return of deposits



   50.122   Method of developing a water quantity charge



   50.123   Monthly water rates



   50.124   Meter charges



   50.125   Effluent charges



   50.126   Town government; charges



   50.127   Charges to service applicant or customer



   50.128   Drinking fountains, toilets and other fixtures



   50.129   Charges when meter fails to register correctly or unable to
be read



   50.130   Charges for use of more than one meter



   50.131   Fire hydrant meter; deposit, charges, monthly service
charge and water rates; fire flow tests



   50.132   Unapproved water use and/or removal of seals from fire
prevention system



   50.133   Charges for service lines and meter installations



   50.134   Taps for water main extensions



   50.135   Water main shutdown; charges



   50.136   Irrigation meter



   50.137   Discontinuance of service



   50.138   Activation or reactivation of water service



   50.139   Change of occupancy



   50.140   Continuity of service



   50.141   Minimum charge and miscellaneous charges



   50.142   Service establishment charge



   50.143   Service reestablishment charge



   50.144   Service relocation charge



   50.145   Meter reading, billing and collecting



   50.146   Accounts generally; notices’ house numbers to be correct



   50.147   Unpaid bills at previous location



   50.148   Water service to tenants



   50.149   Unregistered or un-assessed water



   50.150   Miscellaneous charge for water



   50.151   Discontinuance of service; on order of customer



   50.152   Resumption of service




Drought Management Response Procedure




   50.170   Scope



   50.171   Declaration of policy



   50.172   Authorization



   50.173   Application



   50.174   Water use reduction stages



   50.175   Stage 1; water alert



   50.176   Stage 2; water warning



   50.177   Stage 3; water emergency



   50.178   Stage 4; water crisis



   50.179   Water use reduction implementation




Backflow Prevention




   50.195   Declaration of policy; authorization



   50.196   Cross connections from or to source of water supply other
than that of town



   50.197   Responsibility for backflow prevention control



   50.198   Backflow prevention methods



   50.199   Remedies



 



   50.999   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 50.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AIR GAP.  A physical separation between the free flowing discharge end
of a potable water supply pipeline and an open or non-pressure receiving
vessel. An APPROVED AIR GAP shall be at least double the diameter of the
supply pipe measured vertically above the overflow rim of the vessel, in no
case less than one inch (2.54 cm).



   APPROVED.  The term APPROVED, as herein used in reference to a water
supply, shall mean a water supply that has been approved by the health agency
having jurisdiction. The term APPROVED is herein used in reference to an air
gap, a double check valve assembly, a reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention assembly or other backflow prevention assemblies or methods shall
mean an approval by the administrative authority having jurisdiction.



   APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY (ASSEMBLY).  Any testable
assembly, with the exception of an approved air gap, which has been issued a
certificate of approval by the University of Southern California Foundation
for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research (USCFCCCHR or the
foundation) or the other third party certifying entity, unrelated to the
product's manufacturer or vendor, which may be acceptable to the State
Department of Environmental Quality. A list of assemblies shall be maintained
by the Utility Superintendent.



   AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY.  Any water supply on or available to the
premises other than the purveyor's approved public water supply will be
considered as an auxiliary water supply. These auxiliary waters may include
water from other purveyor's public potable water supply or other natural
source(s) such as a well, spring, river, stream, harbor and the like or used
waters or industrial fluids. These waters may be contaminated or polluted or
they may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over
which the water purveyor does not have sanitary control.



   BACK PRESSURE.  A form of backflow due to any elevation of pressure in
the downstream piping system (by pump, elevation of piping or stream and/or
pressure) above the supply pressure at the point of service delivery which
would cause, or tend to cause, a reversal of the normal direction of flow
through the backflow prevention assembly.



   BACK SIPHONAGE.  A form of backflow due to a reduction in system
pressure which causes a negative or sub-atmospheric pressure to exit at a
site in the water system.



   BACKFLOW.  The undesirable reversal of flow of water or mixtures of
water and other liquids, gases or other substances into the distribution
system of the public potable water supply.



   BACKFLOW PREVENTOR.  An assembly or means designed to prevent backflow.



   CERTIFIED TESTER.  An individual certified to test backflow prevention
assemblies by the California-Nevada Section of the American Water Works
Association (AWWA), the Arizona State Environmental Technology Training
(ASETT) Center or other agencies or organizations involved with the training
and certification of testers if they are acceptable to the State Department
of Environmental Quality.



   COMMON AREA.  A recreational or open space area or areas maintained
for the benefit of the residents of a housing development which is owned and
operated as a single integrated facility.



   COMPANY.  The town water division.



   CONSUMER.  The person using water delivered to the premises, building
or establishment where used, or for whose account and use the water is
delivered, and also the owner, occupant, tenant and lessee of the premises,
building or establishment.



   CONTAMINATION.  An impairment of the quality of the water which
creates an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or through
the spread of disease by sewage, industrial fluids, waste and the like.



   CONTIGUOUS.  In contact at any point along a boundary or part of the
same master planned community, two parcels of land are contiguous even if
they are separated by one or more of the following: a road, easement or
right-of-way.



   CROSS CONNECTION.  Any unprotected,  potential connection or
structural arrangement between a public or a customer's potable water system
and any other source or system through which it is possible to introduce into
any part of the potable water system any used water, industrial fluid, gas or
substance other than the intended potable water with which the system is
supplied. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel
or changeover devices and other temporary or permanent devices through which
or because of which backflow can, or may occur, are considered to be CROSS
CONNECTIONS. Compliance with the town Plumbing Code creates a rebuttable
presumption that a cross connection does not exist.



   CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL BY CONTAINMENT.  The appropriate type or
method of backflow protection at the service connection, commensurate with
the degree of hazard of the consumer's potable water system.



   CROSS CONNECTIONS CONTROLLED.  A connection between a potable water
supply system and a non-potable water system with an approved backflow
prevention assembly properly installed and maintained so that it will
continuously afford the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard.



   CUSTOMER.  Any person, partnership, association, company, private
corporation, public corporation, political subdivision, the United States and
the state who receives potable water from the Town of Florence water system
or reclaimed wastewater from the town's wastewater system or untreated
Central Arizona Project water from town facilities.



   DIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION.  A cross-connection which is subject to both
back siphonage and back pressure.



   DIRECTOR.  The Public Works Director of the town or his or her
authorized deputy, agent, designee or representative.



   DWR.  The State Department of Water Resources.



   GROUNDWATER CODE.  The Arizona Groundwater Management Act, A.R.S.
Title 45, Chapter 2 (A.R.S. §§ 45-401 et seq.) and any amendments thereto.



   HAZARD; DEGREE OF.  Either a pollution (non-health) or contamination
(health) hazard and is derived from the evaluation of conditions within a
system.



   HAZARD; HEALTH.  An actual or potential threat of contamination of a
physical or toxic nature to the public potable water system or the consumer's
potable water system that would be a danger to health.



   HAZARD; PLUMBING.  An internal or plumbing type cross-connection in a
consumer's potable water system that may be either a pollutional or a
contamination type hazard. This includes, but is not limited to,
cross-connections to toilets, sinks, lavatories, wash trays and law
sprinkling systems. Plumbing type cross-connections can be located in many
types of structures, including homes, apartment houses, hotels and commercial
or industrial establishments. Such a connection, if permitted to exist, must
be properly protected by an appropriate type of backflow prevention assembly.



   HAZARD; POLLUTIONAL.  An actual or potential threat to the physical
properties of the water system or the potability of the public or the
consumer's potable water system, but which would not constitute a HEALTH or
SYSTEM HAZARD, as defined. The maximum degree or intensity of pollution to
which the potable water system could be degraded under the definition would
cause a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause minor
damage to the system or its appurtenances.



   HAZARD; SYSTEM.  An actual or potential threat of severe danger to the
physical properties of the public or the consumer's potable water system or
of a pollution or contamination which would have a protracted effect on the
quality of the potable water in the system.



   INDIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION.  A cross-connection which is subject to
back siphonage only.



   INDUSTRIAL FLUIDS.  Any fluid or solution which may be chemically,
biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration
which would constitute a health system, pollutional or plumbing hazard if
introduced into an approved water supply. This may include, but not limited
to: polluted or contaminated used waters, all types of process waters and
“used waters” originating from the public potable water system which may
deteriorate in sanitary quality, chemicals in fluid form, plating acid and
alkalies, circulated cooling waters connected to an open cooling tower and/or
cooling waters that are chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with
toxic substances, contaminated natural water such as from wells, springs,
streams, rivers, bays, harbors, seas, irrigation canals or systems and the
like, oils, gases glycerine, paraffins, caustic and acid solutions and other
liquid and gaseous fluids used industrially, for other processes, or for fire
fighting purposes.



   LOT.  A parcel of land or two or more contiguous parcels to be used as
a unit.



   NET LOT AREA.  That portion of a lot excluding all dedicated streets
or alleys and roadways or alley easements.



   NON-POTABLE WATER.



      (1)   Reclaimed water, stormwater runoff that is not subject
to appropriation under A.R.S. § 45-151;



      (2)   Water withdrawn pursuant to a poor quality groundwater
withdrawal permit pursuant to A.R.S. § 45-516;



      (3)   Groundwater withdrawn pursuant to type 1 or type 2
non-irrigation certificate of grandfathered right issued by the Department of
Water Resources; or



      (4)   Other non-potable water source of a quality suitable for
landscape irrigation, which meets all local, state and federal water quality
requirements for full body contact, except untreated Central Arizona Project
water.



   POINT OF SERVICE DELIVERY.  The terminal end of a service connection
from the public water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the
service connection, then the POINT OF SERVICE DELIVERY shall mean the
downstream end (i.e. customer's side) of the meter. If an un-metered
connection exists, then the POINT OF SERVICE DELIVERY shall mean at the point
of demarcation between the public right-of-way or easements and private
property.



   POLLUTION.  An impairment of the quality of the water to a degree
which does not create a hazard to the public health, but which does adversely
and unreasonably affect the aesthetic qualities of the waters for domestic
use.



   POTABLE WATER.  Water delivered through the town's domestic water
delivery system after treatment designed to meet the Environmental Protection
Agency's and State Department of Environmental Quality drinking water
standards.



   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY.  An assembly
containing two independently acting approved check valves together with a
hydraulically operating, mechanically independent pressure differential
relief valve located between the check valves and at the same time below the
first check valve. The unit shall include properly located resilient seated
test cocks and tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valves at each end of
the assembly. This assembly is designed to protect against a non-health (i.e.
pollutant) or health hazard (i.e. contaminant). This assembly shall not be
used for backflow protection of sewage or reclaimed water.



   SWIMMING POOL.  An artificially constructed pool for swimming purposes
that meets the applicable design standards and specifications for swimming
pools provided by the Department of Health Services.



   TOTAL OPERATING FACILITY AREA.  An area of land being used for
cemetery-related purposes, including any area of land covered by grave
markers or by cemetery related buildings, walks, pathways and landscaping,
but not including parking lots and any areas of land being held for future
expansion of the cemetery.



   USED WATER.  Any water supplied by the town from the public potable
water system to a customer's water system, after it has passed through the
point of service delivery.



   UTILITY SUPERINTENDENT.  The Superintendent in charge of the Water
Division of the Public Works Department is invested with the authority and
responsibility for the implementation of an effective cross-contamination
control program and for the enforcement of the provisions of this division.



   WATER APPLICATION RATE.  The amount of water applied in a calendar
year.



   WATER FROM ANY SOURCE.  Any water, including reclaimed wastewater from
a wastewater treatment facility or cooling tower.



   WATER; NON-POTABLE.  A water supply which has not been approved for
human consumption by the health agency having jurisdiction.



   WATER; POTABLE.  Any public potable water supply which has been
investigated and approved by the health agency. The system must be operating
under a valid health permit. In determining what constitutes an approved
water supply, the health agency has final judgment as to its safety and
potability.



   WATER; SERVICE CONNECTION.  The terminal end of a service connection
from the public potable water system (i.e. where the water purveyor may lose
jurisdiction and sanitary control of the water at its point of delivery to
the consumer's water system). If a water meter is installed at the end of the
service connection, then the service connection shall mean downstream end of
the water meter.



   WATER; USED.  Any water supplied by a water purveyor from a public
potable water system to a consumer's water system after it has passed through
the service connection, and is no longer under the control of the water
purveyor.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-25)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.002  PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT; DUTIES; PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR.



   The Public Works Director, hereinafter referred to as the Director,
shall be the general executive officer in charge of all personnel, the entire
operation and equipment and facilities of the Water and Wastewater Divisions.
He or she shall also control the water supply and at all times insure the
sufficiency thereof and shall notify the public, unless an emergency requires
otherwise, of the necessity of shutting off any pipeline for the purpose of
making repairs, extension or connections, should he or she have cause to
expect to know beforehand of the necessity to so shutoff the water from any
line. He or she shall establish and have general supervision over, subject to
the approval of the Town Manager and Town Council, all charges for water and
sewer services, departmental policies, agreements, new connections, repairs
and the like, and for all charges not expressly provided for this chapter.
The Director shall have the authority to waive the collection or imposition
of risk deposits, delinquent fees or late charge fees imposed by the
provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-26)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



Cross-reference:



   For similar section, see § 51.003



§ 50.003  AUTHORITY OF PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR TO MAKE DECISIONS.



   The Director shall have the authority to decide any question that may
arise which is not fully covered by the provisions contained in this chapter,
and his or her decision in such cases shall be final, subject only to the
general direction of the Town Manager.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-27)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



Cross-reference:



   For similar section, see § 51.003



§ 50.004  WATER AND WASTEWATER DIVISION DUTIES.



   (A)   The Water and Wastewater Division shall make all service
connections, and set all meters on the various mains for service except in
new subdivisions where the developers are required to have their contractors
install water service connections simultaneously with the water main
installations.



   (B)   The Division shall also make all repairs on mains, meters and
services, and check all valves and fire hydrants and see that they are in
good order, shall operate and maintain all water sewer system facilities and
shall perform other duties as required by the Director, subject to the
approval of the Town Manager.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-28)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



Cross-reference:



   For similar sections, see § 51.003



§ 50.005  OWNERSHIP OF MAIN EXTENSION, SERVICE PIPES AND APPURTENANT
EQUIPMENT.



   The ownership of all water mains, fire lines, service pipes and
appurtenant equipment maintained by the Water and Wastewater Divisions shall
be vested in the Division, and in no case shall the owner of any premises
have the right to claim any part except where otherwise provided.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-29)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.006 SHUTOFF VALVES.



   All shutoff valves on the public water system are installed by the town
for the use of the Water and Wastewater Division. The shutoff valves shall
not be used or in any way molested or manipulated by consumers of the water.
All consumers shall provide their own valve for ordinary usage. This valve
shall be located on the consumer's side of the meter ahead of the first water
outlet.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-30)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.007  OBSTRUCTION OF WATER SYSTEM.



   No person shall place upon or about, any valve, valve box, curb cock,
water meter box or water gate connected with the water system of the town any
object, material, debris or structure of any kind that shall prevent free
access to the same at all times or in any manner tamper with or injure the
appurtenances. No person shall fill up or cover over any valve or meter box.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-31)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)
Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.008  TAMPERING WITH AND DAMAGING WATER SYSTEM.



   It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally to break, deface or
damage any hydrant, valve, pipe or other waterworks appliances or fixture, or
in any other manner interfere with the operation of any part of the water
system of the town.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-32)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)
Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.009  ONLY AUTHORIZED PERSONS TO TURN ON WATER.



   (A)   No person other than an official or employee of the Water and
Wastewater Division shall turn on water from town mains without permission
from the Director.



   (B)   Should the water be turned on to the premises by anyone except
an employee of the Division after it has been turned off at the town's stop
cock, it will be turned off at the main and will not be turned on again until
a flat charge covering the expense of excavation and replacing of the paving,
as established by the Director subject to the approval of the Town Manager,
shall have been paid.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-33)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)
Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.010  UNAUTHORIZED POSSESSION, SALE OR FABRICATION OF WATER AND
WASTEWATER DIVISION KEYS OR HYDRANT WRENCH.



   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to knowingly have and
keep in his or her possession or under his or her control, any curb cock key,
valve key or hydrant wrench to the town's water supply system and no person
shall, without authority from the Water and Wastewater Division, make,
construct, buy, sell or in any way dispose of to any person any curb cock
key, valve key or hydrant wrench for use on the town's water supply system.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-34)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)
Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.011  FIRE HYDRANTS; GENERALLY; PURPOSE AND USE.



   Fire hydrants are provided for the primary purpose of extinguishing
fires and shall be opened and used only by the Water and Wastewater Divisions
and the Fire Departments or the persons as may be authorized to do so by the
Public Works Director. No permit shall be issued and existing permits shall
be cancelled to any person who has violated any of the provisions of this
chapter or whose indebtedness to the Town of Florence for water used or
damage to hydrants is delinquent. Every person authorized to open fire
hydrants will be required to replace the caps on the outlets when such are
not in use and will keep hose connections in good repair. Failure to do so
will be sufficient cause to prohibit further use on the hydrants and the
refusal to grant subsequent permits for the use of the fire hydrants.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-35)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.012  FIRE HYDRANTS; OBSTRUCTING ACCESS; UNLAWFUL USE; TAMPERING WITH
OR INJURING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the access to any fire
hydrant by placing around, on or within 20 feet of the hydrants any stone,
brick, lumber, dirt, rubbish or other material or to open or operate any fire
hydrant or to draw or attempt to draw water or to willfully or carelessly
injure the hydrants or in any manner to tamper with or injure the hydrants.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-36)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)
Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.013  GENERAL CONSTRUCTION WATER; FROM FIRE HYDRANTS; UN-METERED WATER
TO BE ESTIMATED.



   When water for construction is required by a contractor, it shall be
supplied through a meter whenever possible. Where an existing service
connection is not available, or is of insufficient size, the contractor may
apply to the Water and Wastewater Division for a fire hydrant meter. The
application may be approved subject to the applicant's compliance with all
rules and regulations established by the Public Works Department pertaining
to the use of construction water from fire hydrant and the payments of
applicable fees and charges.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-37)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.014  INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE.



   The water may at any time be shutoff from the town's mains without
notice due to emergencies or for the purpose of making repairs, extension or
any other necessary work. The town will not be liable for any damage that may
occur on account of the water being cut off for any purpose or on account of
the breaking of any pipe or fixtures by the water from the town's mains.
Water consumers who have any machinery, material, process or plant which
requires a constant supply of water, shall install upon their premises the
water storage facilities as will prevent any damage in case the town water
supply may, for any reason, be interrupted or discontinued.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-38)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.015  STREET WORKS; UTILITY RELOCATION, NOTICE TO WATER AND WASTEWATER
DIVISION.



   All persons handling street work, such as grading, filling and
trenching or paving and the like, shall give the Director written notice in
case it becomes necessary during the work to remove, displace or change any
water mains, pipes, fittings, meters, gates or other waterworks appurtenances
that may interfere with the prosecution of the work. Where the amount of work
to be done does not exceed the amount of $300, the notice shall be delivered
not less than 48 hours before the services of the Water and Wastewater
Division are required. Where the amount of work does exceed the amount of
$300, the notice shall be delivered not less than five days before the
services of the Water and Wastewater Division are required. Failure to
furnish the notice shall make the person liable to the Water and Wastewater
Division in case damages should result from the failure.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-39)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.016  CONDEMNED BUILDINGS.



   Whenever the town building official shall report in writing to the
Director that any building has been condemned by him or her as a structure
not habitable and dangerous to human life, and whenever the County Health
Officer shall report in like manner to the Director that any building has
been condemned by him or her as unsanitary and not fit for habitation, the
Director shall at once shutoff the water from the building and not permit it
to be turned on again until the building has been made safe or sanitary, as
the case may be, which condition must be reported to the Director by the town
building official or the County Health Officer, respectively, as soon as it
exists.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-40)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.017  PROTECTION OF WATER SUPPLY AND SEWERAGE SYSTEMS.



   The Public Works Director and the town building official may, with the
approval of the Town Manager, make the additional rules and regulations in
furtherance of the purposes of this code and not inconsistent with specific
provisions of this code as may be deemed necessary to properly protect the
town water supply or the sewage collection and treatment facilities.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-41)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.018  WATER AND/OR SEWER MAIN RESTRICTIONS.



   No building, fences, wall, rockery, trees, shrubbery or obstruction of
any kind shall be erected or planted or permitted to remain within the
boundaries of rights-of-way or easement area without written permission of
the Director of Public Works, and no excavation shall be made within three
feet of the water and/or sewer main, and that the earth cover over a water
main shall be maintained at not less than 35 inches nor more than 48 inches.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-41.1)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.019  HYDRANT AND/OR METER RESTRICTIONS.



   No building, fence, rockery, trees, shrubbery or obstruction of any
kind shall be erected or planted or permitted to remain within the boundaries
of an easement and/or right-of-way area without the written permission of the
Director of Public Works, and that no excavation shall be made within three
feet of the water service facilities, and that the surface level of the
ground within the easement area shall be maintained at the same elevation as
that of the hydrant and/or water meter vault cover.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-41.2)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.020  RESTORATION OF PERMITTED IMPROVEMENTS.



   The Town of Florence may enter upon an easement and/or right-of-way
area provided that the work shall be accomplished in such a manner that the
private improvements existing in the work area shall not be disturbed or
destroyed, or in the event that they are disturbed or destroyed, they may be
replaced to a reasonable and moderate condition as they were immediately
before the property was entered upon by the town.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-41.3)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.021  RESTORATION OF PAVED AREAS.



   The Town of Florence may enter upon an easement and/or right-of-way
area and may be responsible for the restoration or repair of any improvements
destroyed or damaged by the town within the easement and/or right-of-way area
caused by the installation, repair or reconstruction of aforesaid water
and/or sewer facilities, except that where excavation is required in paved
areas, the areas will be restored by standard patching procedure.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-41.4)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.022  WATER AND WASTEWATER DIVISION; RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION;
CREDENTIALS.



   (A)   Any authorized employee of the Water and Wastewater Division
shall have free access at all reasonable hours to any premises supplied with
the town water for the purpose of making any inspection of the entire water
system upon the premises.



   (B)   In case any authorized employee shall be refused admittance to
any premises, or being admitted, shall be hindered or prevented from making
the examination, the Director may cause the water to be turned off from the
premises after giving 24 hours' notice to the owner of occupant of the
premises, of his or her intention to do so.



   (C)   Servicepersons and other employees of the Water and Wastewater
Division whose duty it may be to enter upon private premises to make
inspection and examination of the pipes, fixtures or attachments used in
connection with the water supply, shall identify themselves as authorized
agents for the Department.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-42)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.023  DUTY OF OTHER TOWN DEPARTMENTS TO AID WATER AND WASTEWATER
DIVISION.



   It shall be the duty of the town departments to give vigilant aid to
the Water and Wastewater Division in the enforcement of this chapter, and to
this end they shall report all violations which come to their knowledge to
the office of the Public Works Director.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-43)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



Cross-reference:



   For similar sections, see Ch. 51



§ 50.024  CONSTRUCTION OF PAVING DISTRICTS.



   Whenever the construction of a paving district has been authorized by
the Town Council, it shall be the duty of the Water and Wastewater Division
to request all property holders, in writing to make application for the
installation of blind services within the paving district in order to save
the cost of expensive and unsightly paving cuts in newly laid paving.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-44)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



Cross-reference:



   For similar sections, see Ch. 51



§ 50.025  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR CONSUMER TO SUPPLY WATER TO OTHERS.



   No owner, lessee or property supplied with water from the town mains
shall furnish water to any other person or property without first obtaining
written permission to do so from the Public Works Director. No permit will be
issued until the person desiring to use the water has obtained and filed with
the Director the written consent of the owner or lessee of the property from
which the water is to be taken, stating the location of the property by
street and number and the location by street and number of the property to be
supplied with water and stating the purpose for which the water is to be
taken, the Director may issue a temporary permit allowing water to be
supplied to other persons or property.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-45)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.026  WASTE OF WATER; FAILURE OF CONSUMER TO MAKE REPAIRS TO PIPES,
VALVES AND FIXTURES.



   (A)   Owners of property served by town water are responsible for
all leaks, or damages on account of leaks, from the service pipes leading
from the consumer's side of the meter to the premises served.



   (B)   Every consumer shall at all times maintain in good repair all
his or her water pipes, faucets, valves, plumbing fixtures or any other water
appliances to prevent waste of water.



   (C)   Where any consumer willfully neglects to make the necessary
repairs, the water shall be shutoff by the Water and Wastewater Division and
shall not be turned on again until the repairs have been made to the
satisfaction of the Division and a service activation fee paid by the
consumer to the Division.



   (D)   Customers are responsible for all water consumption by leaks
or damages on account of leaks from the service pipes leading from the meter
to the premises served. The Water and Wastewater Division will be responsible
for all water consumption inaccurately billed. Inaccurate billings will be
adjusted by an amount determined by the Director.



   (E)   The Water Division shall maintain all service lines from the
main to and including the first valve or meter yoke but not the house side
connection thereto. In the case where no valve is located in the service line
and the meter is located on the private property of the owner, it shall be
the responsibility of the owner to maintain the service line from the main to
the building served. On branch service piping, the first valve is the tapping
valve or gate valve fitting to the tee. Apparent leaks in the customer's
water installation, whether registered on the water meter or not, shall be
repaired by the customer within ten days of receipt of written notice by the
Water Division. If repairs are not made, the town shall issue written notice
of an intended disconnect and five days thereafter may discontinue water
service until the leak is repaired. If, in the judgment of town personnel,
the leak endangers public safety, constitutes a serious nuisance or wastes
substantial amounts of water, water service may be discontinued without prior
notice to the customer. Hidden leaks in the customer's water installation
shall be repaired, after discovery under the same provisions as apparent
leaks.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-46)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.027  RULES AND REGULATIONS; AUTHORITY OF DIRECTOR.



   The Public Works Director shall have the right, subject to the approval
of the Town Manager, to make rules and regulations with reference to the use
of water supplied to a customer.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-47)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.028  RULES AND REGULATIONS TO APPLY OUTSIDE OF TOWN; EXCEPTION.



   All rules and regulations referring to the management of the Water and
Wastewater Division, effective inside the town, shall equally apply outside
the town limits except for deposits, water rates and charges.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-48)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



Cross-reference:



   For similar sections, see Ch. 51




MAIN EXTENSIONS AND CONSTRUCTION




§ 50.045  CONNECTIONS WITH DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM.



   Persons desiring to connect water main extensions to the existing
distribution system shall make application to the Public Works Department in
writing and shall pay established fees and charges.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-49)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.046  CONSTRUCTION; OWNERSHIP AND MAINTENANCE.



   The extension of all water mains and service connections shall be
constructed in strict accordance with plans and specifications to be approved
by the Public Works Department. All extensions and service connections shall
be, and remain the property of, the Public Works Department after acceptance
by the town. Main extensions and service connections shall be maintained by
the Department up to, and including, the consumer's meter and shall be
operated by the Department as part of the distribution system. The Department
shall exercise complete control over the extensions, and upon completion, the
person responsible for the construction of the extension shall relinquish all
right to or interest in the ownership of the extensions.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-50)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.047  POLICY OF TOWN GENERALLY.



   The water main extension policy of the town for town water mains and
the policy to be followed in connection therewith shall be, and the same is
hereby declared to be as follows:



   (A)   Developers must pay all costs for constructing mains of the
sizes as to afford adequate service during peak demands.



   (B)   The minimum water requirements will be three gallons per
minute per service with a minimum residual pressure of 40 pounds per square
inch at the meter.



   (C)   The Public Works Director will approve the developer's
required size and lay-out of public water mains that will meet both domestic
water needs and fire flow requirements as required by this code.



   (D)   The Town Engineer will not perform field engineering nor
submit detailed plans and specifications for any developer. This work is to
be performed by a civil engineer registered in the state and employed by the
developer. Before construction begins, final detailed plans and
specifications for the water main extensions in the development must be
approved by the Public Works Department. The cost of staking the location of
the new water mains and the cost of inspecting the construction shall be
assumed by the developer. The town will perform the inspections during
construction.



   (E)   Where booster pumps are necessary to maintain adequate
pressures in the mains due to the development being near or above the
hydraulic gradient of the distribution system of the town service area, the
developer shall construct at his or her own expense the necessary booster
pumping station and storage facilities to town specifications. The town will
assume ownership, maintenance and operation of the booster pump installation
upon its completion and acceptance by the town.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-51)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.048  EXTENSIONS IN SUBDIVISIONS, SINGLE LOT, SUBLOT DEVELOPMENTS AND
ALL OTHER DEVELOPMENTS.



   (A)   In all new subdivisions and single lot developments and all
other developments, other than a single residence on a single lot, where the
town is to provide water service, the developer shall furnish and install in
accordance with plans approved by the Public Works Director, all water mains,
service connections, valves, fittings and appurtenances within the boundary
of the development as well as the streets bounding the entire development.
Review fees shall be paid as set forth in the town code. In addition, the
developer shall furnish and install all off-site water mains as necessary to
complete a looped connection to existing town mains as determined by the
Public Works Department. All water lines are to be constructed as a general
area improvement whether they do, or do not provide service to the property
being developed. For developments principally residential in character, the
town requires that 12-inch diameter lines be provided on section line
streets, eight-inch lines on mid-section line streets and six-inch lines on
all other streets. Four inch lines shall be allowed in short residential
cul-de-sac streets where the number of service shall not exceed 10, and the
maximum length of the four-inch water mains shall not exceed 400 feet. For
developments other than those principally residential in character, the
minimum size of the mains installed by the developer shall be six inches or
larger, consistent with needs of the development, including fire flow
requirements. For all developments, fire hydrants, valves, pipe and fitting
required for the hydrant installation shall also be installed by the
developer in accordance with plans approved by the Public Works Director.
Review fees shall be paid as set forth in accordance with plans approved by
the Public Works Director. Review fees shall be paid as set forth in the Town
Code. The maximum spacing of fire hydrants along public water mains shall be
approximately 500 feet in a single-family residential development and
approximately 300 feet in all others. Fire hydrant locations within the
bounds of any development shall be such that fire hose lengths will not be
more than 300 feet to reach any potential fire in the tract.



   (B)   Existing lines larger than 12 inches in diameter are
considered part of the transmission system, and are not part of the water
distribution master grid system. Developers may be required to construct
distribution mains of the required size in parallel to the existing
transmission mains. Where existing distribution system mains within a
development, or the streets bounding a development are smaller in size than
that required by this code, or are otherwise inadequate, the developer may be
required to replace or parallel the mains with those of the required size.



   (C)   Where no water main is existing along the frontage of a
single, existing, residential lot zoned for single-family use, and the
developer of the single lot requests water service, sufficient length of main
shall be constructed by the developer to extend the new main from an existing
water main to the point of the requested service connection, plus an
additional ten feet. If the Public Works Director determines after a review
of the size, length and location of the line, that an approach main repayment
agreement is practical, and the applicant desires to enter into such an
agreement, the new water main shall be constructed to and across the entire
lot frontage.



   (D)   The service connections installed by a developer's contractor
shall be guaranteed against any and all defects by the developer for a period
of two years after acceptance of the installation by the Public Works
Department.



   (E)   No one except authorized town personnel shall be permitted to
install, remove or reinstall water meters. Any developer whose contractor,
plumber (or others) removes, changes or relocates water meters shall be
charged the cost to the town for restoring meters to their authorized and
designated locations of records. The costs together with any cost incurred by
the town for repairing defective service connections installed by developer's
contractors shall be due and payable within 60 days of billing for the
charges by the town.



   (F)   After acceptance by the town of the water mains and service
connections, the developer or his or her agent may make applications to the
Public Works Department for the installation of one or more meters to be
installed on the new service connections to measure construction water used.
The developer will be held responsible for all water used from the date the
meter is set until there is a change in ownership.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-52)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.049  CONSTRUCTION WATER THROUGH METERED SERVICE CONNECTIONS; RATES.



   (A)   The Public Works Department will accept applications from a
developer or his or her authorized agent for the installation of a meter to
measure water to be used for construction, provided that a service
connection, including a curb stop and meter box, has been installed and
accepted for service by the town.



   (B)   The Water and Wastewater Division will prepare a separate
billing for each metered service connection used to supply water for
construction and the following charges will be applicable:



      (1)   Inside the town.



         (a)   For each metered service connection used to supply
water for construction, a minimum charge will be in accordance with the
prevailing inside municipality water rates. The minimum charge shall not be
construed as a monthly minimum, but shall apply as a minimum for the initial
120 days of the construction period and monthly minimums thereafter.



         (b)   When a metered application is made, the developer
or his or her authorized agent will be required to prepay the minimum billing
for each meter connection. The developer will be held responsible for all
water used from the date the meter is set until there is a change of
ownership. The developer will be required to submit in writing to the Water
and Wastewater Division, the name of the new owner, the correct street
address and the date of the change of ownership. When this information is
furnished, a final reading and billing will be prepared. In no event will any
portion of the minimum billing be refundable and any charge in excess of the
minimum will be billed to the developer.



      (2)   Outside the town.  For each metered service connection
used to supply water for construction, the above requirements shall apply
except that the prevailing outside the municipality water rates for the
particular area shall be used to compute charges.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-53)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.050  REPAYMENTS; MAINS BY DEVELOPERS (APPROACH MAINS).



   The water main repayment policy of the town for developer water main
extensions, is declared to be as follows:



   (A)   The town desires to encourage the development of undeveloped
areas through re-payment for costs incurred in the construction of
“off-site” water mains that are necessary to serve new developments, in
order “to distribute the costs of extending the mains between two or more
developers”. This policy would apply where an “approach main” was
extended by one developer and connected to at a later date by one or more
developers. An APPROACH MAIN is defined as a main extended beyond the limits
of the project or a main constructed along the frontage or boundary of the
development.



   (B)   In the event that a proposed new development or project finds
it necessary to extend water mains from a distant point in order to serve the
development or project, the cost of the main extension, designated as an
“approach main” will be included in a separate agreement. The town will
limit the maximum size of the approach main entirely at the developer's cost
to 12 inches in diameter, where required on section lines or grid arterials,
and to eight inches in diameter on mid-section lines or mid-grid feeders.



   (C)   The town reserves the right to increase the diameter of the
approach main, if it deemed advisable, but under this condition the town will
furnish sufficient pipe so that the laid cost of the approach main or larger
diameter pipe to the subdivider or developer, will not exceed the laid cost
of the same extension if it were an eight-inch diameter pipe on mid-section
streets or mid-grid feeders, and 12 inches on section line streets of grid
arterials, where required.



   (D)   The final detailed plans and specifications for the
“approach main” extension must be approved by the Public Works Director
prior to construction. The engineering costs for the preparation of plans,
specifications and staking of the “approach main” incurred in by the
developer may be included in the agreed construction costs as provided for in
this section. The cost of distribution mains within the boundary of the
development shall not be eligible for repayment.



   (E)   A charge of $265 will be assessed by the town for the
administration of each repayment agreement.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-54)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.051  ENGINEERING COSTS; INSPECTION OF CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   The costs for the preparation of construction plans for the
proposed water mains as well as the costs of staking the location of the
water mains, the cost of inspecting the construction, the costs of acquiring
rights-of-way and easements and preparation of as-built plans, shall be part
of the construction cost assumed by the developer in accordance with plans
approved by the Public Works Director. Review fees shall be paid as set forth
in the Town Code.



   (B)   The Public Works Department will not perform field engineering
or submit detailed plans and specifications for the developer. This latter
work is to be performed by a civil engineer registered in the state employed
by the developer. The final detailed plan and specification for the
“approach main” extension must be approved by the Public Works Department
before construction begins. The engineering cost for preparation of plans and
staking of the “approach main” only, incurred by the developer may be
included in the agreed construction cost as provided in § 50.050. The
engineering costs will be agreed upon by the town and developer for
determination of total construction cost prior to completion of the repayment
agreement.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-55)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.052  UTILITY IMPROVEMENTS DISTRICT ASSESSMENTS; SALE.



   (A)   Purpose.  The town may, from time to time, require the
payment of certain delinquent assessments which have accrued on parcels of
land located within the North Florence Improvement District No. 1, and
further, if the demanded payments are not tendered to the town, the town may
offer the parcels for sale to the public pursuant to A.R.S. §§ 48-603 et
seq.



   (B)   Procedure.



      (1)   In the event of a sale of the assessments, the sale
shall be for the entire assessment including the delinquent installments, and
the person who will take the least quantity of land and then and there pay
the amount of the assessment, penalties and costs due, including $.50 to the
Superintendent for a certificate of sale, shall become the purchaser.



      (2)   If there is no purchaser other than the town who will
pay the entire amount of the assessment, penalties and costs, including $.50
to the Superintendent for a certificate of sale, the Superintendent shall
sell the lot or portion thereof to the person who will take the least
quantity of land then and there pay the amount of the assessment then
delinquent, including interest, penalties and costs due, and $.50 to the
Superintendent for a certificate of sale, and deed shall issue to the
purchaser pursuant to A.R.S. § 48-606 subject, however, to redemption
pursuant to A.R.S. § 48-605.



      (3)   If the sale is made pursuant to division (B)(2) above,
the lien and the entire lot, piece or parcel of land assessed shall continue
to be in effect for the amount of the assessment or portion thereof,
including interest, penalties and costs thereafter to become due, and the
land may again be sold should the assessment again become delinquent. Any
notice of sale issued pursuant to this section and division (B)(2) above
shall contain a notice of the continuance of the lien.



      (4)   If there be no purchaser for any lot offered for sale,
it shall be struck off to the town as purchaser, and the Mayor and Town
Council shall appropriate from the town's general fund of the Treasury, the
amount bid for the purpose, and shall order the Treasurer to place the amount
bid for the purpose, and shall order the Treasurer to place the amount in a
Special Fund for the improvement. The Mayor and Town Council may direct the
Treasurer to pay into the Special Fund only the sum required to pay the
installment then due or to become due upon the bonds issued for the
assessment, and thereupon the town shall become obligated to pay from the
general fund the succeeding installments and interest on the bonds, as are
payable by the assessments of the lot. Thereafter the lien of the assessment
shall not be extinguished for nonpayment of general taxes or prior special
assessments, and the annual installments of principal and interest of the
assessments, shall constitute a first lien on the respective lot, piece or
parcel of land, co-equal with the lien for general taxes.



      (5)   The town may sell any lot purchases pursuant to division
(B)(4) above, after the expiration of the time for redemption at private or
public sales pursuant to A.R.S. § 48-605. All sums received by the town from
redemption of property purchased by it, and from the sale by it of property
so purchased, less the amount theretofore paid into the Special Fund from the
general fund, shall be paid into the Special Fund for the payment of the
bonds until the Special Fund is sufficient to pay all outstanding bonds. If
by ordinance of the code of the town, installments of principal and interest
may be paid by partial payments prior to the time each of the installments
become due, and the owner of the property against which the installments
becomes due and the owner of the property against which the installment of
principal and interest has become delinquent has paid to the Superintendent,
partial payments on the installments, the owner of the property advertised
for sale shall have the right to pay the balance due on the annual
installments of principal and interest plus penalties and costs, and no sale
shall be held on the parcel of land.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-56)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



Cross-reference:



   For similar sections, see Ch. 51




SERVICE CONNECTIONS




§ 50.070  CONNECTION TO WATER MAINS REQUIRED.



   Where property is located upon a street in which a water main is laid,
the property shall be connected with the water system. These services shall
extend at right angles from the main to the curblines and shall be installed
in accordance with the town's standard detail. The number, location, manner
of construction and size of all service connections shall be subject to the
approval of the Director.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-58)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.071  BUILDING TO HAVE SEPARATE SERVICE CONNECTIONS; EXCEPTIONS.



   Every separate building supplied with town water must have its own
separate service connection with the town mains, except two or more buildings
located on the same lot, or property that is known as a court, apartment
house, trailer court or other similar developments covering more than one lot
may be, upon written permission granted by the Director, supplied through a
single metered connection with the town main as long as single ownership
continues. Upon change from the single ownership, a new and separate
connection shall be immediately made for the building or premises having the
indirect connection.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-59)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.072  UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTION WITH WATER MAINS.



   No person shall connect any pipe, tube or other instrument with any
main service pipe, conduit or flume for conducting water belonging to the
town, for the purpose of taking water from such without a permit from the
proper authorities of the town. Violators shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-60)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)
Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.073  APPLICATION FOR SERVICE GENERALLY; INFORMATION REQUIRED.



   (A)   Each person making application for a service connection shall
present a valid plumbing permit issued by the town building official, or his
or her authorized representative, to the Water and Wastewater Division as a
prerequisite for the approval of the requested service connection.



   (B)   The applicant shall state the following in his or her
application:



      (1)   His or her name, a description of the lot, block and
addition;



      (2)   The desired location where the town main is to be tapped
and the desired size of the tap to be made;



      (3)   The official house number assigned to the premises as
shown by the records in the office of the Water and Wastewater Division; and



      (4)   The purpose for which the water is to be used.



   (C)   The Department, as a condition to granting the application and
furnishing water to the premises, is authorized to and shall require payment
for this installation of service connections and/or meters.



   (D)   Before the Town of Florence will supply any water service, the
person desiring the same must make application in person or by first class
mail to the Town of Florence specifying the place or location where service
is desired, and agree to comply with all the terms, rules and regulations of
the Town of Florence covering the service and agree to pay for the same in
accordance with the rates of the Town of Florence applicable to the class of
service desired.



   (E)   The Town of Florence may reject any application for service
when, and so long as, the applicant is delinquent in the payment of bills
incurred for service previously supplied by the town at any location.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-61)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



Cross-reference:



   For similar sections, see §§ 51.076 and 51.100



§ 50.074  SERVICE AND MATERIALS TO BE PROPERTY OF WATER AND WASTEWATER
DIVISION; CONSUMER TO PAY FOR DAMAGES.



   (A)   All service and water meters and all materials supplied by the
Water and Wastewater Division in the installation or repair of any meter, and
all materials supplied in the installation of any service connection with the
town mains shall remain at all times the property of the Water and Wastewater
Division, and shall be maintained, repaired and renewed by the Water and
Wastewater Divisions when rendered unserviceable through normal use.



   (B)   Where replacements, repair to pipes, meters or other materials
are rendered necessary by the act, negligence or carelessness of the consumer
or any member of his or her family or person in his or her employ, any
expenses cause to the Water and Wastewater Divisions for the repair, shall be
charged against and collected from the consumer.



   (C)   The Water and Wastewater Division may refuse to furnish water
through the service until the account is paid in full.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-62)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.075  SERVICE CONNECTION ON EXISTING MAINS.



   Where all or part of a new subdivision is served by an existing town
water main, only authorized personnel of the town Water and Wastewater
Division shall make taps for service connections.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-63)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.076  DEVELOPERS TO INSTALL SERVICE CONNECTIONS ON NEW MAINS IN NEW
SUBDIVISIONS.



   In all new subdivisions or other developments where there are no
existing town water mains, developers are required to have their contractors
install all three-fourths-inch and/or one-inch service connections
simultaneously with the installation of the subdivision's water mains.
Services one and one-half inches and/or two inches in size may also be
installed by the developer's contractor if so approved by the Public Works
Director. Services larger than two inches shall be installed by town forces.
The concrete vaults required for services three inches and larger in size
shall be constructed by the developer or his or her contractor in accordance
with applicable Town of Florence standards specifications and details. In all
new subdivisions or other developments where the developer's contractors
install the service connections, application must be made to the town Water
and Wastewater Division as otherwise provided in this code, for installation
of water meters.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-64)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.077  CONNECTION OF EXISTING SERVICE TO NEW MAIN.



   Where a new main has been laid in any street, the owners of premises on
the street who are being supplied through temporary services, and have paid
the regular service installation charge, shall be connected to the new main
by the Water and Wastewater Division without further charge.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-65)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.078  CHANGES TO EXISTING SERVICE TO CONNECTION.



   When new buildings are to be erected on the site of old ones and it is
desired to increase the size of or to change the location of the old service
connection or where a service connection to any premises is abandoned or no
longer used, the Department may immediately reclaim and disconnect the
connection at the main, after which, should a service connection be required
to the premises, a new service shall be placed only upon the owner making
application and paying for a new service in the regular manner.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-66)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



Cross-reference:



   For similar sections, see Ch. 51



§ 50.079  SERVICE PIPES; LOCATION.



   (A)   Permits for connections will not be granted, or may be
revoked, when the service pipe passes over or through premises which at the
time are, or may become, the property of persons other than the owner of the
premises to be supplied from the connections.



   (B)   No water service pipe will be permitted to be laid in a sewer
trench or within six feet of the trench.



   (C)   Each consumer shall grant, covey or shall cause to be granted
or conveyed to the Town of Florence a permanent license, easement or
right-of-way across any property owned or controlled by the consumer wherever
the license, easement or right-of-way is necessary to enable the Town of
Florence to furnish water to the consumer.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-67)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



Cross-reference:



   For similar sections, see Ch. 51



§ 50.080  SERVICE PIPES; EXCAVATIONS UNDER SIDEWALK, INSTALLATION.



   (A)   Where basement areas have been excavated beneath sidewalks,
water service pipes shall be laid by the town only to the inside of the area
wall and the owner shall be required to construct, from plans approved by the
Director, a suitable meter pit and sidewalk opening with cover in order to
locate the meter abutting the sidewalk side of the curbline in regular
position.



   (B)   The installation of water service pipes extending from the
main to the meter abutting the sidewalk side of the curbline, together with
necessary labor and materials for the construction, shall be made by the
Water and Wastewater Division.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-68)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.081  SPECIAL CONNECTIONS FOR FIRE PREVENTION SERVICES; INSTALLATION
AND FEES; USE.



   (A)   Any person desiring to install a separate fire prevention
service line, building standpipe and hose or sprinkler system, where the
service line or systems will not be connected to or supplied water through a
regular water service meter, shall file an application with the Public Works
Department for a fire line tap and standby fire prevention service. The
special fire prevention systems shall be installed in accordance with Public
Works Department requirements, and review fees shall be paid as set forth in
the Town Code.



   (B)   Where, in the opinion of the Public Works Director, a
potential cross connection of back pressure can occur, a double check valve
backflow prevention assembly shall be installed on the first prevention
service line ahead of the first point of water use.



   (C)   Whenever a detector check valve and bypass meter is required,
all materials and equipment shall be furnished and installed by the
applicant. The bypass meter shall be tested and sealed by the Water and
Wastewater Division prior to its installation. The detector check valve and
meter shall be enclosed in a vault acceptable to the Director. Should the
detector meter on a fire prevention service line show consumption without a
fire having occurred and without prior notice to the Public Works Director, a
charge for water used and other costs as established by the Director, subject
to the approval of the Town Manager, will be invoked during the month when
illegal consumption is indicated, and the fire line service shall be cut off
unless the charge is paid, except in matters of an emergency nature.



   (D)   Every outlet valve on a non-metered sprinkler system shall be
sealed. Seals may be removed for authorized purposes only, such as testing of
the system. The owner or tenant may test the fire prevention apparatus at any
time by notifying the Water and Wastewater Division that such a test is
desired. A mutually agreeable time shall be set for the test to be made. All
outlet valves shall be sealed immediately after completion of any test on a
non-metered system. A charge shall be established and imposed in case any
sealed valve is opened without prior notification of the Water and Wastewater
Division and the water shall be turned off and remain off until the charge is
paid. In addition, a detector check valve and bypass meter may be installed
by the Water and Wastewater Division at the cost thereof charged to the owner.



   (E)   In no case shall any tap be made upon any pipe or tank used
for fire purposes, nor shall the use of any water be permitted through any
fire service, nor through any pipes, tanks or fixtures for any purpose other
than the extinguishing of fire on the premises.



   (F)   The premises upon which any the fire protection service is
installed shall be open to the inspection of any authorized representative of
the Public Works Department at all times, and the owner or tenant shall give
the representative all reasonable facilities for making the inspection and
any information he or she may require.



   (G)   An inside town and outside town charge shall be established
for standby fire prevention service provided by the town.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-69)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.082  SERVICE CONNECTION FEES.



   The fee to be charged and collected in advance by the Water and Sewer
Department for laying and constructing service connections from three-fourths
inches to six inches in diameter shall be the current fee for the work as
publicized and established by the Director, subject to approval of the Town
Manager.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-70)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)




METERS




§ 50.100  SERVICES TO BE METERED.



   Whenever a service shall be installed, connecting any property or water
using equipment with the water supply system of the town, the water will be
supplied to the property or equipment through meter only, except as provided
in § 50.081 for sprinkler type fire prevention systems.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-72)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.101  LOCATION OF METERS.



   All meters of the Public Works Department shall be located on the
sidewalk side of the curbline in accordance with standard construction
details as approved by the Director. The Town of Florence will install its
meter at the property line; or at the Town of Florence's option, on the
consumer's property in a location mutually agreed upon by both the Town of
Florence and the consumer.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-73)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.102  RESETTING OF METERS INSIDE BUILDINGS.



   If required, where meters have been set inside of buildings, the meters
shall be reset abutting the sidewalk side of the curbline. All work and
expense involved between the main and new meter location, in resetting a
meter shall be borne by the Public Works Department. The customer shall relay
his or her service pipes to conform to the new meter setting at his or her
own expense.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-74)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.103  COST OF CHANGING SIZE OF METER OR SERVICE.



   In case a larger or smaller meter or service is applied for other than
one already in service, the applicant shall pay for the installation of the
new service in accordance with the schedule of charges as established by the
Director, subject to the approval of the Town Manager. The original tap shall
be killed.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-75)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.104  REMOVAL OF METERS.



   Meters when installed on any property, shall only be removed by an
authorized employee of the Water and Wastewater Division upon order of the
Director. For the violation of this provision, the water shall be turned off
and a charge equal to the costs incurred by the town for restoring the meter
to its authorized and designated location must be paid before the water is
again turned on.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-76)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.105  REPLACEMENT OF METERS.



   The Water and Wastewater Division shall replace any meter at the time
as it may see fit and shall be the judge of the size and type of any water
meter installed. In the event there is an excessive rate of flow through an
installed meters the town may require the owner, at his or her expense, to
install a meter of adequate size.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-77)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.106  MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR; CONSUMER TO PAY FOR DAMAGES.



   The Water and Wastewater Division shall maintain and repair all meters
when rendered unserviceable through normal use and shall renew them if
necessary. Where replacements, repairs or adjustment of any meter are
tendered necessary by the act, neglect or carelessness of the owner or
occupant of any premises, and this shall include all damage to meters due to
hot water, breaking meter seals, tampering with working parts of meter and
the like, any expense caused to the Water and Wastewater Division thereby
shall be charged against and collected from the owner of the premises, or
person supplied. The Department may refuse to furnish water through the
service until all charges are paid in full.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-78)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.107  TESTING METER ACCURACY.



   (A)   When any consumer makes a complaint that the bill for any past
time has been excessive, the Water and Wastewater Division will, upon written
request, have the meter reread and the service inspected for leaks.



   (B)   Any consumer may have the accuracy of the meter, through which
water is being furnished to his or her premises, examined and tested by the
Water and Wastewater Division by making a request therefore, and payment of
the established fee for the work. Upon receipt of the request, the Water and
Wastewater Division will examine and test the meter, and if found to register
more than 2% in excess of the actual quantity of water passing through it,
the meter shall be removed and another meter installed in lieu thereof, the
consumer's water bill for the current period adjusted in the manner as the
Director may deem fair and just, and no fee will be charged to the consumer
for testing the meter otherwise the test fee shall be paid to and retained
by, and be a part of the funds and revenue of the Water and Wastewater
Division. The consumer shall have the privilege, if he or she requests, to be
present when the test is made and to verify the accuracy of the test.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-79)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)




DEPOSITS, RATES, BILLING PROCEDURES AND MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES




§ 50.120  GUARANTEE AND SERVICE DEPOSITS.



   There shall be charged the following standard schedule of financial
responsibility deposits for all town water services:



   (A)   A deposit not in excess of two months minimum charge may be
required of a consumer, provided that the town may require the consumer to
increase the deposit to twice the amount of any monthly bill rendered
thereafter. The individual in whose name the deposit is made shall be
responsible for payment of all bills incurred in connection with the service
furnished.



   (B)   A separate deposit may be required for each meter installed.
The guarantee deposit receipt is not negotiable and can be redeemed only at
the municipality offices. When services are discontinued and all bills paid,
the deposit will be refunded.



   (C)   Where the town finds that the request for a guarantee deposit
refund is questionable, the town may require the applicant for a refund to
produce the deposit receipt properly endorsed. Upon discontinuance of service
for nonpayment of the bill, the deposit will be applied by the town toward
settlement of the account.



   (D)   Customers requesting initial service connections will be
charged a refundable deposit for residential service or services that do not
exceed an average usage of metered water in excess of 7,000 cubic feet, or
52,360 gallons of water in any one calendar year, and commercial or
industrial type services using 7,000 or over 52,360 gallons of water in any
one calendar year, of twice the average monthly bill.  See Town of Florence
Schedule of Fees.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-80)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004;
Ord. 559-11, passed 6-6-2011)



Cross-reference:



   For similar sections, see §§ 51.101 and 51.102



§ 50.121  RETURN OF DEPOSITS.



   (A)   All risk deposits shall be non-interest bearing and will be
retained by the Water and Wastewater Division. Customers who maintain a good
payment record, that is, not more than one delinquent bill and/or no returned
checks, will have the risk deposit refunded after one year.



   (B)   If an account is closed at the customer's request, the deposit
will be refunded.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-81)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



Cross-reference:



   For similar sections, see §§ 51.101 and 51.102



§ 50.122  METHOD OF DEVELOPING A WATER QUANTITY CHARGE.



   (A)   The water quantity charge shall be developed by the following
methodology: the monthly water quality charge per cubic feet and/or gallons
is added to the monthly meter charges and shall be calculated in two separate
rates which will be added together for a combined rate.



   (B)   For metered service location located outside the municipality,
the monthly water charge per cubic feet and/or gallons which is added to the
monthly service charge shall be calculated by taking into consideration the
above methodology.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-82)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.123  MONTHLY WATER RATES.



   Please see Town of Florence Schedule of Fees (Fee Schedule may be
viewed online at www.town.florence.az.us).



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-83)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004;
Ord. 385-05, passed 6-20-2005; Ord. 453-07, passed 1-16-2007; Ord. 510-09,
passed 7-6-2009; Ord. 559-11, passed 6-6-2011; Ord. 595-13, passed 5-20-2013)



§ 50.124  METER CHARGES.



   Please see Town of Florence Schedule of Fees (Fee Schedule may be
viewed online at www.town.florence.az.us).



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-84)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004;
Ord. 385-04, passed 6-20-2005; Ord. 453-07, passed 1-16-2007; Ord. 510-09,
passed 7-6-2009; Ord. 559-11, passed 6-6-2011)



§ 50.125  EFFLUENT CHARGES.



   Please see Town of Florence Schedule of Fees (Fee Schedule may be
viewed online at www.town.florence.az.us).



(Ord. 453-07, passed 1-16-2007; Ord. 559-11, passed 6-6-2011)



§ 50.126  TOWN GOVERNMENT; CHARGES.



   The Water and Wastewater Division shall be paid for water furnished to
other town departments for town purposes from funds budgeted for that purpose
at the rate set forth in § 50.123. All town services shall be metered. The
meters and services shall be maintained by the Water and Wastewater Division.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-86)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



Cross-reference:



   For similar sections, see Ch. 51



§ 50.127  CHARGES TO SERVICE APPLICANT OR CUSTOMER.



   All rates for water supplied to property connected with the town mains
shall be charged to the service applicant or customer to whom the water was
so supplied. All charges for meters supplied, installed or repaired by the
Water and Wastewater Division, all charges on account of labor furnished or
materials supplied in the installation of any service connection with the
town mains, or for tapping the town mains, all charges for turning water on
or off and all fines and penalties assessed or imposed in the provisions of
this chapter or the rules of the Water and Wastewater Division shall be
charged to the service applicant or customer for which the service was
rendered or the fine or penalty imposed.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-87)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



Cross-reference:



   For similar sections, see Ch. 51



§ 50.128  DRINKING FOUNTAINS, TOILETS AND OTHER FIXTURES.



   Whenever any watering troughs, drinking fountains, toilets, urinals or
other fixtures are placed for the benefit of the public by private parties,
the fixtures shall be supplied through meter only and water shall be charged
for at regular meter rates.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-88)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



Cross-reference:



   For similar sections, see Ch. 51



§ 50.129  CHARGES WHEN METER FAILS TO REGISTER CORRECTLY OR UNABLE TO BE
READ.



   (A)   If the meter fails to register correctly, the charge to the
consumer shall be estimated. The Director has the authority to develop an
estimating procedure in accordance with the best available historical
consumption data. The estimation shall be kept on file in the Water and
Wastewater Division's office.



   (B)   Meter readings may be estimated whenever construction
conditions, obstruction, inclement weather or emergency situations prevent
completion of the regular meter reading cycle.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-89)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.130  CHARGES FOR USE OF MORE THAN ONE METER.



   Where premises are supplied through more than one meter, the minimum
charge, and charge for water used, shall be computed separately for each
individual meter.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-90)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.131  FIRE HYDRANT METER; DEPOSIT, CHARGES, MONTHLY SERVICE CHARGE AND
WATER RATES; FIRE FLOW TESTS.



   (A)   When a customer makes application for a fire hydrant meter, he
or she shall post a deposit and be subject to fees in accordance with the
Town of Florence Schedule of Fees.



   (B)   This deposit is subject to the charges listed in the Town of
Florence Schedule of Fees plus the following:



      (1)   The customer will be charged for the cost of repairing
the hydrant meter or connection, if damaged.



      (2)   The customer is responsible for meter and connections
while permit is in force. In the event the meter is not returned, the
customer will be charged $1,000 replacement cost.



      (3)   The customer is required to post an additional deposit
when the charges exceed the amount of the deposit.



      (4)   If the total charges are less than the original deposit,
the balance remaining will be refunded.



      (5)   Monthly service charged and water consumption rates
(plus applicable taxes) will be charged in accordance with the Town of
Florence Schedule of Fees.



   (C)   A fee shall be charged to the contractor for a fire flow test
in accordance with the Town of Florence Schedule of Fees.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-91)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.132  UNAPPROVED WATER USE AND/OR REMOVAL OF SEALS FROM FIRE PREVENTION
SYSTEM.



   (A)   Should the flow detector meter on a fire prevention service
line show consumption without a fire having occurred and without prior notice
to the Public Works Director, a per occurrence charge will be assessed (see
Town of Florence Schedule of Fees).



   (B)   Should any sealed valve on a sprinkler type fire prevention
system be opened without prior notification and approval of the Public Works
Director, a per occurrence charge will be assessed (see Town of Florence
Schedule of Fees).



   (C)   For providing of standby fire prevention service, a monthly
charge based on per inch diameter of service pipe shall be made (see Town of
Florence Schedule of Fees).



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-92)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.133  CHARGES FOR SERVICE LINES AND METER INSTALLATIONS.



   Please see Town of Florence Schedule of Fees (Fee Schedule may be
viewed online at www.town.florence.az.us).



   (A)   Water service connection charges.



      A street shall be considered paved and subject to paving repairs
if described and defined as such in the Public Work's Department policy,
except that where it is determined by the Water and Wastewater Division that
no paving will be disturbed in making the connection, the fee shall be
indicated “without paving repairs”.



   (B)   Separate tap and meter installations.



      (1)   Inside the town.  Tap only (included corp. stop,
service lines, curb stop, meter box and lid). Please see Town of Florence
Schedule of Fees (Fee Schedule may be viewed online at
www.town.florence.az.us).



      (2)   Meter only; inside or outside the town.  Please see
Town of Florence Schedule of Fees (Fee Schedule may be viewed online at
www.town.florence.az.us).



         (a)   Connection for meters from three inches through
six inches are furnished by the property owner and shall be compound meters
unless specified as (other) by the town.



         (b)   All charges for service lines and meter
installations for services outside the municipality shall be at a rate of
150% (one and one-half times) the rates established inside the town rates.



         (c)   All presently established services to be moved due
to customer request will be charged based on the cost of material plus labor
and equipment costs.



         (d)   All three-fourths-inch and one-inch service
installation charges shall be collected at the time the customer makes
application for new service.



         (e)   A deposit shall be collected at the time the
customer makes application for all two-inch and larger service installations
meters. The deposit will be deducted from the final billing for the service
installation (see Town of Florence Schedule of Fees).



         (f)   Connection for meters from three inches through
six inches are furnished by the property owner and shall be compound meters
unless specified as “other” by the town.



         (g)   All charges for service lines and meter
installations for service outside the municipality shall be at a rate of 150%
(one and one-half times) the rates established for inside the town rates.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-94)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004;
Ord. 385-05, passed 6-20-2005)



§ 50.134  TAPS FOR WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS.



   Charges included in the Town of Florence Fee Schedule are for the
actual tapping operation only and do not include materials. The contractor
must furnish and install the saddle and tapping sleeve and valve and make the
excavation sufficient size to allow town field crews enough room to perform
necessary work.  Please see Town of Florence Schedule of Fees (Fee Schedule
may be viewed online at www.town.florence.az.us).



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-95)  (Ord. 385-05, passed 6-20-2005)



§ 50.135  WATER MAIN SHUTDOWN; CHARGES.



   (A)   Approval of the Public Works Director is required prior to the
shutdown of a town water main. Any contractor desiring the shutdown of a town
water main shall make application to the Water and Wastewater Division and
pay the established charges. It shall be the responsibility of the contractor
to notify the public where a shutdown will cause any town water customer to
be without water.



   (B)   Charges for the shutdown of a town water main.  Please see
Town of Florence Schedule of Fees (Fee Schedule may be viewed online at
www.town.florence.az.us).



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-96)  (Ord. 385-05, passed 6-20-2005)



§ 50.136  IRRIGATION METER.



   Please see Town of Florence Schedule of Fees (Fee Schedule may be
viewed online at www.town.florence.az.us ).   All others shall be the cost
of labor and materials for installation.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-97)  (Ord. 385-05, passed 6-20-2005)



§ 50.137  DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.



   The municipality may discontinue its service without notice for the
following additional reasons:



   (A)   To prevent fraud or abuse;



   (B)   The consumer's willful disregard of or refusal to comply with
these rules or the special rules as may be adopted by the town;



   (C)   Emergency repairs;



   (D)   Insufficiency of supply due to circumstances beyond the town's
control;



   (E)   Legal processes;



   (F)   Direction of public authorities;



   (G)   Strike, riot, fire, flood, accident or any unavoidable cause;



   (H)   Unauthorized turn-ons; and



   (I)   The town may suspend the service of, or refuse service to any
consumer who tampers with a meter or other measuring device.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-100)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.138  ACTIVATION OR REACTIVATION OF WATER SERVICE.



   (A)   Service applications are required of all customers requesting
activation or reactivation of water service.



   (B)   Application information must be submitted for each service
address.



   (C)   An application must also be submitted when requesting the
transfer of service from one customer to another.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-101)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



Cross-reference:



   For similar sections, see Ch. 51



§ 50.139  CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   Not less than three work-days' notice must be given in person
or in writing at the town's office to start and/or discontinue service or to
change occupancy.



   (B)   The outgoing party shall be responsible for all water consumed
up to the time of departure or the time specified for departure, whichever
period is longer.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-101.1)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



Cross-reference:



   For similar sections, see Ch. 51



§ 50.140  CONTINUITY OF SERVICE.



   The municipality shall not be responsible in damages or otherwise for
any failure to supply water, or for interruption of supply, if the failure or
interruption is without willful default or neglect on its part.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-101.2)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.141  MINIMUM CHARGE AND MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES.



   (A)   The initial or minimum charge, as provided in the rate
schedule, shall be made for each meter installed, regardless of location.
Each meter installed shall require a separate meter reading sheet and each
meter reading sheet shall cover a separate and individual account.



   (B)   For service to trailer courts, campgrounds, auto courts or
multiple unit dwellings, the minimum monthly charge shall be the regular
monthly charge for the meter size used. Excess water will be billed at the
municipality's authorized rates.



   (C)   If the consumer takes exception to this method of established
minimum charges, the consumer may request that a meter be installed for each
residential unit, upon paying to the municipality the regular guarantee
deposit for each meter to be installed.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-102)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.142  SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT CHARGE.



   A non-refundable service establishment charge will be assessed each
time the town is requested to establish water service to the customer's
delivery point. A standard charge will be assessed during regular business
hours (Monday through Friday 7:00 a.m. through 2:30 p.m.), and an after hour
charged assessed for any time after regular hours, weekends or holidays.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-102.1)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004;
Ord. 385-05, passed 6-20-2005; Ord. 559-11, passed 6-6-2011)



§ 50.143  SERVICE REESTABLISHMENT CHARGE.



   (A)   If service is to be reestablished at the same service location
for a customer who has there ordered a service disconnection within the
preceding 12-month period, or for any member of the customer's household, a
base service charge times number of months disconnected will be required as a
precondition to the establishment of the service. Payment for the charge
shall be made at the time of application for reestablishment of service.



   (B)   If a customer is on the disconnect list the day of
disconnection, there will be a charge to stop disconnect of service. All
balances on the utility account must be paid regardless of the due date, and
a deposit will be required as in § 50.120.



   (C)   If service is to be reestablished after being disconnected for
non-payment, before 2:30 p.m. during regular work hours, the customer must
clear all balances due regardless of due date, pay the reconnect charge, and
make a deposit as set forth in § 50.120.



   (D)   If service is to be reestablished after being disconnected for
non-payment, after 2:30 p.m. that is after regular work hours, the customer
must clear all balances due regardless of due date, pay the reconnect charge,
and make a deposit as set forth in § 50.120.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-102.2)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004;
Ord. 559-11, passed 6-6-2011; Am. Ord. 567-11, passed 12-15-2011)



§ 50.144  SERVICE RELOCATION CHARGE.



   All presently established services to be moved, due to customer
request, will be charged based on the cost of the material plus labor and
equipment costs.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-102.3)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.145  METER READING, BILLING AND COLLECTING.



   (A)   Meters will be read and bills rendered monthly, and there
shall not be a variance of more than five days in reading a particular meter
and rendering a bill thereon in the subsequent month.



   (B)   Bills for water will be computed in accord with the company's
authorized rate schedule and will be based on the amount of water consumed
for the period covered by the meter readings, except that where a consumer
orders a turn-on resulting in a period of availability of service of less
than 16 days. This consumption will be carried over to the next month's
billing.



   (C)   Charge for service commences when the meter is installed and
connection made, whether used or not.



   (D)   Bills are due when rendered and delinquent on the last of the
month following billing. Delinquent notices with a ten day cut-off notice
with a re-connection charge will be sent to each delinquent account. If the
account is not paid at the end of the ten-day period, the service may be
discontinued. Service discontinued for delinquency of bills are restored only
after all due bills are paid in full, redeposit made, if required, and a
service charge paid for each service established (see Town of Florence
Schedule of Fees).



   (E)   Failure to receive bills or notices shall not prevent the
bills from becoming delinquent nor relieve the consumer of his or her
obligations therein.



   (F)   If the consumer believes his or her bill to be in error, he or
she shall present his or her claim at the company's office before the bill
becomes delinquent.



   (G)   The company will make special meter readings at the request of
the consumer for a fee; provided; however, that if the special reading
discloses that the meter was over read, no charge will be made (see Town of
Florence Schedule of Fees).



   (H)   Meters will be tested at the request of the consumer upon
payment of a testing fee provided, however, that if the meter is found to
over-register beyond 3% of the correct volume, no charge will be made (see
Town of Florence Schedule of Fees).



   (I)   If the seal of the meter is broken by other than the company's
representative, the consumer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of
his or her previous bills or from other proper data.



   (J)   If the meter fails to register or stops for any cause of which
the consumer is not responsible, the first month's bill may be estimated by
the company, but thereafter the consumer shall be billed the regular monthly
minimum until the meter is repaired or replaced.



   (K)   When an apparent or hidden leak has been determined or
discovered in the customer water installation, and the customer has the leak
repaired within ten days after being notified or having discovered the leak
or if the customer does not own the premises to which the water service is
furnished, if the customer certified in writing to the town that he or she
notified the owner of the premises of the leak within ten days after being
notified or having discovered the leak and adjustment of the customer's water
and sewer charge may be made upon recommendation of the Director of Public
Works. The water bill adjustment shall be for a period not exceeding 60 days
prior to repair of the leak or, in the case of a customer who does not own
the premises, 60 days prior to the notification of the leak, by the customer
to the owner, and the charge for water service for the 60 day period may be
adjusted downward in the amount of one-half the normal charge for the water
service as to the owner of the premises. No adjustment shall be made to the
charge for water service to any customer more often than once every two years
for any one location. Sewer charge shall be made at the normal or average
water usage for the period being adjusted.



   (L)   The Water Division shall maintain all service lines from the
main to, and including the first valve or meter yoke, but not the house side
connection thereto. In the case where no valve is located in the service line
and the meter is located on the private property of the owner, it shall be
the responsibility of the owner to maintain the service line from the main to
the building being served. On branch service piping, the first valve is the
tapping valve or gate valve fitting to the tee. Apparent leaks in the
customer's water installation, whether registered on the water meter or not,
shall be repaired by the customer within ten days of receipt of written
notice by the Water Division. If repairs are not made, the town shall issue a
written notice of an intended disconnect and five days thereafter may
discontinue water service until the leak is repaired. If, in the judgment of
town personnel, the leak endangers public safety, constitutes a serious
nuisance or wastes substantial amounts of water, water service may be
discontinued without prior notice to the customer. Hidden leaks in the
customer's water installation shall be repaired, after discovery under the
same provisions as apparent leaks.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-103)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004;
Ord. 385-05, passed 6-20-2005)



Cross-reference:



   For similar sections, see Ch. 51



§ 50.146  ACCOUNTS GENERALLY; NOTICES’ HOUSE NUMBERS TO BE CORRECT.



   All water accounts shall be carried on the books of the Water and
Wastewater Division by the house and street number. All notices sent out by
the town regarding water accounts and all notices regarding any other matter
pertaining to the town water supply to any property, shall be sent to billing
address as stated upon the application for service. Should the owner of the
property desire personal notice from the town, he or she should file an
application on a form to be furnished by the town's financial office. To
insure proper delivery of notices, all errors in house numbers should be
promptly reported to the Water and Wastewater Division. If numbers on houses
are not corrected by the owner after proper notice by the Department, the
Department can refuse service to the premises.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-104)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



Cross-reference:



   For similar sections, see Ch. 51



§ 50.147  UNPAID BILLS AT PREVIOUS LOCATION.



   As a term and condition of providing service, the Water and Wastewater
Division requires that outstanding amounts owed at a previous location served
by the Water and Wastewater Division for services, rendered and/or due to
labor supplied or materials furnished by the Water and Wastewater Division be
paid. If a service is activated with outstanding indebtedness to the town at
a previous location, the account will be considered delinquent and subject to
turnoff for nonpayment of services previously provided.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-106)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



Cross-reference:



   For similar sections, see Ch. 51



§ 50.148  WATER SERVICE TO TENANTS.



   Where a tenant pays his or her own water utilities amount not in rent,
the tenant is responsible for the payment of all town water services provided
for his or her use. The tenant must place the required deposit in accordance
with § 50.120. These accounts will require that the tenant submit an
application in accordance with § 50.138.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-107)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



Cross-reference:



   For similar sections, see Ch. 51



§ 50.149  UNREGISTERED OR UN-ASSESSED WATER.



   A service applicant or customer who has been furnished water by the
town, if such may not have been registered or assessed for water charges on
the books of the Water and Wastewater Division, shall be assessed the water
charges for the amount of water used.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-108)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



Cross-reference:



   For similar sections, see Ch. 51



§ 50.150  MISCELLANEOUS CHARGE FOR WATER.



   The rates to be charged and collected for all classes of service not
named in this chapter shall be at the meter rates established in this
chapter, as near as may be estimated from the amount of water consumed in
similar places, and the rates shall be estimated by the Public Works Director.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-109)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.151  DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE; ON ORDER OF CUSTOMER.



   (A)   All requests for turning off water must be made by the named
applicant on a service account or his or her authorized agent. When the water
is ordered turned off from any premises, a final meter reading will be
obtained and all charges for services supplied to the premises shall be
calculated and due on the date specified on the bill. The customer requesting
discontinuance of service must also furnish the Water and Wastewater Division
with a change of address.



   (B)   Until the notice and payments shall have been made, the
premises shall be deemed occupied by the customer and his or her liability
continued.



   (C)   In the event that the customer shall have made a deposit to
the Water and Wastewater Division, and the deposit is still being retained by
the division, the deposit amount will be applied to the balance owing on the
account. All credits will be refunded.



   (D)   When the former customer has been notified of the amount of
billing remaining due after deduction of customer's deposit, any accounts
remaining due may be assigned for collection purposes.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-110)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



Cross-reference:



   For similar sections, see Ch. 51



§ 50.152  RESUMPTION OF SERVICE.



   (A)   Full payment of all amount owed on an account must be made
prior to resuming service and may require payment of a deposit in accordance
with § 50.120.



   (B)   When the foregoing conditions are fulfilled, it shall be the
duty of the Division to cause the water to be turned on for the use of the
premises, unless there are extenuating circumstances such as broken or
leaking pipes or other causes which are, in the opinion of the Division,
sufficient reason to refuse to turn on the service.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-111)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



Cross-reference:



   For similar sections, see Ch. 51



DROUGHT MANAGEMENT RESPONSE PROCEDURE



§ 50.170  SCOPE.



   It is hereby established and following policies, rules, duties,
penalties and plans for the Town of Florence to be implemented during a
declared water shortage. The drought management response procedure shall
include the provisions of this chapter, rules and guidelines, adopted
pursuant to this chapter and the drought management plan.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-117)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.171  DECLARATION OF POLICY.



   It is hereby declared that, because of the conditions prevailing the
Town of Florence, the general welfare requires that the water resources
available to the town be put to the maximum beneficial use to the extent to
which they are capable, and that the waste or unreasonable use or
unreasonable method of use of water be prevented, and the conservation of the
water is to be extended with a view of the reasonable and beneficial use
thereof in the interests of the people of the town and for the public welfare.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-118)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.172  AUTHORIZATION.



   The Public Works Director, or his or her designated representative, is
hereby authorized and directed to implement the applicable provisions of this
chapter, determination in accordance with the standards provided herein that
the implementation is necessary to protect the public welfare and safety.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-119)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.173  APPLICATION.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all persons, customers
and property served by the Water and Wastewater Division wherever situated.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-120)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.174  WATER USE REDUCTION STAGES.



   (A)   No customer of the Town Water Service Division shall knowingly
make, cause, use or permit the use of water from the town for residential,
commercial, industrial, agricultural, government or any other purpose in a
manner contrary to any provisions of this chapter, or in an amount in excess
of that use permitted by the drought management plan, or emergency response
plan, as appropriate, in effect pursuant to action taken by the Public Works
Director, or his or her designee representative according to the provision of
this chapter.



   (B)   The Public Works Director shall promulgate guidelines which
shall set forth the criteria for determining when and where particular
regulations within a water use reduction stage are to be implemented and
terminated.



   (C)   The guidelines shall be updated when, in the opinion of the
Director, the conditions of the utility system have changed so as to
necessitate the update. In addition, the guidelines shall be available for
inspection at the Town Clerk's office, and the Water Division administrative
office during normal business hours.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-121)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)
Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.175  STAGE 1; WATER ALERT.



   (A)   The Water Services Director is authorized to declare a Stage 1
water alert when an insufficient supply appears likely due to water system
limitations or structural failure, or when a catastrophic incident threatens
the existing water supply or water delivery system. The declaration may
designate the entire area served by the Town of Florence Water Division or a
portion of the service area affected, in the event the shortage is not
system-wide.



   (B)   Upon declaration by the Director of the Stage 1 water alert
and publication of the declaration, the Water Division shall implement the
latest drought management plan or emergency response plan on file in the Town
Clerk's office that has been approved by resolution and kept available for
public use and inspection. The water alert shall trigger an intensive public
education and information program to assist all customers impacted by the
shortage to understand the state of the emergency and the need for voluntary
compliance. Town of Florence personnel will direct their resources to
enforcement of all existing town codes which influence water use or misuse.



   (C)   The Director is authorized to terminate the Stage 1 water
alert when the Director determines that the condition upon which Stage 1
water alert was declared no longer exists.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-122)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.176  STAGE 2; WATER WARNING.



   (A)   The Public Works Director is authorized to declare a Stage 2
water warning when the water supplies are reduced, an insufficient supply
situation occurs due to water system limitation or structural failure, or a
catastrophic incident limits the existing water supply or water deliver
system. The declaration may designate the entire water service area served by
the Town of Florence, or a portion or portions of the service area as
affected, in the event the shortage is not system wide.



   (B)   Upon declaration by the Public Works Director of the Stage 2
water warning and publication of the declaration, elements of Stage 2 water
warning may become mandatory and be enforced. The elements may include, in
addition to any other remedy available in this chapter, any surcharge
authorized to be imposed by this chapter for the uses. If and when the Public
Works Director becomes aware of any violation of any use reduction regulation
pertaining to water use or misuses, the Public Works Director shall have the
authority to take actions, including mandatory measures up to and including
disconnection service, and other enforcement actions, as are required or
deemed necessary to assure compliance with the use reduction plan. A written
notice shall be placed on the property where the violation occurs, and to any
person known to the Department who is responsible for the violation or its
correction. The notice shall describe the violation and order that it be
corrected, caused, (ceased) or abated immediately or within the specified
time as the Department determines is reasonable under the circumstances. If
the order is not complied with, the Department may forthwith disconnect the
service where the violation occurs. If a service is disconnected, assessment
of a fee, to be determined by the Public Works Department, will be assessed
and collected before service is restored. The fee shall be in addition to
other fees or charges imposed by this chapter for disconnection or
re-connection of service.



   (C)   Upon a second violation of the same property, or by the
responsible party, disconnection may be ordered immediately, and the service
shall not be reconnected unless a device supplied by the Department which
will restrict the flow of water to the service is installed. Furthermore, a
fee for re-connection may be imposed in addition to other fees or charges
imposed by this chapter for disconnection and re-connection of service.



   (D)   The Public Works Director is authorized to terminate a Stage 2
water warning when water allotments, deliveries, storage or distribution
system conditions are determined to be sufficient to meet consumption demand
without mandatory use reduction compliance.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-123)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.177  STAGE 3; WATER EMERGENCY.



   (A)   The Public Works Director is authorized to declare a Stage 3
water emergency when additional reductions in deliveries will occur to level
such that Stage 2 water use reduction measures and inter-service area water
transfers, water withdrawals from town wells and feasible water supply
insufficiency due to system limitation or structural failure has occurred,
and Stage 2 water use reduction measures and supply augmentation measures are
either not possible or will not meet expected unrestricted demand. The
declaration may designate the entire water as served by the Town of Florence,
or a portion or portions of the service area as affected, in the event the
shortage is not system-wide.



   (B)   Upon implementation by the Public Works Director or designated
representative, mandatory water use reduction programs will be implemented
and the surcharge recalculated and applied to meet the increased regulation
and enforcement expenses.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-124)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.178  STAGE 4; WATER CRISIS.



   The Public Works Director is authorized to declare a Stage 4 water
crisis when the Director determines that, based on the severity of the
crisis, additional measures must be instituted as determined by the Public
Works Director to protect human health and safety. The Public Works Director
shall declare Stage 4 water crisis when Stage 3 emergency supply and use
reduction programs are insufficient to meet water demand. The declaration may
designate the entire water services area served by the Town of Florence, or a
portion or portions of the service area as affected, in the event the
shortage is not system-wide. In addition to any other remedy available in
this chapter, the Director is authorized to set water prices in the form of a
surcharge that shall be adjusted to reduce demand to match available supplies.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-125)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.179  WATER USE REDUCTION IMPLEMENTATION.



   During drought or other shortage conditions, the Public Works Director
shall monitor the projected supply and demand for water on a daily basis and
shall advise the Town Manager on the extent of the use reduction required
through the implementation and/or termination of particular use reduction
stages in order for the Department to prudently plan for and supply water.
Thereafter, the Public Works Director may order that the appropriate phase of
water use reduction be implemented or terminated in accordance with the
applicable provisions of this chapter. The order shall be made by public
announcement and shall be published a minimum of one time in a daily
newspaper of general circulation. Applicable restrictions herein outlined
shall take effect and be enforceable upon publication of the notice, except
that restrictions due to water treatment or delivery system failure, or
unforeseen sudden increases in demand for water, shall be enforceable
immediately following the filing of intent with the Office of the Town Clerk.
Restrictions shall remain in effect until the time as applicable restrictions
are removed.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-126)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



BACKFLOW PREVENTION



§ 50.195  DECLARATION OF POLICY; AUTHORIZATION.



   It is declared that danger to the public health, safety and welfare
resulting from contamination or pollution of the public potable water supply
system requires that measures be adopted to protect that system by
authorizing town officials to:



   (A)   Protect the public potable water supply from the possibility
of contamination or pollution by preventing the backflow of contaminantble
pollutants into the public potable water supply system;



   (B)   Promote the awareness and elimination of cross connections,
actual or potential of a customer's internal potable water system with the
public potable water supply system;



   (C)   Provide for a continuing program of backflow prevention
control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the public
potable water supply system;



   (D)   Provide for the monitoring and enforcement of a continuing
program of backflow prevention which will prevent the contamination or
pollution of the public potable water supply; and



   (E)   Comply with the state requirement contained in the Arizona
Administrative Code, Title 18, Chapter 4, Art. 1 (R18-4-115 entitled
“Backflow Prevention”) that was promulgated by the State Department of
Environmental Quality with an effective date of August 8, 1991, and is
incorporated herein by reference (hereinafter referred to as State Rule
R18-4-115). One copy shall be on file with the Town Clerk and the Public
Works Department.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-129)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.196  CROSS CONNECTIONS FROM OR TO SOURCE OF WATER SUPPLY OTHER THAN
THAT OF TOWN.



   It shall be unlawful for any customer to cause a connection to be made
or to allow one to exist for any purpose whatsoever between the town water
supply and any other source of water supply without the approval of the
Director.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-130)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)
Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.197  RESPONSIBILITY FOR BACKFLOW PREVENTION CONTROL.



   (A)   Public Works Director.  It shall be the responsibility of the
Director to protect the public water supply by applying the remedies and
enforcement provisions set forth in § 50.199.



   (B)   Public Works Department responsibilities.  It shall be the
responsibility of the Public Works Director to enforce certain provisions of
this chapter as follows:



      (1)   The Public Works Director shall administer and enforce
all applicable cross connection control provisions of the Town of Florence
designated plumbing code, including issuance of permits for all required
backflow prevention assemblies.



      (2)   The Public Works Director shall determine whether a
facility is a listed facility or activity in § 50.198 and therefore requires
backflow protection. This responsibility includes inspection as necessary of
all existing facilities connected to Town of Florence water services.



      (3)   The Public Works Director shall, as a condition of
issuance of any building permit, require installation of appropriate backflow
prevention as required by § 50.198 and the Town of Florence Plumbing Code.



      (4)   The Public Works Director shall determine the type and
location of all backflow prevention assemblies in accordance with this
chapter and all other codes and ordinances of the town.



      (5)   The Public Works Director shall keep adequate records of
each test of an approved backflow prevention assembly and any subsequent
maintenance or repair thereof.



   (C)   Customer responsibilities.  It shall be the responsibility of
the customer to prevent pollutants or contaminants from entering the
customer's building potable water system and the public potable water system.
The customer's responsibility starts at the point of service delivery from
the public potable water system and includes all water piping systems. The
customer is required to properly locate, install, test and maintain each
backflow prevention assembly in good working condition and shall provide the
necessary inspections to assure that the assembly is operating properly.
These responsibilities include, but are not limited to the following:



      (1)   The customer shall obtain a permit from the town
building official for the installation of any backflow prevention assembly or
for the modification of any plumbing system.



      (2)   The customer shall test all backflow prevention
assemblies at least once a year except that the Public Works Director may
require more frequent testing if warranted. As to fire lines or fire
sprinkler system with backflow prevention assemblies, the initial and annual
test shall be performed by a certified tester. The initial and annual test
shall include a full flow test. It is the responsibility of the customer to
test and submit all testing results to the Public Works Director. If the test
reveals the assembly to be defective or in unsatisfactory operating
condition, the customer shall perform to the satisfaction of the Public Works
Director all repairs or replacements so that the assembly is in satisfactory
operation condition.



      (3)   If the Director or customer becomes aware during the
interim period between annual tests that an assembly is defective or in
unsatisfactory operating condition, the customer shall perform to the
satisfaction of the Director, all repairs, replacement and any retesting so
that the customer has an assembly in satisfactory operating condition.



      (4)   Assembly testing shall be performed by a certified
tester. Testing requirements shall be in accordance with the procedures
outlined in the latest edition of the University of Southern California
Manual of Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research (U.S.C.-FCCCHR or
the Foundation). Los Angeles, California, December, 1993 (hereinafter
“USC-CCCHR Manual”), § 9. The USC-CCCHR Manual is incorporated herein by
reference. One copy of the USC-CCCHR Manual shall be on file with the Town
Clerk and the Public Works Department.



      (5)   The customer shall be responsible for submitting copies
of testing records pertaining to assemblies, on forms approved by the
Director, by the date specified by the Director. The customer shall be
required to retain all records for a minimum of three years from the date
that a copy was provided to the Director.



      (6)   Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed by the
customer, at the customer's expense, in compliance with the standards and
specifications adopted by the town.



      (7)   In the event the customer's or the public water system
is contaminated or polluted due to a cross connection or other cause, and the
same comes to the knowledge of the customer, the Public Works Director and
the County Health Authority shall be promptly notified by the customer so
that the appropriate measure may be taken to overcome the contamination.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-131)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.198  BACKFLOW PREVENTION METHODS.



   Unless otherwise specifically designated by the Director:



   (A)   Approved backflow prevention method.  An approved backflow
prevention method shall be one of the following types:



      (1)   Air gap.  An unobstructed vertical distance through the
free atmosphere between the opening of any pipe or faucet, supplying potable
water to a tank plumbing fixture or other device and the flood level rim of
the tank, plumbing fixture or other device. An approved air gap shall be at
least double the diameter of the supply pipe or faucet and in no case less
than one inch.



      (2)   Reduced pressure principle assemble (hereafter RP).  An
assembly containing two independently acting approved check valves together
with a hydraulically operating, mechanically independent pressure
differential relief valve located between the check valves and at the same
time below the first check valve. The assembly shall include properly located
test cocks equipped with properly located test cocks fitted with brass plugs
and tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valves located at each end of
the assembly.



      (3)   Pressure vacuum breaker assembly (hereafter PVB).  An
assembly containing an independently operating loaded check valve and an
independently operating, loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side
of the check valve. The assembly shall be equipped with properly located test
cocks fitted with brass plugs and tightly closing resilient seated shutoff
valves located at each end of the assembly.



      (4)   Double check valve assembly (hereafter DC).  An
assembly composed of two independently acting, approved check valves,
including tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valve at each end of the
assembly and fitted with properly located test cocks equipped with brass
plugs.



   (B)   Requirements for new services and existing services.  An
approved backflow prevention method is required for the activities or
facilities listed in this section that are connected to the public water
system. The backflow prevention method shall be in accordance with that
specified in § 7 of the USC-CCCHR Manual. The location shall be as close as
practicable to the point of service delivery except that the customer may
request that the approved backflow prevention method be located internally
within the activity or facility. The customer must demonstrate that the
proposed location will adequately protect the public water supply as well as
satisfy the applicable requirements of this chapter. For purposes of this
section, the listed facilities, equipment or conditions shall be as defined
in § 7 of the USC-CCCHR Manual, or if not listed in the USC-CCCHR Manual,
shall be defined in the Town of Florence Design Standards and Policies Manual.



      (1)   Industrial facilities.



         (a)   Beverage bottling plants (air gap, RP or DC);



         (b)   Breweries (air gap or RP);



         (c)   Canneries, packing houses, reduction plants and
food processing plants (air gap or RP);



         (d)   Dairies and cold storage plants (air gap, RP or
DC);



         (e)   Film laboratories (air gap or RP);



         (f)   Laundry and dye works (air gap or RP);



         (g)   Metal manufacturing, cleaning, processing and
fabricating plants (air gap, RP or DC);



         (h)   Oil and gas production, storage or transmission
properties (air gap or RP);



         (i)   Paper and paper products plants (air gap or RP);



         (j)   Plating plants (air gap or RP);



         (k)   Sand and gravel plants (air gap or RP);



         (l)   Semiconductor manufacturing facilities (air gap or
RP); and



         (m)   Sewage and storm drain facilities, reclaimed water
(air gap or RP).



      (2)   Medical facilities.



         (a)   Research laboratories (air gap or RP);



         (b)   Hospitals, medical buildings, sanitariums,
morgues, mortuaries, autopsy facilities, nursing and convalescent homes and
clinics (air gap or RP); and



         (c)   Veterinary hospital, animal research or animal
grooming shops (air gap or RP).



      (3)   Commercial and educational facilities.



         (a)   Any structure having a cross connection in
violation of the Town of Florence Plumbing Code or water operated sewage
pumping facilities, auxiliary water supplies or other like sources of
contamination which would create a potential hazard to the public water
system (air gap, RP or DC);



         (b)   Carwash facilities (air gap or RP);



         (c)   Multi-storied buildings having booster pumps or
above-ground storage tanks (air gap, RP or DC);



            1.   Multiple services; interconnected (air gap RP
or DC);



            2.   Exception: Existing facilities which are not
otherwise listed in this section.



         (d)   1.   Mobile home parks (RP or DC);



            2.   Exception: Existing mobile home parks unless
a specific hazard is identified.



         (e)   Recreation vehicle parks (RP or DC);



         (f)   Schools and colleges with laboratories (air gap or
RP); and



            1.   Retail shopping centers and strip mails;
retail and industrial shell buildings (when one service supplies more than
one tenant) (RP).



            2.   Exception: Existing retail shopping center
and strip malls retail and industrial shell buildings (when one service
supplies more than one tenant) unless a specific hazard is identified.



      (4)   Portable or temporary services or equipment.



         (a)   Construction sites or construction water services
(air gap or RP);



         (b)   Mobile equipment, utilizing public potable water
(i.e. water trucks, street sweepers, hydrovacs and the like) (air gap or RP);
and



         (c)   Portable insecticide and herbicide spray tanks
(air gap or RP).



      (5)   Miscellaneous activities and equipment.



         (a)   Auxiliary water systems  (Air gap or RP);



         (b)   Chemically contaminated water system  (Air gap or
RP);



         (c)   Fire systems.



            1.   Class 1 or 2.  No backflow prevention
assembly required. Check valve assemblies required by the Town of Florence
Fire Chief shall be inspected, tested and maintained at least annually to
verify the valves are properly installed and functioning. Annual flow and
valve confidence tests shall be performed by a certified tester to test and
maintain fire lines or fire sprinkler systems. Test results, on forms
approved by the town, shall be provided to the Director and the town Fire
Chief within 30 days following the inspection. Any fire sprinkler system
which fails shall be repaired as required by the Fire Code.



            2.   Class 3, 4, 5 or 6 (RP).



         (d)   Industrial fluid systems. Any industrial fluid
system interconnected with the public water supply and containing any fluid
or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated
or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health
system, pollution or plumbing hazard into an approved water supply (RP or DC).



         (e)   Irrigation systems.



            1.   System using a chemical injection system (RP);



            2.   System having elevated areas which are higher
than six inches below the PVB or multiple services (RP); and



            3.   System not subject to back pressure (PVB).



         (f)   Restricted, classified or other closed facilities,
including civil works. (Air gap or RP).



            1.   Solar heating systems; direct and auxiliary.
(RP).



            2.   Exception: Once through solar heating systems.



      (6)   The Public Works Director shall determine on a
case-by-case basis backflow prevention requirements for any facility or
activity not listed in this section in order to prevent contamination or
pollution of the public potable water system.



      (7)   All assemblies shall be accessible for testing and
maintenance. A reduced pressure principle assembly or double check valve
assembly shall not be installed in a basement, meter box, pit or vault unless
adequate clearance and drainage is provided. A pressure vacuum breaker
assembly shall be installed above ground.



      (8)   Unless a cross connection problem is specifically
identified, or as otherwise provide in this chapter, the requirements of this
chapter do not apply to a single-family residences used solely for
residential purposes.



      (9)   Close as practicable is the point nearest the service
delivery where the assembly can be installed. Where the assembly installation
location may interfere with obstacles such as driveways and sidewalks, then
close as practicable in the nearest point after the obstacle, but in no event
beyond the first tap.



      (10)   An air gap separation shall be located as close as
practicable to the customer's point of service delivery. All piping between
the customer's connection and receiving tank shall be entirely visible unless
otherwise approved by the Director.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-132)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.199  REMEDIES.



   (A)   If a customer has committed one or more of the acts contained
in division (D) below and has not taken the corrective action as required by
the Director, the Director may elect to impose a civil penalty not to exceed
1,000% per billing period on the charges for all water used beginning from
the date the corrective action was required and until the corrective action
has been completed by the customer.



   (B)   If a situation, which would otherwise result in discontinuance
of water service, is not remedied with the time provided in the notice of
termination sent to the customer, the Director at his or her discretion, may
install a backflow prevention assembly at the customer's point of service
deliver and bill the customer for all costs, together with all applicable
penalties.



   (C)   The Director, at his or her discretion, may publish in the
largest daily newspaper published in the town, notice of customers who at
least once during the preceding 12 month period were in violation with any
requirement of this chapter. The publication shall also summarize any
enforcement action taken.



   (D)   In addition to any other remedy available to the Director
under the Town Code, to enforce this chapter, the Director to terminate water
service if the customer:



      (1)   Fails to properly locate, install, test or maintain a
required backflow prevention assembly;



      (2)   Removes or bypasses a required backflow prevention
assembly without the prior approval of the Director;



      (3)   Allows a cross connection to occur;



      (4)   Fails to timely submit records of tests and repairs of a
backflow prevention assembly;



      (5)   Fails to comply with the written policy on backflow
prevention and cross connection on file with the Town Clerk and Director; or



      (6)   Fails to comply with any requirements imposed upon the
customer by State Rule R18-4-115.



   (E)   Termination of water service shall be immediate and without
prior notice if the Director determines that the customer's water system may
cause a health hazard to the public potable water supply. Otherwise, the
Director shall give ten days' written notice to the customer prior to
termination of water service. Water service may be restored when the
condition forming the basis for the termination has been remedied to the
satisfaction of the Director. All costs, fees and expenses incurred, and all
surcharges and penalties relating to the termination and restoration of water
service shall be paid prior to the water service being restored.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-133)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 50.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Interference with or obstructing water system facilities. 
Any person who in any manner willfully defaces, damages, illegally uses or
interferes with the operation of any well, pump, hydrant, valve, pipe,
construction trench or any waterworks facility, or anyone who shall pollute
the potable water supply of the town, or violates any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any expense caused to the town for
the repair or replacement of damaged, stolen or misused waterworks facilities
shall be charged against and collected from the person or persons who caused
the expense. The violation of any provision of this chapter, or failure to
pay for damages to town waterworks facilities, shall be sufficient cause for
the Director to discontinue town water service to any property owned or used
by the person or persons.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-114)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



   (B)   Authority of Water and Wastewater Division to turn off
water.  For any violation of this chapter or for nonpayment of water charges
for either domestic, sprinkling or other purposes, the Water and Wastewater
Division has the right to turn off the water without further notice. After it
has been turned off from any service pipe on account of nonpayment or
violation of this chapter, the water shall not be turned on until all back
charges are paid, together with the payment of all fees, and the applicable
deposit paid, if required in accordance with § 50.152.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-115)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



   (C)   Rules and regulations to be enforced; exception.  The rules
and regulations of this chapter are made for the benefit of the consumers of
water in the town for the protection of the water supply system of the town.
Their enforcement shall in no case be willfully ignored by any town official
or employee. When a strict enforcement of any rule could work a gross
injustice on a consumer of water from the town mains, the Director may in his
or her discretion order a suspension of the rule as to that particular case.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. II, § 18-116)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



Cross-reference:



   For similar sections, see Ch. 51



CHAPTER 51: WASTEWATER



Editor’s note:



   Many of the sections set forth in this Chapter 51 have analogous or
corresponding sections set forth in Chapter 50 of this code. Since the
content of the two chapters closely overlap, the reader should also refer to
Chapter 50 while referencing this Chapter 51.



Section




General Provisions




   51.001   Definitions



   51.002   Water and Wastewater Division; administration



   51.003   Water and Wastewater Division; duties of Public Works
Director



   51.004   Interference with Water and Wastewater Division; digging up
streets without a permit; tampering with equipment prohibited



   51.005   Property owner responsible for cleaning, repair and
replacement of building sewer and connections



   51.006   Sewer service line repair and replacement in public
right-of-way



   51.007   Protection of water supply and sewerage systems



   51.008   Violation



   51.009   Enforcement




Use of Public Sewers and Limitations




   51.025   Unsanitary disposal of excrement prohibited



   51.026   Treatment of polluted wastes required



   51.027   General user requirements



   51.028   Authority of the Director to establish prohibitions and
effluent limitations



   51.029   Preliminary treatment; required approval



   51.030   Preliminary treatment; maintenance of facilities



   51.031   Interceptors required



   51.032   Interceptors; type, capacity, location



   51.033   Interceptors; construction of grease and oil interceptors



   51.034   Interceptors; maintenance



   51.035   Control manholes



   51.036   Right of entry for inspection



   51.037   Discharges to be reported



   51.038   Tests and analyses



   51.039   Approval by Town Engineer and Director required




Sewer Extensions




   51.055   Construction and ownership of public sewer lines and other
equipment maintained by Water and Wastewater Division



   51.056   Main sewer extension policy for areas beyond present town
trunk lines



   51.057   Costs of extension



   51.058   Ownership



   51.059   Sewer extensions in advance of a sewer assessment district



   51.060   Private sewage systems; construction and maintenance within
town prohibited generally



   51.061   Private sewerage systems; when permitted; to be constructed
and maintained in sanitary manner




Connections to Public Sewer and Charges




   51.075   Permit required



   51.076   Application for sewer tap; sewer dye test



   51.077   Public Works Director to approve design, quantity,
location, size and construction sewer services



   51.078   Special provisions for installing taps in new subdivisions
and developments



   51.079   Records to be kept by Water and Wastewater Division



   51.080   Installation of sewer taps




Sewer Service Charges




   51.095   Minimum charges, rates and payments



   51.096   Other sewer service charges



   51.097   Sewer service charges outside the town



   51.098   Quail Run sewer extension development fee



   51.099   Payment of bills and charges



   51.100   Application for service



   51.101   Financial responsibility deposits



   51.102   Risk deposits



   51.103   Distribution of sewerage system revenues and utilization




Haulage of Non-Hazardous Liquid Wastes




   51.120   Prohibition on wastes from industrial sites discharged to
POTW by truck, rail or dedicated pipeline



   51.121   Permit required



   51.122   Exemption



   51.123   Authority of the Director; permitee limitations and
requirements



   51.124   Mixing of non-hazardous liquid waste



   51.125   Hazardous liquid waste



   51.126   Non-hazardous liquid waste fees



   51.127   Acceptance of non-hazardous liquid waste




Industrial Users and Pretreatment Requirements




   51.140   Reserved



 



   51.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 51.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPROVAL AUTHORITY.  The Director in an NPDES state with an approved
state pretreatment program and the appropriate United States Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) regional administrator in a non-NPDES state or NPDES
state without an approved state pretreatment program.



   APPROVED LABORATORY PROCEDURES.  The measurements, test and analysis
of the characteristics of water and wastes in accordance with analytical
procedures as established in Title 40, C.F.R., Part 136, as revised, that are
performed by an environmental laboratory licensed by the state pursuant to
A.R.S. Title 36, Chapter 4.3 (A.R.S. §§ 36-495 et seq.). Alternative
procedures may be approved by the Director in accordance with applicable
federal regulations.



   AVERAGE QUALITY.  The arithmetic average (weighted by flow value) of
all the daily determinations of concentrations, as that term is defined
herein, made during a calendar month.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP).  Measures or practices used to reduce
the amount of pollution entering the sanitary sewer system, surface water,
air, land or ground waters.



   BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND).  The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
conditions for five days at a temperature of 20°C, expressed in milligrams
per liter.



   BRANCH SEWER.  An arbitrary term for a sewer which receives sewage
from more than one public sewer from a relatively small area.



   BUILDING CONNECTION.  The extension from a sewer tap to the property
line, or to the easement line of the property to be served.



   BUILDING OFFICIAL.  The town's chief building official or his or her
authorized representative.



   BUILDING SEWER.  The extension from the building drain to the building
connection or other place of disposal.



   BYPASS.  The intentional diversion of wastes from any portion of a
treatment facility.



   CATEGORICAL STANDARDS (NATIONAL/FEDERAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT
STANDARDS).  Those standards promulgated by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) under the authority of § 307(b) and (c) of the Clean
Water Act (33 U.S.C.§ 1317) which apply to a specific category of industrial
user and which are published in Title 40, C.F.R. Chapter 1, subchapter N
(parts 405-471) and are incorporated in this chapter by reference.



   C.F.R. Code of Federal Regulations.



   COD (CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND).  The quantity of oxygen consumed from a
chemical oxidation of inorganic and organic matter present in the water and
wastewater expressed in milligrams per liter.



   COMBINED SEWER.  A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.



   COMMERCIAL USER.  Any nonresidential user which provides a service or
one connected with commerce and which is not classified as an industrial
user. The Director maintains a list of the types of businesses that are
commercial users and has the authority to classify specific users.



   COMPOSITE SAMPLE.  A combination of individual samples obtained at
regular intervals over a specific time period. The volume of each individual
sample shall be either proportional to the flow rate during the sample period
(flow composite) or constant and collected at equal time intervals during the
composite period (time composite) as defined in the permit.



   COMPOSITE SAMPLE QUALITY.  The concentration of some parameter tested
in a COMPOSITE SAMPLE as that term is defined herein.



   COOLING WATER.  The clean wastewater discharged from any heat transfer
system such as condensation, air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration.



   DAILY AVERAGE EFFLUENT LIMITATION.  The maximum allowable
concentration in the discharge as measured in a representative sample during
a sampling day.



   DEPARTMENT.  The Public Works Department of the town.



   DEVELOPER.  Any person engaged in the organizing and financing of a
wastewater collection system within an area contributing to a branch, main or
a trunk sewer of the town's sewer system. Such may be either a subdivider or
a legally constituted improvement district.



   DIRECTOR.  The Public Works Director of the Public Works Department,
or his or her authorized deputy, agent or representative.



   DISCHARGE.  The disposal of any sewage, pollutant(s), water or any
liquid from any sewer user into the sewerage system.



   DOMESTIC USER.  Any user who discharges only domestic wastewater.



   DOMESTIC WASTE.  A typical, residential-type waste which requires no
pretreatment under the provisions of this chapter before discharging into the
sanitary sewer system, excluding all commercial, manufacturing and industrial
waste.



   DOMESTIC WASTEWATER.  Any waterborne wastes derived from the ordinary
living processes in a residential dwelling unit, of the character as to
permit satisfactory disposal, without special treatment, by conventional POTW
processes.



   EPA.  The United States Environmental Protection Agency.



   ESTABLISHMENT PLANT.  Any establishment or plant producing liquid
waste, with or without suspended solids, required to be discharged into the
town's sewer system.



   FREE ACCESS.  The ability of the town's personnel to enter user
facilities under safe and non- hazardous conditions with a minimum of delay
to inspect any and all parts of the user's facility.



   GARBAGE.  Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of
food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.



   GENERATOR.  A person who generates septage.



   GRAB SAMPLE.  An individual sample of effluent collected in less than
15 minutes without regard for flow or time of day.



   GRAB SAMPLE QUALITY.  The concentration of some parameter tested in a
GRAB SAMPLE, as that term is defined herein.



   INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE.  Any introduction into the POTW of a
non-domestic pollutant which:



      (1)   Is produced by a source which would be subject to any
categorical standards or pretreatment requirements if the source were to be
discharged to the POTW; or



      (2)   Contains any substance or pollutant for which a
discharge limitation or prohibition has been established by any categorical
standard or pretreatment requirement.



   INDUSTRIAL USER.



      (1)   A source of industrial discharge;



      (2)   Any nonresidential user of the sewer system which
discharges more than the equivalent strength of 25,000 gallons per day of
domestic wastes;



      (3)   Any significant industrial user;



      (4)   Has control over the disposal of a waste as described in
divisions (1), (2) or (3) above; or



      (5)   Has the right of possession and control over any
property which produces a waste as described in divisions (1), (2), (3) or
(4) above.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTE.  Any liquid, free-flowing waste, including cooling
water, resulting from any industrial or manufacturing process or from the
development, recovery or processing of natural resources, with or without
suspended solids excluding uncontaminated water.



   INFLOW.  Water other than wastewater that enters a sewerage system
(including sewer service connections) from sources such as roof leaders,
cellar drains, foundation drains, drains from springs and swampy areas,
manhole covers, cross connections between storm sewers and sanitary sewers,
catch basins, cooling towers, storm waters, surface runoff, street wash
waters or drainage.



   INSTANTANEOUS EFFLUENT LIMITATION.  The maximum allowable
concentration in the discharge at any time as measured in a grab sample. In
determining compliance with the instantaneous effluent limitation.



   INTERFERENCE. A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, both:



      (1)   Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes,
operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and



      (2)   Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement
of any environmentally related permit issued by a governmental entity
(including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the
prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following
statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more
stringent state or local regulations) § 405 of the Clean Water Act (33
U.S.C. § 1345), the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et
seq.), (including Title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including state regulations
contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D
of the SWDA), the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. §§ 7401 et seq.), the Toxic
Substance Control Act (15 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq.), the Marine Protection
Research and Sanctuaries Act (16 U.S.C. §§ 1431 et seq. and 33 U.S.C. §§
1401 et seq.).



   LATERAL SEWER.  A sewer that discharges into a branch or other sewer
and has no other common tributary to it.



   LIQUID WASTE HAULER (OR HAULER OR WASTE HAULER).  Any person carrying
on or engaging in vehicular transport of wastewater or wastes as part of, or
incidental to, any business for the purpose of discharging the waste into the
town's treatment works.



   MAIN SEWER.  A sewer which receives sewage from two or more branch
sewers as tributaries.



   MAINTENANCE.  Keeping the sewerage works in a state of repair,
including expenditures necessary to maintain the capacity (capability) for
which the works were designed and constructed.



   NATIONAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD.  Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with § 307(b) and (c) of
the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1317 et seq.) which applies to industrial
users. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant
to title 40 C.F.R. pt. 403.5.



   NATURAL OUTLET.  Any outlet into a watercourse, ditch or other body of
surface or ground water.



   NEW SOURCE.  Any building, structure, facility or installation from
which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under §
307(c) of the Clean Water Act  (33 U.S.C. §§ 1317 et seq.) which will be
applicable to the source if the standards are thereafter promulgated in
accordance with that section, as and stated in detail in Title 40 C.F.R. pt.
403.3(k).



   NON-HAZARDOUS LIQUID WASTES (NHLW).  The wastes specifically
identified in § 51.120.



   NPDES PERMIT.  A National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
permit, issued to the town by the EPA, which imposed federal standards
governing the quality of the treated effluent discharged from the POTW.



   OIL and GREASE.  The measure of oil and grease content of a sample as
determined by EPA Method 413.1, or either equivalent test method approved by
the Director.



   OIL and GREASE (TPH).  For purpose of determining compliance with the
oil and grease limitation contained in the code, OIL and GREASE is defined as
the measure of petroleum and mineral oil (total petroleum hydrocarbons (TPH))
content of a sample as determined by EPA Method 418.1, or other equivalent
test method approved by the Director.



   PASS-THROUGH.  A discharge which exits the POTW into water of the
United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation
of any requirement of the POTW NPDES permit (including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation) or which causes or contributes to a
violation of an applicable numeric or narrative water quality standard.



   PERMIT.  A written control mechanism that the Director issues to
particular users or classes of users under the authority of this chapter of
the town code.



   PERMITTEE, PERMIT HOLDER.  Any person, firm, association, corporation
or trust which owns, operates, processes or controls an establishment or
plant being operated under a valid permit to discharge wastewater into the
town's sewer system.



   PERSON.  Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
association, joint stock company, trust, state, municipality, Indian tribe,
political subdivisions of the state or federal government agency or any other
legal entity, including their legal representatives, agents or assigns.



   pH.  The logarithm of reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.



   POLLUTANT.  Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator, residue,
sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive
materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and
industrial, municipal and agricultural wastes.



   POLLUTION PREVENTION.  Source reduction and other practices that
reduce or eliminate the creation of pollutants through:



      (1)   Increased efficiency in the use of raw materials,
energy, water or other resources; or



      (2)   Protection of natural resources by conservation.



   POTW.  Publicly owned treatment works and connecting sewer collection
system which are owned and/or operated, in whole or in part, by the town and
which provide the town with wastewater collection and disposal services.



   POTW RESIDUALS.  All POTW effluent and/or solids, including sludge,
scum, screening and grit, which are the byproduct of wastewater treatment
operations and which must be discharged to the environment for ultimate
disposal and/or reuse.



   PRETREATMENT.  The physical, chemical, biological or other treatment
of any industrial discharge prior to discharge to the POTW, for the purpose
of:



      (1)   Reducing the amount of concentration of any pollutant;



      (2)   Eliminating the discharge or any pollutant; or



      (3)   Altering the nature of any pollutant characteristic to a
less harmful state.



   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.  All of the duties or responsibilities
imposed upon POTW users by this chapter.



   PRODUCER.  Any person, firm, association, corporation or trust which
owns, operates, possesses or controls an establishment or plant, whether or
not a permittee.



   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE.  Garbage that has been shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than
one-fourth of an inch in any dimension.



   PUBLIC SEWER.  A branch, main or trunk sewer controlled and maintained
by the town.



   RECYCLING.  A material is recycled if it is used, reused or reclaimed.
A material is used or reused if it is either:



      (1)   Employed as an ingredient (including its use as an
intermediate) to make a product; however, a material will not satisfy this
condition if distinct components of the material are recovered as separate
end products (as when metals are recovered from metal containing secondary
materials); or



      (2)   Employed in a particular function as an effective
substitute for a commercial product. A material is reclaimed if it is
processed to recover a useful product or if it is regenerated. Examples
include the recovery and lead values from spent batteries and the
regeneration of spent solvents.



   REPLACEMENT.  Those expenditures made for obtaining and installing
equipment, accessories and/or appurtenances during the useful life of the
treatment works which are necessary to maintain the capacity and performance
of the treatment works for which they were designed and constructed.



   REPRESENTATIVE SAMPLE.  A composite sample obtained by flow
proportional sampling techniques where feasible. When the Director determines
that flow-proportional composite sampling is infeasible, the Director may
allow or conduct composite sampling by time proportional techniques or by the
compositing or averaging of one or more grab samples.



   SANITARY SEWER.  A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm
waters, surface waters and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.



   SEPTAGE.  Aerobic wastewater originating from a domestic source, be it
from a residential, commercial or industrial facility, that is not hazardous
waste and is compatible with the biological wastewater treatment plant
process.



   SEWAGE.  A combination of water-carried wastes, from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with
the ground waters, surface waters and storm waters as may be present.



   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT.  Any arrangement of devices and structures
used for treating sewage.



   SEWAGE WORKS.  All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage. As used in this chapter, the term SEWER SYSTEM or
SEWERAGE WORKS shall have the same meaning and definition as SEWAGE WORKS.



   SEWER.  A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.



   SEWER CONNECTION.  The connection to the public sewer and the
extension therefrom of the sewer to the property line at the alley or the
curb line of the street, whichever is applicable, depending on the location
of the public sewer.



   SEWER CONNECTION FEE.  The initial sewer connection charge.



   SEWER TAP.  The wye, saddle or other device placed on a public sewer
to receive a building connection.



   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.



      (1)   All users subject to categorical pretreatment standards
under Title 40, C.F.R. pt. 403.6 and Title 40, C.F.R. Chapter I, subchapter N
(parts 405-471).



      (2)   Any other user that:



         (a)   Discharges an average of  25,000 gallons per day
or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, non-contact
cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater);



         (b)   Contributes a process waste stream which makes up
5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the
POTW treatment plant; or



         (c)   Is designed as such by the Director on the basis
that he or she has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.



   SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.  An industrial user is in a state of
significant noncompliance (SNC) when violations meet one or more of the
following criteria:



      (1)   CHRONIC VIOLATIONS OF WASTEWATER DISCHARGE LIMITS,
defined here as those in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken
during a six month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit
or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter;



      (2)   TECHNICAL REVIEW CRITERIA (TRC) VIOLATIONS, defined here
as those in which 33% or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant
parameter taken during a six month period equal or exceed the product of the
daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC
(TRC equals 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease and 1.2 for all other
pollutants except pH);



      (3)   Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit
(daily maximum or longer-term average) that the Director determines has
caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interferences or
pass-through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the
general public);



      (4)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted
in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority under this chapter to halt
or prevent such a discharge;



      (5)   Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date,
a compliance schedule milestone contained in a permit or enforcement order
for starting construction, completing construction or attaining final
compliance;



      (6)   Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date,
required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90 day compliance
reports, periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with
compliance schedules;



      (7)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or



      (8)   Any other violation or group of violations which the
Director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of
the local pretreatment program.



   SLUG DISCHARGE.  Any discharge of non-routine, episodic nature,
including but not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch
discharge.



   SOURCE REDUCTION.  Any practice which:



      (1)   Reduces the amount of pollutant or contaminant entering
any waste stream or otherwise released into the environment (including
fugitive emissions) prior to recycling, treatment or disposal; and



      (2)   Reduces the hazards to public health and the environment
associated with the release of the substances, pollutants or contaminants.



   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC).  A coded classification of
industries based upon economic activity developed by the United States
Department of Commerce as published in the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget.



   STANDARD METHODS.  The procedure as described in the most current
edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
published by the American Health Association, or the most current edition of
Manual of Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes published by the
United States Environmental Protection Agency.



   STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN.  A sewer which carries storm and surface
waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS).  Solids measured in milligrams per liter that
either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, wastewater or
other liquids and which are largely removable by a laboratory filtration
device as defined in the Standards Methods as defined herein.



   SYSTEM DESIGN CAPACITY.  The design capacity for normal domestic
wastewater as established by accepted engineering standards.



   TOTAL ORGANIC CARBON (TOC).  The total of all organic compounds
expressed in milligrams per liter as determined by the combustion-infrared
method prescribed by approval laboratory procedures.



   TOWN OF FLORENCE; TOF.  Town of Florence.



   TREATMENT PARAMETER.  A fundamental characteristic of sewage around
which treatment is designed, such as, but not limited, flow, BOD and
suspended solids.



   TRUNK SEWER.  A sewer which received sewage from many tributary main
sewers and serves as an outlet for a large territory.



   UPSET.  An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and
temporary noncompliance with technology-based permit effluent limitations
because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the permittee, excluding
such factors as operational error, improperly designed or inadequate
treatment facilities or improper operation and maintenance or lack thereof.



   USER.  Any person, lot, parcel of land, building, premises, municipal
corporation or other political subdivision that discharges, causes or permits
the discharge of wastewater into the sewage system.



   WASTE COURSE.  A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.



   WASTE MINIMIZATION.  Any activity which eliminates or reduces the
amount of any pollutant from entering the waste stream or the environment.
This may include a change in raw materials, operational improvement, process
improvement, product reformulation, reuse or reclamation.



   ZERO PROCESS DISCHARGE USER.  The term applies to those users that
only discharge domestic wastes or have no discharge, but have significant
quantities or hazardous materials or high strength waste, which if
discharged, would be regulated by this chapter. The facilities may be
regulated by requiring them to have zero discharge of process wastes, thus
allowing only domestic wastes to be discharged.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-150)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 51.002  WATER AND WASTEWATER DIVISION; ADMINISTRATION.



   For the proper administration of the Water and Wastewater Division and
the operation of the water and sewerage works of the town, there shall be
appointed by the Public Works Director a Utility Superintendent and other
additional assistants as may be required for the operation of the Water and
Wastewater Division.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-151)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 51.003  WATER AND WASTEWATER DIVISION; DUTIES OF PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR.



   (A)   The Public Works Director, hereinafter referred to as
Director, shall be the general executive officer in charge of all personnel,
the entire operation, equipment and facilities of the Water and Wastewater
Division.



   (B)   He or she shall also have general supervision over, subject to
the approval of the Town Council, all charges for water and sewer services,
departmental policies, agreements, new connections, repairs and the like, and
for all charges not expressly provided in this chapter.



      (1)   The Wastewater Division shall not be responsible for the
installation, maintenance or inspection of the consumer's service line piping
or apparatus or for any defects therein.



      (2)   The Wastewater Division shall have the right to refuse
service unless the consumer's lines or piping are installed in the manner as
to prevent cross connections or backflow.



      (3)   Under normal conditions, the consumer shall be notified
of any anticipated interruption of service.



      (4)   The Wastewater Division shall not be responsible for the
negligence of third persons or forces beyond the control of the Wastewater
Division resulting in any interruption of services or damages to the property
or the consumer.



      (5)   The Wastewater Division may refuse service to any
prospective consumer when the capacity of the sewer system will not permit
additional loads being placed thereon.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-152)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



Cross-reference:



   For similar sections, see §§ 50.002 and 50.003



§ 51.004  INTERFERENCE WITH WATER AND WASTEWATER DIVISION; DIGGING UP
STREETS WITHOUT A PERMIT; TAMPERING WITH EQUIPMENT PROHIBITED.



   Every person who shall interfere in any way with employees of the Water
and Wastewater Division in any discharge of his or her duties, either in the
tapping of any sewer pipe, main or lateral belonging to the town, or the
cleaning, laying or connection of any pipe or main or lateral, or who shall
dig up or cause to be dug up, any street or alley in the town for the purpose
of connecting with the sewer system of the town without first obtaining a
permit from the Public Works Director, or who having a permit shall dig up
any portion of any street or alley of the town for the purpose of connecting
with the sewer system of the town and shall fail or neglect to place the
street or alley in its original condition, or who shall maliciously or
willfully break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any
structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the municipal sewage
works, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-153)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 51.005  PROPERTY OWNER RESPONSIBLE FOR CLEANING, REPAIR AND REPLACEMENT
OF BUILDING SEWER AND CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   The property owner shall be responsible for the cleaning,
unstopping, maintenance and repair of the building connection piping serving
the owner's property from the home or building to the public sewer line for
repair including that portion of the private side extending into the town's
right-of-way and connecting to the public sewer including the tie or saddle
connection thereto.



   (B)   Where the connection of a stoppage requires the repair or
replacement of a damaged or broken section of the building connection piping
serving a single-family or a duplex property and the damaged or broken
section is located within the public right-of-way, the property owner will be
responsible for the repair or replacement of the damaged or broken section in
the public right-of-way.



   (C)   Where the correction of a stoppage requires the repair or
replacement of a damaged or broken section of the building connection piping
serving a single-family or a duplex property and the damaged or broken
section is located off property in a street or alley, the owner or his or her
contractor shall obtain a permit from the town to do work in a public
right-of-way prior to doing the work.



   (D)   The town shall be responsible for the repair and maintenance
of all main trunk sewer lines. The responsibility for the expense and cost of
maintaining, repairing and replacing any lateral sewer line from the point
where the lateral taps the main trunk line to the boundary of the user's
property shall be borne and paid by the property owner served by any lateral.
Maintenance of the entire customer line from the building to the public sewer
line shall be the responsibility of the property owner. In the case of
stoppage, if there is a question as to whether the stoppage is in the sewer
main, the town will promptly, upon call, determine whether there is stoppage
in the main and will clear the main if necessary.



   (E)   If it is unclear whether a stoppage is in the service
connection or the customer line, the town may assist in the determination. If
the stoppage is in the customer line, the town may assist the customer with
the restoration of service. In such cases, the customer will be responsible
for all costs incurred by the town.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-154)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 51.006  SEWER SERVICE LINE REPAIR AND REPLACEMENT IN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   (A)   The property owner shall be responsible for first ascertaining
the approximate location of damaged or broken section of piping serving the
property. If the damaged or broken section is in the public right-of-way, the
property owner shall contact the Water and Wastewater Division. The Division
will verify the damaged or broken location. If the damaged or broken section
is verified to be in the public right-of-way and is sufficient in nature to
require repair, the Division may initiate appropriate repair or replacement.
When the broken section is on the private property, it will be the property
owner's responsibility to repair the broken section.



   (B)   Disputes as to location, extent of damage or the method of
repair or replacement or the damaged or broken section shall be resolved at
the sole discretion of the Public Works Director.



   (C)   A special account shall be created to fund the repairs and
replacements with an annual allocation as approved by the Town Council with
the annual budget for each fiscal year. Requests for repairs or replacements
shall be handled on a first-in basis. When the total funding in the account
has been exhausted, all subsequent requests will be deferred until the Town
Council approves additional funding to the account.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-154.1)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 51.007  PROTECTION OF WATER SUPPLY AND SEWERAGE SYSTEMS.



   The specific provisions to properly protect the town's water supply or
the sewage collection and treatment facilities are under the policy set forth
in §§ 50.017 through 50.021.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-154.2)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 51.008  VIOLATION.



   The violation or failure to follow any condition or provisions of the
waste hauler permit, non-hazardous liquid waste dumping policy or Director's
order authorized herein shall be a violation of this ordinance.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-213)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)
Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.009  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The rules and regulations of this chapter are made for the
benefit of the users of the town sewage works, for the protection of the
sewage works and to protect the quality of the effluent of the sewage
treatment plants.



   (B)   Their enforcement shall in no case be willfully ignored by any
town official or employee. With the exception of applicable state and federal
requirements, such as the pretreatment regulations, the Director may, at his
or her discretion, order a suspension of a requirement that would cause a
gross injustice to a particular user of the system.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-215)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS AND LIMITATIONS



§ 51.025  UNSANITARY DISPOSAL OF EXCREMENT PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or deposit, or permit to be
deposited in an unsanitary manner, upon public or private property within the
town or in any area under the jurisdiction of the town, any human or animal
excrement or other objectionable waste.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-155)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)
Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.026  TREATMENT OF POLLUTED WASTES REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
town, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the town, any sewage,
industrial wastes or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment
has been provided in accordance with provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-156)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)
Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.027  GENERAL USER REQUIREMENTS.



   It shall be unlawful for any user to discharge or cause to be
discharged to any entry point into the publicly owned sanitary sewer system:



   (A)   Unless otherwise approved by the Director, any swimming pool
water, storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, surface
drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters that may
constitute INFLOW as defined herein.



   (B)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard to the
system or treatment plant. In no case shall pollutants be discharged with a
closed cup flashpoint less than 140°F (60°C), or pollutants which cause an
exceedance of 10% of the lower explosive limit (LEL) at any point within the
wastewater treatment plant for any single reading or more than 5% for any two
consecutive readings.



   (C)   Solid or viscous pollutants, petroleum oil, non-biodegradable
cutting oil or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause
interference or pass-through or that will cause obstruction to the flow in
sewers or other interference or damage with the system or treatment plant.



   (D)   Any waters or wastes containing a toxic, radioactive,
poisonous or other substances in sufficient quantity to cause or have the
potential to cause injury or interference with any sewage treatment process,
cause corrosive structural damage, constitute a hazard to human or create any
hazard to the sewerage system or in the receiving waters of the sewage
treatment plant or pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases,
vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems.



   (E)   Any waters with a pH less than five standard units (S.U.) or
greater than 9 S.U. except as provided in § 51.028.



   (F)   Any waters with a temperature greater than 150°F (66°C) or
heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW resulting
in interference, but in no event heat in such quantities that the temperature
at the headworks of the POTW treatment plant exceed 104°F (40°C).



   (G)   Any water or waste which may contain more than 50 parts per
million by weight of fat, oil or grease.



   (H)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.



   (I)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.



   (J)   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass
rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch, manure, grits such as brick,
cement, onyx, carbide or any other solid or viscous substance capable of
causing obstruction to the flowing sewers or other interference with the
proper operations of the sewer works.



   (K)   Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such
character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to
handle the materials at the sewage treatment plant.



   (L)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating
a public nuisance.



   (M)   Any water or waste greater than the following parameters under
which the town's wastewater is regulated in accordance with the substances
listed in Arizona Administrative Code Title 18, Chapter 4.



   (N)   Any water or waste that has in any way been diluted, as a
substitute for pretreatment, for the purpose of obtaining compliance with any
categorical standard or pretreatment requirement imposed by this chapter
except where dilution is expressly authorized by any categorical standard.



   (O)   Any water or waste that could cause a violation of any
categorical standard or pretreatment requirement.



   (P)   Any water or waste that is transported from the point of
generation to the POTW by any septic tank pumper, chemical waste hauler or
similarly transported unless the transporter has first:



      (1)   Disclosed to the Director the origin, nature,
concentration and volume of all pollutants to be discharged; and



      (2)   Obtained the written consent of the Director to
discharge.



   (Q)   Any water or waste which could cause interference or
pass-through with POTW operations.



   (R)   Any discharge that exhibits a characteristic of a hazardous
waste, or contains a substance that is listed as a hazardous waste pursuant
to either Arizona Administrative Code R 18-8-261 or Title 40 C.F.R. part 261,
whichever is applicable, whether or not the discharge is otherwise subject to
hazardous regulations. This provision does not apply to domestic wastewater
or to discharges of hazardous wastes that are authorized by the Director.



   (S)   Any water or waste exceeding the limits for the effluent
limitations that are expressed in the total form as regulated by State
Department of Environmental Quality for the permitted facility.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-157)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)
Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.028  AUTHORITY OF THE DIRECTOR TO ESTABLISH PROHIBITIONS AND EFFLUENT
LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   In addition to the prohibitions and effluent limitations
contained in this chapter, the Director shall have the authority to establish
limitations for individual users or class of users for various specific
substances, materials, waters or wastes that can be accepted into the sewer
system, as well as specify those substances, materials, waters or wastes that
are prohibited from entering the sewer system. All prohibitions and effluent
limitations so established shall be placed on file with the Town Clerk and
become effective and enforceable on day 31 after the date of filing.



   (B)   All affected individual or class of users shall comply with
the prohibitions and effluent limitations established pursuant to this
section.



   (C)   The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes
having any of the following characteristics shall be subject to the review
and approval of the Wastewater Division:



      (1)   A five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300
parts per million by weight;



      (2)   Containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of
suspended solids;



      (3)   Containing any quantity of substance having the
characteristics described in § 51.027; and



      (4)   Having an average daily flow of greater than 2% of the
average daily sewage flow of the municipality.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-158)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 51.029  PRELIMINARY TREATMENT; REQUIRED APPROVAL.



   (A)   Where necessary in the opinion of the Director, any user of
the sewage works shall provide at his or her expense, the preliminary
treatment as may be necessary to reduce objectionable characteristics or
constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in this chapter.



   (B)   Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information
relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for
the approval of the Director. No construction of the facilities shall be
commenced until the Director's approval is obtained in writing.



   (C)   The completed facilities shall not be placed in service until
they have been inspected for conformance to the approved plans and the final
construction approved by the Director. The approval of the plans and
inspection of construction shall not relieve the owner from complying with
discharge limitation set forth in this chapter.



   (D)   The town will enforce federal pretreatment requirements as set
forth in 40 C.F.R. part 403.



      (1)   Required.  When necessary in the opinion of the
Wastewater Division, the owner shall provide, at his or her expense, the
preliminary treatment as may be necessary to:



         (a)   Reduce the BOD to 300 parts per million and the
suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight;



         (b)   Reduce objectionable characteristics or
constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in § 51.028; and



         (c)   Control the quantities and rates of discharge of
the waters or wastes.



      (2)   Approval. Plans and specifications and any other
pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities
shall be submitted for approval of the Public Works Department and the State
Department of Environmental Quality (ADEQ if required). No construction of
the facilities shall be commenced until the approvals are obtained in writing.



      (3)   Users of land.  All users of any type of commercially
zoned land, prior to any connection to the town's wastewater system which
comes into existence through the building process at any time in the future,
shall submit to the town a plan or design for the use of the commercial land,
and shall provide access to the town staff or the agents thereof, for the
purpose of testing and sampling of any waste material introduced into any
portion, part, line or treatment facility that is part of the town wastewater
system.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-159)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 51.030  PRELIMINARY TREATMENT; MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES.



   When preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or
wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner at his or her expense. The owner shall keep written
records and documentation of all cleaning, repair, calibration and
maintenance required to demonstrate compliance with this section. Records
shall be kept at the facility for a minimum of three years and be made
available to the Director upon request.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-160)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 51.031  INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED.



   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided for restaurants,
cafes, inns, motels, hotels, churches, meeting halls, breweries, laundries,
service stations, auto repair shops, carwashes, product manufacturers,
disposers of septic wastes, individual plants and other facilities when, in
the opinion of the Director, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease or oil in excess amounts or any flammable
wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients, except that the interceptors
shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-161)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 51.032  INTERCEPTORS; TYPE, CAPACITY, LOCATION.



   All interceptors shall be a type and capacity approved by the Director
and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-162)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 51.033  INTERCEPTORS; CONSTRUCTION OF GREASE AND OIL INTERCEPTORS.



   Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious
materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature.
They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with
easily removable covers. When bolted covers are required they shall be gas
tight and watertight.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-163)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 51.034  INTERCEPTORS; MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall
be maintained by the owner, at his or her expense, in continuously efficient
operation at all times. The owner shall keep written records and
documentation of  all cleaning, repair, calibration and maintenance required
to demonstrate compliance with this section. Records shall be kept at the
facility for a minimum of three years and be made available to the Director
upon request.



   (B)   In maintaining these interceptors, the owners shall be
responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the
captured material and shall maintain records of the dates and means of
disposal, which records are subject to review by the Superintendent. Any
removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by the owner
must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-164)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 51.035  CONTROL MANHOLES.



   (A)   When required by the Director, the owner of any property
served by a building sewer carrying potentially harmful or industrial wastes
shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate
observation, measurement and sampling of wastes.



   (B)   The manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely
located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Director. The manholes shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense
and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible at all
times.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-165)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 51.036  RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION.



   (A)   Any authorized employee of the Water and Wastewater Division
shall have free access as that term in herein defined at all reasonable hours
to any commercial or industrial premises connected to the town service area
or connected to the town sewer system for purposes of assessing applicability
and/or compliance with the requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   Any user or potential user shall allow all inspection,
monitoring, copying of records and the like reasonably needed by the Director
or his or her agent to perform the duties required or needed under this
chapter.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-166)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 51.037  DISCHARGES TO BE REPORTED.



   Every user of the town sewer system shall report to the Director
immediately any accident, negligent act or other occurrence that occasions a
discharge to the public sewer of any wastes or process waters that exceed the
permissible limit for the wastes established by the Director.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-167)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 51.038  TESTS AND ANALYSES.



   All tests and analysis of the characteristics of waters and waste shall
be determined in accordance with approved laboratory procedures. All tests
and analysis of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference
is made in §§ 51.027 and 51.028 shall be determined in accordance with
standard methods for examination of water and sewage, and shall be determined
at the control manhole provided for in section § 51.035 or upon suitable
samples taken at the control manhole.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-168)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 51.039  APPROVAL BY TOWN ENGINEER AND DIRECTOR REQUIRED.



   No public sewer extension shall be made until the plans and
specifications are approved by both the Town Engineer and the Director.
Public sewer extensions shall be constructed in accordance with standards and
specifications on file in the Town Engineer's office. With the concurrence of
the Town Engineer, the Director may authorize variances from the standards
and specifications.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-169)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



SEWER EXTENSIONS



§ 51.055  CONSTRUCTION AND OWNERSHIP OF PUBLIC SEWER LINES AND OTHER
EQUIPMENT MAINTAINED BY WATER AND WASTEWATER DIVISION.



   (A)   In new subdivisions and developments where public sewers are
authorized by the Public Works Director, the public sewers shall be
constructed at the developer's expense in accordance with plans approved by
the Public Works Director. Detailed plans and specifications for public sewer
extensions must be approved by the Public Works Director prior to
construction. The costs for the preparation of plans and specifications, the
staking of the location of the new public sewers, the cost of inspecting the
construction, the cost of acquiring rights-of-way and easements and
preparation of as-built plans shall be assumed by the developer. The town
will perform the inspection during construction.



   (B)   The ownership of the public sewer lines, pumping stations,
treatment facilities and equipment and other appurtenances to the sewer
system maintained, or accepted for maintenance, by the Water and Wastewater
Division shall be vested in the Division, and in no case shall the owner of
any premises have the right to claim any part except where otherwise provided
in this code.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-170)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 51.056  MAIN SEWER EXTENSION POLICY FOR AREAS BEYOND PRESENT TOWN TRUNK
LINES.



   The main sewer extension policy of the town for areas beyond present
town trunk sewers and the policy to be followed in connection therewith shall
be, and the same is hereby, declared to be as follows:



   (A)   The town desires to encourage the development of undeveloped
areas through repayment for extra costs incurred in construction of
“off-site” sewer mains that are necessary to serve development in order
to distribute the costs of extending the mains between two or more
developers. This policy would apply where a sewer main extension was
constructed by one developer and connected or utilized at a later date by one
or more developers. For this purpose, a SEWER MAIN is defined as a main
extended beyond the limits of the project or a main constructed along the
frontage or boundary of the development with capacity to serve additional
developments. However, the developer must pay all the costs for engineering
design and construction of main sewers of the size as to afford adequate
capacity and service for specific “service areas” to be served by town
trunk sewers.



   (B)   The Town Engineer will not perform field engineering or submit
detailed plans and specifications for the developer. This latter work is to
be performed by a civil engineer registered in the state, employed by the
developer. The final details plans and specifications for the main sewer
extension must be approved by the Town Engineer and the Public Works Director
before construction begins. The engineering costs for preparation of plans
and staking of the main sewer incurred by the developer may be included as
determined by the Director in the agreed construction costs as provided in
this section.



   (C)   The final detailed plans and specifications for the main sewer
extensions must be approved by ADEQ and by the Council before construction
begins. The design and engineering will be in accordance with the
specifications of the State Department of Environmental Quality and the
municipality prior to construction. The construction shall meet the
municipality's specifications, requirements and approval, and will be subject
to inspection by the municipality's agents during construction.



   (D)   In new subdivisions, shopping centers, industrial tracts or
similar developments, the developer shall furnish and install to town
specifications all branch, lateral and main sewers, manholes and
appurtenances within the boundary of the designated area of the development.



   (E)   The design and engineering will be in accordance with the
specifications of the town and must be approved by the Town Engineer of the
town prior to the construction. The construction shall meet the town
specifications, requirements and approval and will be subject to inspection
by the Town Engineer during construction.



   (F)   Upon its completion, the aforesaid main sewer line shall
become and be the property of the town.



   (G)   The maximum area to be serviced by the proposed main sewer
line and its ultimate branches and laterals shall be determined by the Public
Works Department based on local drainage conditions.



   (H)   The town shall have exclusive control of connections to the
proposed main sewer line.



   (I)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, all provisions
of this code and other ordinances of the town or amendments thereto
applicable to sewer services inside and outside the town boundaries,
including all charges therefore, shall apply to services in the proposed area.



   (J)   Should others in the service area desire to join with the
developer in constructing the proposed main sewer line, this agreement will
be considered as including the others.



   (K)   In the event that the area to be serviced by the developer is
lesser in size than the maximum area to be serviced by the proposed main
sewer line and its ultimate laterals, the aforesaid main sewer line shall be
designed, engineered and constructed to serve the maximum area as described
heretofore.



   (L)   In the event that the area to be serviced by the developer is
the entire area above described as the maximum service area, then the
developer will not be eligible for repayment.



   (M)   The town, in consideration of the foregoing, agrees:



      (1)   To permit the developer to connect into town existing
trunk sewer lines and the main sewer line to be constructed by the developer
as above provided;



      (2)   In the event that the area to be serviced by the
developer is smaller than the maximum area to be serviced by the proposed
main sewer line and its ultimate branches and laterals. The town agrees to
enter into an agreement with any party desirous of obtaining a connection to
the main sewer line;



      (3)   Such an agreement will establish a just, equitable and
reasonable charge to permit such a connection. The connection charge will be
made on a cost per acre basis on the area to be served, using the heretofore
agreed main sewer line construction cost based on competitive bidding and
maximum service area acreage to determine the cost per acre;



      (4)   Any connection charge will not affect the right of the
town to assess its regular tax charges and sewage rental charges against the
owners of property within the developer's area;



      (5)   Building connection charges (sewer tap) shall be paid to
the town at the prevailing rate and are not refundable; and



      (6)   A charge of $100 will be assessed by the town for the
administration of each repayment agreement (see Town of Florence Schedule of
Fees).



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-171)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 51.057  COSTS OF EXTENSION.



   The developer shall pay the costs for utility extension using one of
the following two options:



   (A)   Option I.  The developer shall pay in full for the
rights-of-way, the construction and installation of the lines, pipes and
mains, and all other features of the extension.



   (B)   Option II.



      (1)   The construction cost of the extension shall be
determined and agreed upon prior to commencement of construction after the
developer has submitted a cost breakdown to the Town Engineer. The
engineering costs incurred by the developer for the preparation of plans and
staking of the main sewer only be included in the agreed construction cost.
Costs of lateral and branch sewers and their appurtenances will not be
included in the agreed construction or in the main sewer project agreement.
The municipality shall reserve the right to reject the developer's cost
breakdown if it is in appreciable variance with the municipality's estimate.



      (2)   In the event that the area to be serviced by the
developer is the entire area described herein as the maximum service area,
then the developer will pay in full for the cost of construction and will not
be eligible for repayment. In the event that the area to be serviced by the
developer is lesser in size than the maximum area to be serviced by the
proposed main sewer line and its ultimate branches and laterals, the
municipality agrees to enter into agreements with any party desirous of
obtaining a connection to the main sewer line. The agreement will establish a
just, equitable and reasonable charge to permit the connection, the charge to
be made on a cost per acre a basis of the area to be served, using the
heretofore agreed main sewer line construction cost and maximum service area
acreage to determine the cost per acre. The amount of the connection charge
will be paid to the municipality, who agrees to repay the amount to the
developer, the total of the repayments not to exceed that portion of the
agreed cost of the construction of the main sewer line allotted to acreage
outside of the development.



      (3)   In no such way is any such agreement to be constructed
as including any branch of lateral within the service area.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-171.1)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 51.058  OWNERSHIP.



   The municipality shall have exclusive control of connections to the
proposed main sewer line and upon its completion, the main line shall become
and be the property of the municipality. Except as otherwise herein provided,
all provisions of this code and ordinances and amendments thereto applicable
to sewer services including all charges therefore shall apply to services in
the approved area.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-171.2)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 51.059  SEWER EXTENSIONS IN ADVANCE OF A SEWER ASSESSMENT DISTRICT.



   The sewer extension policy provisions of the town in regards to sewer
installations in advance of sewer assessment districts and the policy to be
followed in connection therewith shall be, and the same is hereby, declared
to be as follows:



   (A)   At the option of the developer of an individual parcel of land
or of subdivision, he or she may apply for payment of the sewer line or lines
necessary to connect his or her development to a trunk sewer. He or she may
also apply for payment of the sewer lines within his or her development.



   (B)   In order to qualify for payment, the sewer lines to be
installed must be usable by a future assessment district, and the developer
must sign an agreement whereby the assessable area of any parcel or parcels
immediately adjacent to and served by the lines will be included in the
assessment district and will receive an assessment for which the developer
will be liable, regardless of whether he or she sells part or all of the
property to be assessed.



   (C)   The developer shall pay all construction costs, including
engineering services. The design, location and construction must be approved
by the town. The contractor shall be duly licensed.



   (D)   The sewer lines installed by the developer will be held in
trust by the town for sale to a special assessment district in the town. The
agreed construction cost, not exceeding the actual cost for the lines, will
be written into the construction bid as a lump sum item and will become part
of the construction cost for the special assessment district.



   (E)   The property owners adjacent to lines installed by the
developer can connect to these lines by signing an agreement, which will be
recorded, to accept an assessment in the assessment district.



   (F)   If the developer desires to enter into private agreements with
adjacent property owners in which they agree to share his or her cost for the
privilege of connecting to the sewer lateral, he or she may do so, but these
property owners will still be required to sign an agreement with the division
in which they agree to accept an assessment in the assessment's district.



   (G)   There will be only one purchase agreement for each project. No
attempt will be made to negotiate with more than one party, regardless of how
many are sharing the cost.



   (H)   Payment will be made at the completion of the assessment
district or at the time that assessments become payable.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-172)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 51.060  PRIVATE SEWERAGE SYSTEMS; CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE WITHIN
TOWN PROHIBITED GENERALLY.



   Except as provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful to construct
or maintain within the municipality any privy, privy vault, septic tank,
cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-173)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)
Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.061  PRIVATE SEWERAGE SYSTEMS; WHEN PERMITTED; TO BE CONSTRUCTED AND
MAINTAINED IN SANITARY MANNER.



   (A)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available for a distance
of 300 feet within the municipality, or in any area under the jurisdiction of
the municipality, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage
disposal system, complying with the regulations, provisions and
recommendations of the State Department of Health Services and the Sanitary
Code of the County Health Department.



   (B)   The private sewage disposal system shall be constructed,
maintained and operated at all times in a sanitary manner.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-174)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



CONNECTIONS TO PUBLIC SEWER AND CHARGES



§ 51.075  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the Public Works Department.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-175)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)
Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.076  APPLICATION FOR SEWER TAP; SEWER DYE TEST.



   (A)   Each person making application for a sewer tap shall present a
valid plumbing permit issued by the town building official, or his or her
authorized representative to the Water and Wastewater Division as a
prerequisite for the approval of the requested sewer tap.



   (B)   A customer who has been connected to the public sewer and
questions whether a sewer tap is in service may apply to the Water and
Wastewater Division for a sewer dye test to be performed. The sewer dye test
shall be performed by the Water and Wastewater Division when the customer has
paid a fee of $50 to cover the costs of the test. If the test shows that the
sewer tap is not in services, the $50 fee shall be refunded to the customer.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-176)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 51.077  PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR TO APPROVE DESIGN, QUANTITY, LOCATION, SIZE
AND CONSTRUCTION SEWER SERVICES.



   (A)   The design, quantity, location, method of connection and size
of all sewer taps shall be subject to the approval of the Director. The Water
and Wastewater Division will install all sewer taps less than eight inches in
diameter, except as provided elsewhere in this chapter. All sewer taps eight
inches in diameter or larger shall be installed by a private contractor in
accordance with plans approved by the Public Works Director. Review fees
shall be paid as set forth in of the Town Code, sewer taps shall be connected
to public sewers only, unless specifically authorized and approved by the
Director.



   (B)   Where property borders public rights-of-way or public
easements containing a serviceable Town of Florence wastewater main, the
property, when developed, shall be connected to the Town of Florence
wastewater system. Sewer taps shall extend at right angles from the main to
the property line and shall be installed in accordance with the most current
edition of the Maricopa Association of Governments Uniform Standard
Specifications and Details for Public Works Construction.



   (C)   Permits for sewer taps will not be granted, or may be revoked,
when the lateral sewer passes through property which at the time, is or may
become, the property of persons other than the owner of the property to be
served from the connection.



   (D)   No building sewer will be connected to the building connection
until it has been inspected and approved by the Public Works Department or
building inspector.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-177)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 51.078  SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR INSTALLING TAPS IN NEW SUBDIVISIONS AND
DEVELOPMENTS.



   In new subdivisions or developments where public sewer extensions are
authorized by the town and constructed at the developer's expense, the town
may authorize the developer or his or her agent, if he or she so desires, to
install sewer taps with wyes or tees and connect the lateral sewers to the
building connection under the following provisions:



   (A)   The construction of the public sewer, sewer taps and
connections of the lateral sewer to the sewer tap shall be under the
supervision or a registered civil engineer holding registration in the state,
who shall submit “as-built plans” bearing the registered civil engineer's
registration seal and number to the Public Works Department. It shall be the
duty of the developer to require that all sewer taps serving lots in the
development upon which no buildings are constructed be effectively sealed
until the time as buildings will be constructed on the lots left vacant. The
sealed connections shall be inspected and approved by the Public Works
Department before being backfilled and shall be designated and located on the
“as-built plans”. The effective seal shall consist of a vitrified clay
stopper inserted in the bell of the sewer extending to the property line from
the public sewer; the stopper shall be jointed according to the Town
Engineer's standard detail specification of the work. The stopper shall be
permanently flagged by attaching one end of a length of copper wire to the
stopper and the other end to a broken piece of clay pipe, which shall be
placed under the solid surface directly over the end of a sewer pipe.



   (B)   Before any building sewer construction is commenced, plumbing
permits must be obtained by the developer or his or her agent from the
building official.



   (C)   When the “as-built plans” are submitted, the Water and
Wastewater Utility Superintendent Department will make a record of the sewer
taps.



   (D)   The Public Works Director will collect a fee as set forth in
the Town Code.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-178)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 51.079  RECORDS TO BE KEPT BY WATER AND WASTEWATER DIVISION.



   The Water and Wastewater Division shall keep a record of all sewer taps
and building connections made, and the purpose for which they are to be used,
together with the name of the owner of the property, his or her agent or
representative.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-179)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 51.080  INSTALLATION OF SEWER TAPS.



   The installation of sewer taps eight inches or less will be the
responsibility of the Water and Wastewater Division. The contractor and/or
developer will be responsible for the excavation to and the uncovering of the
town sanitary sewer main. All excavation and trenching shall be in accordance
with the latest regulation of the occupational safety and health
administration. The contractor shall notify the Water and Wastewater Division
at least 48 hours in advance for the required sewer taps. Division employees
will be prohibited from entering any excavation or trench not meeting the
safety requirements of any applicable town, state or federal regulations.
Upon completion of the installation of the sewer tap, the contractor and/or
developer will be responsible for backfilling the trench and restoring the
surface to its original condition or as shown on the approved engineering
plans. All sealed connections shall be inspected and approved by the Town
Engineer prior to being backfilled in accordance with § 51.078.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-180)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



SEWER SERVICE CHARGES



§ 51.095  MINIMUM CHARGES, RATES AND PAYMENTS.



   (A)   The initial sewer connection fee and minimal charge, as
provided in the sewer rate schedule, shall be made for each sewer connection
regardless of location (see Town of Florence Schedule of Fees).



   (B)   The monthly rates for sewer furnished to consumers shall be
provided in the Town of Florence Schedule of Fees.



      (1)   New service installations shall be according to the Town
of Florence Schedule of Fees; outside the municipality shall be double the
rate.



      (2)   All sewer installation charges shall be collected at the
time the customer makes application for new service (see Town of Florence
Schedule of Fees).



         (a)   Residential.  Sewer use volume charge is computed
based on 75% of actual water consumption for residential customers inside the
municipality and 100% for all other customers.



         (b)   Institutional.  Includes but not limited to
multi-bed, self-contained facilities with or without kitchens.



         (c)   Commercial.  Includes but not limited to office,
multi-family, school and government facilities.



      (3)   (a)   In order to provide for recovery of municipal
costs associated with the municipal sewer pretreatment program, a volume
charge per excess pound treated (please see Town of Florence Schedule of
Fees).



         (b)   Car washes, laundries, restaurants, bakeries,
service stations and auto repair shops and other commercial and public users
with dining facilities shall pay a per month commercial inspection charge
(see Town of Florence Schedule of Fees).



      (4)   The schedule shall apply to all sewer connections served
by the municipality and the schedule shall apply to all future extensions
unless and until the schedule is amended or charged by the Council.



      (5)   All fees for sewer service shall be collected by the
Finance Director or his or her authorized agent and deposited in the Sewer
Revenue and Reserve Fund. Initial sewer connection fees shall be paid on
issuance of a sewer connection permit. Rental fees shall be charged on a
monthly basis at the end of each month. The Town Manager or his or her
authorized agent is hereby authorized and directed to use any legal means or
procedures to ensure collection of sewer service fees.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-181)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004;
Ord. 385-05, passed 6-20-2005; Ord. 453-07, passed 1-16-2007; Ord. 510-09,
passed 7-6-2009; Ord. 559-11, passed 6-6-2011; Ord. 595-13, passed 5-20-2013)



§ 51.096  OTHER SEWER SERVICE CHARGES.



   In addition to the user charges described herein, the rate schedule
shall be sufficient to cover the following costs:



   (A)   A portion of the annual debt service costs for retirement of
sanitary sewer bonds will be charged to all customers served directly by the
town wastewater collection system.



   (B)   Adequate reserve funds to allow for reasonable expected
increases in the cost of providing services will be charged to all customers
served directly by the town wastewater collection system.



   (C)   The costs of billing and collection a performing industrial
waste services shall be charged to customers on an equitable basis.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-186)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 51.097  SEWER SERVICE CHARGES OUTSIDE THE TOWN.



   All customers served directly by the town and located outside the town
limits shall pay at a rate of one and one-half times the rate for the same
classification of service inside the town. In determining the amount the
Finance Director shall charge these customers, the same user charges as
customers inside the town and will add to this amount, as an “other
charge”, an amount sufficient to make the total charge payable by the
customers equal to one and one and one-half times the amount paid for the
same classification in the town.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-187)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 51.098  QUAIL RUN SEWER EXTENSION DEVELOPMENT FEE.



   (A)   All connections to the Quail Run sewer extension, within the
crosshatched area on the Quail Run Sewer Extension Service Area Map attached
to Ord. No. 346-04 and on file in the office of the Town Clerk, whether
direct or indirect, will be subject to the Quail Run sewer extension
development fee.



   (B)   The Quail Run sewer extension per acre development fee shall
be paid at the time the building permit is issued. No connection shall be
permitted until payment has been received by the town.



   (C)   The funds collected will be placed in a restricted “major
sewer line account” and can only be used to install future major trunk,
interceptor, extension or relief services.



   (D)   The charge will be based on the following fee schedule:



      (1)   The town will construct an eight-inch sewer line
extension to provide sewer service to the Quail Run sewer extension service
area. This plan provides for reimbursements to the town for the costs
incurred in building the line plus or minus an adjustment for construction
cost changes.



      (2)   A total charge as determined by the Town Manager will be
expended to construct the Quail Run sewer extension, which includes
construction costs, engineering costs, inspection costs and incidental costs.



      (3)   The service area for the Quail Run sewer extension, as
shown in the crosshatched area of the map referenced in division (A) of this
section, comprised 48.67 net acres defined as the gross acreage minus
existing dedicated rights-of-way for streets, highways and canals. Any
development within the service area that does not receive sewer service from
the Quail Run sewer extension shall not be charged this development fee and
likewise any development outside the service area that receives sewer service
from the Quail Run sewer extension shall be charged this fee.



      (4)   The base reimbursement shall be as follows:



         Acreage Subject to Permit Request x Total Base Cost =
Reimbursement



         48.67 (Net acreage)



      (5)   The actual reimbursement for the Quail Run sewer
extension shall be adjusted to reflect the then current prevailing market
rate for construction. The index rate for the adjustment shall be the
Engineering News Record Index using March, 1994, as the base rate. The March,
1994, Index value of $5,381 shall be used in the calculation as follows:



         Base Reimbursement x (ENR Cost Index) = Actual
reimbursement for permit



         $5,381 to issue.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-187.1)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 51.099  PAYMENT OF BILLS AND CHARGES.



   (A)   All sewer user accounts shall be carried on the books of the
Water and Wastewater Division by the house and street numbers. All notices
sent out by the town regarding sewer user accounts and all notices regarding
any matter pertaining to the use of the town sewerage system shall be sent to
the billing address noted in the application for service. Should the owner of
the property desire personal notice from the town, he or she should submit a
mailing address to the Water and Wastewater Division. If insure proper
delivery of notices, all errors in house numbers should be promptly reported
to the Water and Wastewater Division.



   (B)   The sewer account and bills shall distinguish the amount of
the sewer user charge from any industrial cost recovery charge, if applicable.



   (C)   All rates and service charges are due and payable when
rendered. Payment must be made no later than the due date printed on the
bill. If payment is not received by the due date, the next monthly billing
will indicate the past due amount and the current amount due. The account is
considered delinquent and subject to turnoff for nonpayment. If the prior
month billing is not paid by day 15 of the month, a turnoff notice will be
mailed to the customer indicating the scheduled disconnect date. If the prior
month due of the bill is not paid prior to the scheduled disconnection date,
the notice of delinquency having been given, water service may be
disconnected from the premises of the delinquent customer. No further notices
need be given to the customer by the Water and Wastewater Division. A turnoff
fee will be assessed to the customer's account for discontinuance of service.
A turnoff fee shall be collected before again restoring service, plus the
total amount of the bill due. An account may also become delinquent and
subject to disconnection for nonpayment of return check amounts and services
charges. If a customer disputes the amount of the bill or protests a proposed
termination of service as unjustified, the customer may present objections by
following the policy set forth in Chapter 50.



   (D)   A consumer's water service may be disconnected for nonpayment
of a bill for sewer service rendered at a previous location served by the
Water and Wastewater Division.



   (E)   Any expense caused by the town for the repair or replacement
of damaged, stolen, tampered with or misused sewer or water facilities shall
be charged against and collected from the person or persons who caused the
expense.



   (F)   All requests for discontinuing service must be made by the
owner or authorized agent of the owner of the property or by the named
applicant on a service account or his or her authorized agent. All charges
for services supplied to the premises shall be calculated and due on the
specified due date printed on the bill. The customer requesting
discontinuance of service must also furnish the Water and Wastewater Division
with a change of address.



   (G)   Until a request to discontinue service is received, the
premises shall be deemed occupied by the consumer and customer's liability
continued.



   (H)   In the event that the consumer shall have paid a deposit to
the Water and Wastewater Division, and the deposit is still being retained by
the Department, the balance of the deposit amount paid will be refunded after
deducting from the deposit the amount owing on the account.



   (I)   When a former user of the sewer system has been notified of
the amount of sewer rental charges remaining due and payment for same has not
been received, the Director may assign the account to an agent of the Water
and Wastewater Division for collection.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-188)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 51.100  APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.



   (A)   No sewer connection connecting the sanitary sewer system to
any consumer shall be made or used by any person or the municipality except
upon written application furnished to the municipality by the owner or his or
her authorized agent of the premises to which sanitary sewer services is to
be furnished. An initial sewer connection fee shall be required in addition
to a monthly rental charge for the sanitary sewer connection according to the
rates fixed by the municipality until service is discontinued by order of the
Public Works Department or written order of the owner or his or her
authorized agent. A re-application fee charge shall be made for
re-application of service to an existing connection. The initial sewer
connection fee is non-refundable. Applications for sanitary sewer service
outside the corporate limits must be approved by resolution of the Council.
The Council shall have the right to consider each application presented to it
separately, with the privilege of approving only those areas that are
beneficial to the municipality, and that protect the health, safety and
welfare of its citizens. No prior approvals as herein set forth shall set a
precedent for subsequent approvals (see Town of Florence Schedule of Fees).



   (B)   An applicant for sewer service shall submit the information
referenced § 50.073. If the information has been submitted for a water
application, the applicant for sewer service shall provide the information
relevant to sewer service on the existing application, if for sewer service
at the same address as water service application.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-188.1)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 51.101  FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY DEPOSITS.



   The applicant for sewer service shall pay the deposit amount referenced
in § 50.120. A service fee for activation or reactivation of a sewer service
will be imposed (see Town of Florence Schedule of Fees) provided; however, if
water service is also activated at the same time, then the only fee shall be
the one imposed in § 50.143.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-188.2)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 51.102  RISK DEPOSITS.



   Sewer service customers who do not maintain good payment record, shall
post a risk deposit in accordance with the amount and requirements set forth
in section § 50.120.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-188.3)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 51.103  DISTRIBUTION OF SEWERAGE SYSTEM REVENUES AND UTILIZATION.



   (A)   Funds shall be established for the proper distribution of
sewer revenues. They shall include but not be limited to the following:



      (1)   Sewerage Revenue Fund;



      (2)   Sewerage Operation and Maintenance Fund: user charge;



      (3)   Sewerage Operation and Maintenance Fund: other charges;
and



      (4)   Sewerage Replacement Fund: lines.



   (B)   The distribution of sewer charges to the above funds shall be
as follows:



      (1)   The operation and maintenance portion of the sewer user
charge revenues shall be allocated to the Sewerage Operations and Maintenance
Fund: user charge;



      (2)   The applicable portion of the sewer service charge
revenues shall be allocated to the Sewerage Operation and Maintenance Fund:
other charges; and



      (3)   The Replacement Fund portion of the sewer user charge
revenues shall be allocated to the Sewerage Replacement Funds.



   (C)   The utilization of the above funds shall be as follows:



      (1)   Sewerage Operations and Maintenance Fund.  User charge
shall be utilized for the user charge portion of the personal services and
operational expenses associates with the operation and maintenance of
wastewater treatment facilities and sewage collection facilities.



      (2)   Sewerage Operations and Maintenance Fund.  Other
charges shall be utilized for personal services and operational expenses
associated with the provision of sewerage system services that are not
included in the User Charge Fund.



      (3)   Sewerage Replacement Funds.  Sewerage Replacement Funds
shall be utilized for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories or
appurtenances which are necessary to maintain the capacity and performance of
the system.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-189)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



HAULAGE OF NON-HAZARDOUS LIQUID WASTES



§ 51.120  PROHIBITION ON WASTES FROM INDUSTRIAL SITES DISCHARGED TO POTW BY
TRUCK, RAIL OR DEDICATED PIPELINE.



   (A)   Hauls of non-hazardous liquid wastes (NHLW) removed from
residential and nonindustrial discharge commercial customers are subject to
the terms and conditions for discharge as contained in this  chapter. The
following NHLW wastes may be discharged into the POTW by waste haulers at the
discharge point(s) specified by the Director:



      (1)    Domestic septage from residences;



      (2)   Domestic septage from commercial facilities;



      (3)   Septage from self-service non-dry cleaning laundries;



      (4)   Domestic septage from chemical toilets;



      (5)   Wastewater from swimming pools;



      (6)   Wastewater from standing storm and flood waters;



      (7)   Wastewater from well construction; and



      (8)   Wastewater from incidental discharges of wells whose
purpose is to monitor groundwater quality.



   (B)   The Director, at his or her discretion, shall have the
authority to establish additional categories of NHLW that can be discharged
to the POTW. Any additional category of NHLW shall be placed on file with the
Town Clerk and at each authorized discharge point.



   (C)   Aside from the above, any wastes removed by a hauler from
nonresidential, industrial or commercial customers are specifically
prohibited from being discharged to the POTW. Discharge of the wastes into
the POTW will constitute a violation, and will subject the hauler to the
penalties provided for in this chapter.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-205)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)
Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.121  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   Except as provided in § 51.122, any person transporting NHLW to the
POTW shall first obtain from the Director, a NLHW hauler permit prior to any
discharge. The person shall pay an annual permit fee if only one vehicle is
used. There is an additional annual charge. Discharge of NHLW without a
permit is prohibited. Any person violating this section shall be liable for a
permit fee of $1,000 following the first occurrence. The permit fee for
disposing of any NHLW in a POTW without a waste hauler permit a subsequent
time shall be $10,000. This is in addition to all other remedies available to
the Director under this chapter.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-207)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)
Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.122  EXEMPTION.



   The Director has the authority to exempt transporters from the
permitting requirement of this chapter if the Director determines that other
safeguards are in place to protect the POTW, worker safety, the public and
the environment. Any exceptions made pursuant to this section shall be filed
with the Town Clerk.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-207.1)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 51.123  AUTHORITY OF THE DIRECTOR; PERMITEE LIMITATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The Director shall develop and administer a non-hazardous
liquid waste monitoring program. The scope of the program is to determine the
characteristics of the non-hazardous liquid waste, and to discover illegal
loads and prevent their discharge to the POTW.



   (B)   The Director shall establish a NHLW policy. A copy of the NHLW
policy shall be on file with the Town Clerk and at any designated discharge
site.



   (C)   The Director shall issue or amend, (as applicable), a permit
within 60 days of receiving the permit application. In addition to other
conditions and requirements deemed appropriate by the Director, each permit
may contain the following:



      (1)   Specify a time period not to exceed five years;



      (2)   Require the permittee to complete a waste tracking form
(manifest) for each load of NHLW prior to discharge to the POTW. The manifest
forms shall be approved by the Director. The manifest shall contain
information on the permittee and the source, quality and quantity of the
NHLW, as well as a certification statement by the permittee to that effect;



      (3)   Specify the allowable categories of NHLW to be
discharged at the designated discharge point;



      (4)   Prior to discharge of hauled waste, the permittee shall
allow a town designated representative to sample the waste to ensure
compliance with discharge limits and requirements. The permittee shall not be
allowed to discharge NHLW until the initial analysis is complete. The
Director reserves the right to refuse permission to discharge any load that
may not be treatable by the POTW, or will inhibit, interfere or otherwise be
incompatible with the operation of the POTW;



      (5)   Require the permittee carry liability insurance is the
amount and in the form as shall be determined by the Director. The insurance
shall, at a minimum, afford general liability coverage, including contractual
liability, in the amount of $1,000,000 combined single limit. Motor vehicle
liability insurance shall be in the minimum amounts as outlined in A.R.S. §
28-4033. Worker's compensation insurance, if applicable shall comply with
state requirements. Evidence of the insurance coverage shall be provided to
the Director. The requirement shall not in any manner preclude the permittee
from obtaining the additional insurance coverage as may be deemed necessary
for his or her own protection;



      (6)   Require the permittee (as “indemnitor”) to
indemnify, defend and hold harmless the town (as idemnitee) from and against
any and all claims, losses, liability, costs or expenses (including
reasonable attorney fees) (hereinafter collectively referred to as
“claims”) arising out of bodily injury of any person (including death) or
property damage to the extent that the claims are caused by the negligence,
misconduct or other fault of the indemnitor, its agents, employees or
contractors; and



      (7)   Specify discharge limitations and requirements as deemed
appropriate by the Director.



   (D)   The permittee is responsible for protecting the POTW from any
contributing discharges which would inhibit, interfere or otherwise be
incompatible with the operation or maintenance of the collection system or
treatment plant including the use or disposal of municipal sludge. The
permittee shall comply with all requirements and conditions of his or her
permit.



   (E)   The permit is nontransferable by the permittee. In the event
of any change in control or ownership, the permittee shall notify the
Director. The new owner shall apply for a new permit and shall not be allowed
to discharge to the POTW until a permit is issued or written permission is
otherwise provided by the Director.



   (F)   The Director is authorized to take appropriate enforcement
action against any person in noncompliance with this chapter. All penalties
assessed to the town by federal and/or state agencies as a result of a
violation shall be recoverable from the violator. In addition to the
enforcement available to the Director that is contained herein, the Director
may:



      (1)   Suspend for a period of up to 30 days the permit of any
hauler for the first violation of any provision of the permit or any
provision of this chapter. Following the first period of suspension, the
waste hauler permit may be reinstated only after payment of the fee for
reinstatement, which shall be $5,000;



      (2)   Suspend for a period of up to 180 days the permit of any
hauler committing a subsequent violation of a provision of the permit or a
provision of this chapter. Following the second period of suspension, for a
subsequent violation, the permit may be reinstated only after payment of the
reinstatement fee, which shall be $10,000. In addition to any reinstatement
fee required to be paid under this section, the hauler shall either pay or
make arrangements acceptable to the Director to pay any expense the town
incurs by reason of the violation; and



      (3)   A suspension may be appealed by the permit holder to the
Town Council by submitting an appeal in writing within 15 days of receiving
notice of the suspension setting forth the specific grounds for the appeal.
The filing of the appeal will not serve to stay the suspension of the fees
for reinstatement. A lesser fee for reinstatement may be charged by the Town
Council if it is found that the permit holder has taken substantial action to
prevent further violations.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-208)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 51.124  MIXING OF NON-HAZARDOUS LIQUID WASTE.



   Septage of different categories shall not be mixed unless the load
contains only septic wastes from septic tank and chemical toilets.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-209)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 51.125  HAZARDOUS LIQUID WASTE.



   Regardless of origin, hazardous liquid waste (as defined in § 1004 of
the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (49 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.)),
shall not be disposed of in any POTW, manhole or headworks. The discharge of
hazardous wastes to the headworks of a POTW by truck, rail or dedicated
pipeline is prohibited.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-210)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)
Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.126  NON-HAZARDOUS LIQUID WASTE FEES.



   (A)   There shall be a charge based upon the nominal capacity of the
tank truck or trailer for haulers discharging to the POTW non-hazardous
liquid waste collected inside the limits of the town.  Please see Town of
Florence Schedule of Fees (Fee Schedule may be viewed online at
www.town.florence.az.us).



      (1)   Chemical toilets. Please see Town of Florence Schedule
of Fees.



      (2)   Residential septic tanks.  Septic tanks from
“household sources”, commercial and domestic septic tanks and self-serve
laundry wastes.  Please see Town of Florence Schedule of Fees.



   (B)   There shall be a charge based upon the nominal capacity of the
tank truck or trailer for haulers discharging to the POTW non-hazardous
liquid waste collected outside the limits of the town.  Please see Town of
Florence Schedule of Fees.



   (C)   The permittee shall pay fees through a monthly billing system.
Any hauler who is in arrears may, at the Director's request, be required to
provide a cash bond to continue monthly billing service. The bond can be used
to reduce or pay off any unpaid amount. The Director shall file with the Town
Clerk and post at every designated discharge site a copy of the NHLW fee
collection policies and procedures.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-211)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 51.127  ACCEPTANCE OF NON-HAZARDOUS LIQUID WASTE.



   (A)   Permits shall be limited to the discharge of domestic sewage
waste containing no industrial waste. Any user transporting, collecting or
discharging non-domestic industrial process wastewaters or a mixture of the
wastewaters with domestic wastewaters shall obtain a permit in accordance
with § 51.123.



   (B)   The Director shall designate the locations and times where the
trucks may be discharged and may refuse to accept any truckload of waste at
his or her absolute discretion where it appears that the waste could
interfere with the effective operation of the treatment works or any sewer
line or appurtenance, or where it appears that a truckload of waste contains
industrial process waste or a mixture of domestic sewage and industrial
process waste contains industrial process waste or a mixture of domestic
sewage and industrial process waste. Discharges shall only take place during
normal business hours unless specifically approved by the Director.



   (C)   The Director shall have the authority to investigate the
source of any hauled waste to require testing the waste at the expense of the
discharger prior to the discharge.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-212)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



INDUSTRIAL USERS AND PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS



§ 51.140  RESERVED.



§ 51.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   A person convicted of violations of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $500 or
incarceration for a term not to exceed 30 days or both, all as further
provided herein and § 50.010 of the Florence Code.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-152.1)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



   (B)   The violation or failure to follow any condition or provisions
of the waste hauler permit, non- hazardous liquid waste dumping policy or
Director's order authorized herein shall be a violation of this chapter.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. III, § 18-213)  (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004)



CHAPTER 52: SOLID WASTE



Section



General Provisions



   52.001   Title



   52.002   Purpose and scope



   52.003   Powers and duties of the Director



   52.004   Hours of collection



   52.005   Definitions



   52.006   Unauthorized use of refuse collection system unlawful



   52.007   Refuse accumulation unlawful



Solid Waste Containment



   52.020   Inspection of containers



   52.021   Responsibility for solid waste and recyclables



   52.022   Illegal dumping of solid waste; penalty



   52.023   Household medical and infectious waste



   52.024   Animal waste



   52.025   Unobstructed passage in streets and alleys



   52.026   Solid waste or recyclables container requirements



   52.027   Condemnation of containers; removal



   52.028   Responsibility for streets, alleys and sidewalks



   52.029   Burning and dumping unlawful



Solid Waste Collection



   52.045   Ownership, placement and responsibility for containers



   52.046   Residential, institutional and commercial collection



   52.047   Residential bulk trash placement and collection services



Administration and Enforcement



   52.065   Authority to enforce



   52.066   Rules and regulations



   52.067   Enforcement and corporation of other departments



   52.068   Issuance of citation or notice of violation



   52.069   Threats and intimidation



Solid Waste Disposal Facilities



   52.085   Disposal site; designation; enforcement



   52.086   Disposal site; rules and regulations



Solid Waste Fees



   52.100   Level of solid waste fees; no exceptions



   52.101   Payment of solid waste fees



   52.102   Credits and debits of solid waste fees



   52.103   Method of collecting fees



 



   52.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 52.001  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as the "Solid Waste Ordinance of the Town
of Florence." It may be cited as such or as the "Florence Sanitation Code."
It may also be referred to hereinafter as "this chapter."



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. IV, § 18-231) (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004; Ord.
604-13, passed 12-2-2013)



§ 52.002  PURPOSE AND SCOPE.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health
and safety of the citizens of the town and to protect the environment by
establishing minimum standards for the storage, collection, treatment,
transportation, processing and disposal of solid waste. In addition, to set
rates charged by the town for its solid waste program and its inspection,
collection and disposal services, so as to recover the town's costs to
provide such services.



   



   (B)   Collection required. Solid waste collections shall be made by
the town or by collection companies as authorized by the town. Except as
provided in divisions (C) and (D) of the section, all persons and properties
within the town are required to use the solid waste collection system of the
town, to haul, carry or transport solid waste through the streets and
highways of the town. All persons and occupied property shall use and be
responsible for at least the minimum level of solid waste collection service
and the associated charges and fees for residential, institutional or
commercial service, as applicable, unless exempted from such requirements
under this division or division (C) of this section. It shall be unlawful to
dump or store solid waste, recyclable, or yard waste materials in violation
of the provisions of this chapter. The town shall automatically bill the
residential or commercial customer for such minimum level of service if the
customer does not sign up for service within 30 days of occupying a property
in the town. Upon satisfactory evidence that a residential customer owns a
business in the town that has a commercial solid waste collection service,
the Director may in his discretion approve an exemption from the mandatory
solid waste collection service and payment requirements of this section.



   (C)   Commercial permitted hauler. Those commercial and industrial
business establishments having prior established permits to haul their own
waste may continue to haul such solid waste by annual permit. Renewal permits
shall be issued upon application and payment of the annual permit fee. Any
permit holder, as provided for in this subsection, shall haul solid waste at
least once a week for public health reasons.



   (D)   Self-haul. This section does not prohibit the limited and
occasional hauling of solid waste, recyclable materials, or yard wastes by a
customer from their property to an approved town solid waste, recyclables, or
yard waste collection site. However, occasional haulers are not exempt from
the mandatory solid waste collection service and payment requirements above
and are responsible for the fees for collection site services, if any.



   (E)   Penalty. Violations of the provisions of this section are
punishable as provided in § 52.999(B)(2) of this chapter.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. IV, § 18-232) (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004; Ord.
604-13, passed 12-2-2013)



§ 52.003  POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR.



   The Director, in order to protect the health and safety of the citizens
and the environment of the town, is authorized and directed to implement and
enforce the provisions of this chapter to control the storage, collection,
treatment, transportation, processing and disposal of solid waste generated
within the town. The Director is further authorized and directed to provide
public solid waste disposal facilities for solid waste originating within the
town. Nothing in this chapter is intended or shall be construed so as to
infringe or supplant the authority of the Pinal County Health Department, the
State Department of Health Services, State Department of Environmental
Quality or the United States Environmental Protection Agency in this area
pursuant to federal and state laws.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. IV, § 18-233) (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004; Ord.
604-13, passed 12-2-2013)



§ 52.004  HOURS OF COLLECTION.



   (A)   The hours for collection of solid waste or recyclables by
private and municipal collectors shall be regulated by the Director. In order
to prohibit the disturbance of the public, it shall be unlawful to collect or
remove solid waste or recyclables between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m. In the event of a missed collection or other unusual circumstances,
reasonable accommodations may be approved by the Director if a request is
made by a person authorized to collect solid waste in the town.



   (B)   For purposes of this section, PRIVATE means any entity other
than the town or a collection service authorized by the town.



   (C)   All refuse shall be collected as deemed necessary by the
Director or designee.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. IV, § 18-234) (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004; Ord.
604-13, passed 12-2-2013) Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.005  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALLEY. A public passageway affording a secondary means of access to
abutting property for utility and emergency vehicles.



   ASHES. All residue from the burning of any combustible material but
does not include ashes from medical waste, hazardous wastes or special waste.



   AUTOMATED CONTAINED SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SYSTEM. A contained solid
waste collection system that utilizes town-specified solid waste containers
and a solid waste collection vehicle equipped with a lifting device.



   BULK TRASH. Bulk trash means those items as defined in § 52.047(G).



   COLLECTOR. The municipality or its authorized representative.



   COMMERCIAL SERVICE UNIT. Any building, structure or premises not
defined as a RESIDENTIAL SERVICE UNIT or an INSTITUTIONAL SERVICE UNIT in
this section.



   COMPACTOR or ROLL-OFF SYSTEM. A contained solid waste collection system
that uses a stationary solid waste compactor and compactor bins or open top
roll-off boxes.



   CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION SOLID WASTE. All solid waste, building
materials, rubble, soil and spoils resulting from construction, remodeling,
repair and demolition operations.



   CONTAINED SOLID WASTE. All garbage and trash generated and placed in
containers for disposal.



   DEPARTMENT. The Town of Florence Public Works Department.



   DIRECTOR. The Town Manager or designee.



   DWELLING UNIT. Any structure or structures used primarily for human
habitation by one or more persons.



   FLY-TIGHT. The lid of the container must fit flush around all contact
points and prevent entry of flies or rodents.



   GARBAGE. All putrescible waste, except sewage and body waste, including
waste accumulated of animals, food or vegetable matter, and including waste
that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat,
fish, fowl, fruit and vegetable, and shall include all the wastes or
accumulations or vegetable matter of residence, restaurants, hotels and
places where food is prepared for human consumption. The term GARBAGE shall
not include recognized industrial byproducts. Swill, offal and any
accumulation of spoiled, partially or fully decomposed, rotting or discarded
animal, vegetable or other matter that attends the preparation, handling,
consumption, storage or decay of plant and animal matter including meats,
fish, fowl, buds, fruits, vegetables or dairy products and their waste
wrappers or containers.



   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any waste so defined by the provisions of A.R.S. Title
49, Chapter 5, Art. 2 and 40 C.F.R. part 261 and polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCB's).



   HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any waste that would otherwise be a
hazardous waste pursuant to A.R.S., Title 49, Chapter 5, Art. 2, and 40
C.F.R. part 261 but is excluded as a hazardous waste because it is generated
by the normal day-to-day activities of households.



   IMMINENT HEALTH or SAFETY HAZARD. Condition of real property, solid
waste or recycling container that places a person’s life, health, safety or
property in high risk of peril when the condition is immediate, impending on
the point of happening and menacing.



   INCIPIENT HAZARD. Condition of real property that can become an
imminent or health hazard if further deterioration occurs that can cause
unreasonable risk of death or severe personal injury.



   INSTITUTIONAL SERVICE UNIT. Any school or educational facility; any
government building or facility whether belonging to the town, Pinal County,
the State of Arizona or the United States; any jail or prison facility
whether privately or publicly owned; any religious institution; any publicly
owned medical facility and the buildings and facilities of any nonprofit
organization.



   INFECTIOUS SOLID WASTE. Any material which presents a significant
danger of infection because it is contaminated with or may reasonably be
expected to be contaminated with agents which cause or significantly
contribute to the cause of increased infection or infectious disease in human
beings.



   INSPECTOR. The authorized employee or employees of the municipality
having the duty of the enforcement of this chapter.



   MOBILE HOME DEVELOPMENT. A subdivision designed for mobile homes in
which the lots are individually owned.



   MOBILE HOME PARK. Property owned and operated for the purpose of
leasing or renting out mobile home space to tenants.



   MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING UNITS. A building or buildings attached to each
other and containing two or more dwelling units. This term is intended to
apply to dwelling unit types such as duplex, triplex, four-plex and
apartments.



   NONCOMBUSTIBLE SOLID WASTE. Consists of miscellaneous solid waste
materials that are unburnable at ordinary incinerator operating temperatures
(up to 2,000°F) and is in the inorganic component of solid waste.



   NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION. Any entity recognized by the Internal Revenue
Service as having § 501(C)(3) status, or other tax exempt organizations
however described.



   OBNOXIOUS MATERIALS. Any solid waste that, when exposed, is unpleasant
or offensive to the senses due to its odor or condition.



   OWNER. A person, persons or legal entity listed as current title holder
as recorded in the official records of the County Recorder's office. OWNER
andOCCUPANT may be used interchangeably and shall mean every person in
possession, charge or in control of any dwelling, flat, rooming house or any
eating place, shop, place or business establishment where garbage or other
refuse is created or accumulated.



   PERSON. Any natural person; any corporation, partnership or other legal
entity; and the United States, State of Arizona, County of Pinal and Town of
Florence.



   PLACEMENT DATE. The first day of the scheduled collection period, as
established and published by the Director.



   PREMISES. Land, building or other structures, or parts thereof, where
solid waste is stored or accumulated.



   PRIVATE SOLID WASTE COLLECTION HAULERS. Solid waste collection services
owned and operated by private individuals or corporations holding a business
license issued by the town.   



   PUBLIC NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious or obnoxious to health, or
is offensive to the senses, or is an obstruction to the free use of property,
so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by any
considerable number of persons, or which obstruct the free passage or use, in
the customary manner, of any street, alley, sidewalk or public property.



   PUTRESCIBLE SOLID WASTE. Solid waste which is capable of being
decomposed by microorganisms with sufficient rapidity as to cause nuisances
from odors or gases and capable of providing food for or attracting birds,
insects, snakes, rodents or animals capable of transferring a diseased
bacterium or virus from one organism to another.



   RECYCLABLES. Any solid waste that has been separated from other solid
waste for the purpose of being collected and recycled.



   RECYCLING CONTAINER. A receptacle used exclusively for the storage of
recyclables until they are collected.



   REFRIGERANTS. Chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) and hydrochloroflourocarbons
(HCFC).



   REFUSE. Solid wastes, including garbage and rubbish.



   RESIDENTIAL SERVICE UNIT. Any single family or multi-family dwelling
unit; any apartment building or apartment complex; any townhouse or
condominium; and any other building or structure regardless of type which is
used primarily for human habitation. RESIDENTIAL SERVICE UNIT does not
include facilities for the detention or incarceration of prisoners.



   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. An occupant, lessor, lessee, manager, licensee,
owner or other person having control over a structure or parcel of land and
in the case where remediation is proposed as a means of abatement, any lien
holder whose lien interest is recorded in the official records of the County
Recorder's office.



   RUBBISH. Refuse other than garbage, tin cans, bottles, ashes, paper,
pasteboard or wooden boxes, brush, leaves, weeds and cuttings from trees,
lawns, shrubs and gardens or other waste materials produced in the normal
course of everyday living.



   SCHOOLS. All public and private buildings used for pre-school,
elementary, specialized or higher education purposes.



   SMALL ANIMAL WASTE. Refuse including feces and/or discarded bedding or
flooring materials such as straw, sawdust or paper from yards, kennels, dog
or cat runs, chicken pens, aviaries or other containment for domestic animals
such as dogs, cats, fowl such as birds, chickens, ducks, geese or other tame
or permitted wild animals under 150 pounds.



   SOLID WASTE. Any garbage, bulk trash, yard waste and other materials or
products, including putrescible and non-putrescible wastes, organic and
inorganic wastes, combustible and noncombustible wastes and liquid
non-hazardous waste, but not including hazardous waste or human body parts.



   SOLID WASTE CONTAINER. A receptacle used exclusively for the storage of
solid waste, excluding construction and demolition solid waste until it is
collected.



   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY. Any site owned, operated or utilized by
any person for the collection, source separation, storage, transportation,
transfer, processing, treatment or disposal of solid waste.



   SOLID WASTE FEE. A fee assessed by the town for solid waste services
provided by the Public Works Department and associated functions.



   TIRE. A tire used on vehicles, trailers, machinery or equipment used on
or off the road, excluding bicycles and mopeds.



   TOWN OF FLORENCE. The Town of Florence, Arizona.



   WATERTIGHT. The lid of the container must fit flush around all contact
points and prevent entry of rain.



   WASTE. Unwanted solid, liquid or gaseous materials.



   YARD WASTE. Branches, palm fronds, twigs, weeds, leaves, grass and
vegetation clippings.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. IV, § 18-235) (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004; Ord.
604-13, passed 12-2-2013)



§ 52.006  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF REFUSE COLLECTION SYSTEM UNLAWFUL.



   There is hereby established a system of refuse collection,
transportation and disposal and it shall be unlawful for any person to dump
or dispose of any rubbish or garbage within the limits of the town excepting
in the refuse container assigned to them as an owner or occupant of a
premises located in the town, or as otherwise permitted in this chapter. It
shall also be unlawful to engage in the business of residential or
institutional collection, transportation, hauling or conveying of solid waste
over the streets or alleys of the municipality or to dump or dispose of the
same except by the town or its authorized collection services.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. IV, § 18-236) (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004; Ord.
604-13, passed 12-2-2013) Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.007  REFUSE ACCUMULATION UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate or permit to
accumulate in or about any yard, lot, place or premises, or upon any street,
alley or sidewalk adjacent to such lot, yard, place or premises, any solid
waste, garbage or refuse that is not contained as required by this chapter.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. IV, § 18-237) (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004; Ord.
604-13, passed 12-2-2013) Penalty, see § 52.999



SOLID WASTE CONTAINMENT



§ 52.020  INSPECTION OF CONTAINERS.



   Provisions shall be made for regular inspections, by the Solid Waste
Division of the Public Works Department to secure compliance with this
chapter with reference to containment of solid waste or recyclables. The
Director shall have the right to enter commercial, industrial and
institutional establishments for inspection purposes.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. IV, § 18-238) (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004; Ord.
604-13, passed 12-2-2013)



§ 52.021  RESPONSIBILITY FOR SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLABLES.



   (A)   The responsible party of any premises or business
establishment shall be responsible for their solid waste or recyclables until
the solid waste or recyclables are collected by the town agents of the town
or licensed solid waste haulers.



   (B)   The responsible party of any premises, business establishment
or industry shall be responsible for the sanitary conditions of the premises,
business establishment or industry, and for the proper storage, containment
and placement for collection of all solid waste and recyclables. Except as
provided in this chapter, it shall be a violation for any person to bury,
dump, dispose or release upon any street, alley, right-of-way or public land,
any solid waste or recyclables, including construction and demolition solid
waste and tires.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. IV, § 18-239) (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004; Ord.
604-13, passed 12-2-2013) Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.022  ILLEGAL DUMPING OF SOLID WASTE; PENALTY.



   (A)   It shall be a violation for any person to dump, dispose or
release, or cause to be dumped, disposed or released, any solid waste,
garbage, bulk waste or refuse, including hazardous waste, upon any street,
alley, right-of-way, public or private property within the town except as
specifically permitted in this chapter.



   (B)   In addition to any penalties imposed pursuant to § 52.999(B),
a person in violation of division (A) above shall make restitution to the
town for all cleanup and disposal costs incurred by the town.



   (C)   If issuing a notice of violation of this provision involves a
vehicle, the person in whose name the vehicle is registered shall be prima
facie responsible for the violation and subject to penalties described in
this chapter.



   (D)   The provisions of this section shall apply to those persons in
whose names the vehicle is jointly registered. The person shall be jointly
and severally prima facie responsible for such a violation and subject to the
penalties therefor.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. IV, § 18-240) (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004; Ord.
604-13, passed 12-2-2013) Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.023  HOUSEHOLD MEDICAL AND INFECTIOUS WASTE.



   All household medical and infectious solid waste including lancets,
syringes and hypodermic needles must be properly contained before disposing
of in the solid waste container. Household and infectious waste must be
placed in plastic bags and securely tied before placing in the solid waste
container. Lancets, syringes and hypodermic needles must be placed in a
rigid, leak-proof and puncture resistant container with a secured and taped
lid and must be clearly labeled identifying the contents before placing in
the solid waste container. Depositing or disposing of household medical and
infectious waste or lancets, syringes and hypodermic needles in any recycling
container is prohibited.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. IV, § 18-241) (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004; Ord.
604-13, passed 12-2-2013) Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.024  ANIMAL WASTE.



   (A)   Wastes from animals and pets shall be removed and disposed of
in the manner prescribed and as often as necessary to prevent occurrence of a
nuisance or health and safety hazard.



   (B)   Small animal waste from typical domestic pets such as dogs and
cats shall be placed in a plastic bag, securely tied and placed in a solid
waste container.



   (C)   All animal owners and custodians shall immediately clean up
and properly dispose of wastes left by their animals on any public street,
alley, gutter, sidewalk, right-of-way or park.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. IV, § 18-242) (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004; Ord.
604-13, passed 12-2-2013)



§ 52.025  UNOBSTRUCTED PASSAGE IN STREETS AND ALLEYS.



   (A)   It shall be a violation for any person to permit trees, shrubs
or brush growing upon his or her property to encroach on or over any public
right-of-way so as to interfere with the movement of persons or vehicles. It
is the responsibility of the responsible party to trim trees or shrubbery on
their property and in the adjacent right-of-way back to their property line
and allow 13 foot height clearance.



   (B)   It shall be illegal to have any obstruction, including, but
not limited to, parked vehicles within 15 feet of a solid waste or recycling
container placed out or collection service or to obstruct the solid waste
and/or recycling collection operations in any other manner.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. IV, § 18-243) (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004; Ord.
604-13, passed 12-2-2013) Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.026  SOLID WASTE OR RECYCLABLES CONTAINER REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   General statement. The responsible party of any premises,
business establishment or industry shall be responsible for the sanitary
condition of the premises, business establishment or industry and for the
proper storage, containment and placement for collection of all solid waste
and recyclables. All solid waste and recyclables shall be stored in a manner
that does not present a health or safety hazard or public nuisance,
including, but not limited to the breeding of insects. No person shall place,
deposit or allow to be placed or deposited on his or her premises or private
property or any public street, alley or right-of-way any solid waste or
recyclables except in a manner prescribed in this chapter.



   (B)   General requirements.



      (1)   All responsible parties using or occupying any dwelling
unit, commercial, industrial or institutional establishment or grounds within
the corporate limits of the town where solid waste and recyclables
accumulate, shall contain their solid waste and recyclables in watertight and
fly-tight containers.



      (2)   Solid waste shall be stored, collected and hauled for
disposal in accordance with the State Department of Health Services and State
Department of Environmental Quality Regulations.



      (3)   It is the container users' and responsible parties'
responsibility to properly contain solid waste or recyclables generated on
their premises and to keep the area around the container continuously clear
and free of all debris. If the property has alley solid waste service, the
term AREA includes the alley.



      (4)   All solid waste and recycling containers shall be
maintained in a sanitary condition. Containers shall not be stored or
maintained in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance, health or safety
hazard.



      (5)   It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by
the responsible party to remove, collect or disturb the solid waste and
recyclables stored in the containers or to remove from a solid waste or
recycling container any solid waste or recyclables set out for collection and
disposal by the town or its authorized collection services, or licensed
commercial solid waste haulers. This prohibition does not apply to town
employees or authorized agents of the town acting within the scope of their
official duties.



      (6)   It shall be unlawful for any person to utilize the solid
waste or recycling containers or receptacles assigned to other persons for
the disposal of solid waste or recyclables without their permission. This
does not apply to the automated solid waste or recycling collection system
where residents share the use of common containers.



      (7)   The lids or covers of any solid waste and recycling
containers shall at all times be kept secure in such a manner to prevent
intrusion or moisture, infestation of insects and scattering of solid waste
or recyclables. Covers shall be kept closed except when containers are being
loaded or emptied. Each container shall be placed on or adjacent to the
property of the authorized user at a location approved by the Director.



      (8)   Location of containers. Containers used for storage of
solid waste and recyclables shall be placed as follows:



         (a)   Residential containers shall be located at
curbside in front of the residential service unit.



         (b)   No container shall be placed so as to restrict
egress from an exit door or beneath a fire escape. No container shall be
placed under a street floor window unless the window is of fire-resistant
construction.



      (9)   Containers placed at curbside shall be located in such a
manner to not interfere with pedestrians or vehicles.



      (10)   All boxes, cartons and crates shall be collapsed before
being placed in containers. Ashes shall be soaked with water to extinguish
any live embers and contained in tied bags before placement in containers.



      (11)   Explosive or flammable materials of any kind shall not
be placed in any solid waste recycling container.



      (12)   Corrosives, reactives, oxidizers, lead acid batteries
or any hazardous waste shall not be disposed of in solid waste or recycling
containers.



      (13)   Pool chemical containers shall be emptied, rinsed,
drained and moisture free prior to being placed in a solid waste or recycling
container.



   (C)   Residential user requirements.



      (1)   All household solid waste and grass shall be bagged and
securely tied before being placed in solid waste containers. Solid waste
shall be drained of all liquids and tied in waterproof bags before being
placed in solid waste containers.



      (2)   Construction and demolition solid waste shall not be
placed in a solid waste or recycling container unless generated by the owner
or occupant of a residential dwelling unit. If the construction and
demolition solid waste is generated by a contractor, the contractor is
responsible for the removal and disposal of the solid waste. All construction
and demolition solid waste shall be removed promptly and shall not be stored
in any location where it may be blown or otherwise dispersed beyond the
construction site. The town may, upon request from the responsible party,
provide containers for the construction and demolition solid waste for a
different and separate fee.



      (3)   It shall be unlawful to place material in any solid
waste or recycling container of a volume or weight which prevents the
collection vehicle from emptying the container or which damages the
collection vehicle or container. Maximum weight of material placed in any 90-
to 100-gallon container shall not exceed 200 pounds.



      (4)   It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by
the town to utilize, for other than its intended purpose, the lid from any
solid waste or recycling container.



   (D)   Commercial user requirements.



      (1)   The owner or responsible party of any commercial or
institutional solid waste or recycling container placed on private property
or in the town right-of-way shall be responsible for maintaining the area
within a 25-foot radius around the container and/or bin in a sanitary
condition and prevent scattering or blowing around of materials deposited.



      (2)   Commercial users shall, where the volume of solid waste
or recyclables accumulated cannot be conveniently handled in cans or bags,
provide bins or compactor bins for containment of solid waste and/or
recyclables. The bins or compactor bins shall be constructed of durable
non-absorbent, noncombustible material and have suitable fly-tight and
watertight covers.



      (3)   All commercial and institutional containers shall be
placed or concealed in such a manner so as to minimize visibility from the
street or public walkways.



      (4)   All solid waste and recycling containers shall be
identifiable by indicating the owner's name and telephone number on the
container and shall meet all requirements of this chapter. The container
identification must be readable from a minimum distance of ten feet.



      (5)   Commercial users, shall, upon request of the Director,
be required to show documentation of the method of collection and removal of
solid waste and/or recyclables generated by the establishment.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. IV, § 18-244) (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004; Ord.
604-13, passed 12-2-2013) Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.027  CONDEMNATION OF CONTAINERS; REMOVAL.



   (A)   If a solid waste or recycling container is in violation and
presents a health or safety hazard, the Director shall issue a notice of
violation to the responsible party. Notification shall consist of tagging the
solid waste or recycling containers with a notice of violation or by
delivering a notice in person or by mail to the responsible party.



   (B)   If action necessary to remedy the violation is not taken
within the period specified, the Director shall have the right to remove the
solid waste or recycling container and dispose of it in accordance with and
subject to § 52.003.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. IV, § 18-245) (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004; Ord.
604-13, passed 12-2-2013)



§ 52.028  RESPONSIBILITY FOR STREETS, ALLEYS AND SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   The owner and any responsible party in control of any land
abutting a sidewalk, alley or street shall maintain the sidewalk, alley or
street free from any accumulation of solid waste.



   (B)   The areas required to be maintained pursuant to this section
are:



      (1)   Any portion of a street, which has been opened for
public use, between the curb line and the abutting property line including
sidewalks; and



      (2)   One-half the width of abutting alleys from the property
line to the centerline of the alley.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. IV, § 18-246) (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004; Ord.
604-13, passed 12-2-2013)



§ 52.029  BURNING AND DUMPING UNLAWFUL.



   No person, whether a resident or non-resident, shall burn, incinerate,
bury, dump, collect, remove or in any other manner dispose of rubbish or
garbage within the limits of the municipality, except as provided in this
chapter or as provided in a special permit issued by the Pinal County Air
Quality Control and the Florence Fire Department. No person shall throw,
discard or deposit any rubbish or garbage in or upon any street, alley,
sidewalk or vacant ground, or in or upon any canal, irrigation ditch,
drainage ditch or other watercourse.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. IV, § 18-247) (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004; Ord.
604-13, passed 12-2-2013) Penalty, see § 52.999



SOLID WASTE COLLECTION



§ 52.045  OWNERSHIP, PLACEMENT AND RESPONSIBILITY FOR CONTAINERS.



   (A)   The frequency of contained solid waste collections shall be in
accordance with the State Department of Environmental Quality Regulations.



   (B)   Collection days shall be designated by the Director.



   (C)   The Director determines the service level required and method
of collection. Residents may request different levels of service based on
service levels and fees established in § 52.100.



   (D)   The collector will specify, purchase and own the containers
which are provided to the residents, which are to be used by residential
service units for no other purpose than as solid waste and recycling
collection containers.



   (E)   Residents receiving curbside service shall place their
containers at the curb in front of their residence in such a manner that it
allows for the safe and efficient operation of the collection vehicle and
does not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. Containers shall be
placed so that they open towards the street.



   (F)   Residential lots that cannot be safely or efficiently serviced
using the town's standard solid waste equipment will be assessed a different
and separate fee as set by the Director. Situations where a different and
separate fee may apply includes, but is not limited to, hillside
developments, private streets, dead-end streets without adequate turnarounds
and multi-family dwelling units.



   (G)   The collector is responsible for cleaning only shared use
containers.



   (H)   All containers issued by the town or its authorized collection
service for use in conjunction with an automated loading device shall remain
the property or the authorized service provider. The town or its authorized
collection service is responsible for repairs to the containers when damage
is caused during normal usage. Containers shall be secured between collection
days in such a manner that they are not readily susceptible to theft or
vandalism. Anyone found to have intentionally or negligently damaged the
container provided to them shall be liable to pay the replacement or repair
cost.



   (I)   Only the collector shall be authorized to remove any solid
waste or recycling container from its assigned location. It shall be unlawful
for any other person to remove a container from the address to which it is
assigned.



   (J)   To ensure containers are placed out on time, containers may be
placed at the curb after 6:00 p.m. on the day preceding collection.
Containers for street collection shall be placed at the curb for service no
later than 5:30 a.m. on the day of collection. They must be removed prior to
5:30 a.m. on the day after collection. It shall be unlawful to place or
permit containers to remain adjacent to the curb except upon regular
collection days. Containers shall be stored between collection days on the
users' property so as to not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic.



   (K)   Every owner and occupant of premises within the prescribed
limits of the town shall use the refuse collecting and disposal system
assigned to them, and they shall deposit or cause to be deposited in
accordance with this chapter all rubbish and garbage that is of a nature that
it is perishable, may decompose or may be scattered by wind or otherwise,
which accumulated on their premises.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. IV, § 18-249) (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004; Ord.
604-13, passed 12-2-2013) Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.046  RESIDENTIAL, INSTITUTIONAL AND COMMERCIAL COLLECTION.



   (A)   The town or its authorized collection service shall provide
solid waste collection service to all residential service units.



   (B)   The town or its authorized collection service shall provide
solid waste collection service to all institutional service units.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. IV, § 18-251) (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004; Ord.
604-13, passed 12-2-2013) Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.047  RESIDENTIAL BULK TRASH PLACEMENT AND COLLECTION SERVICES.



   (A)   Bulk trash collection services shall only be available for
single family residential dwelling units. It shall be unlawful to place bulk
trash out for collection more than 48 hours prior to the scheduled placement
date. The owner or occupant of a single family residential service unit shall
notify the collector no later than 24 hours before the scheduled placement
date that a bulk trash pickup is requested.



   (B)   Bulk trash shall be placed out for collection no later than
5:30 a.m. on the scheduled placement date.



   (C)   Bulk trash placed out for collection shall be in neat stacks.



   (D)   Bulk trash placed out for curbside collection shall be placed
on the resident's property, parallel to the street or curb. Bulk trash shall
not be placed on the sidewalk or in the street.



   (E)   Bulk trash shall not be placed within five feet of any fixed
object, solid waste or recycling container, utility meter, or in any manner
which would interfere with or be hazardous to pedestrians, bicyclists,
equestrians or motorists.



   (F)   The amount of bulk trash placed for collection shall not
exceed a total uncompacted volume of 20 cubic yards.



   (G)   Items of bulk trash which are acceptable for normal
residential collection are:



      (1)   Tree limbs and branches less than four feet in length
and 12 inches in diameter that are bundled, bagged or boxed;



      (2)   Palm fronds;



      (3)   Metal materials 20 pounds or less;



      (4)   Pipe less than one inch in diameter and less than four
feet in length;



      (5)   Cardboard boxes;



      (6)   Bagged or boxed leaves, weeds, grass, small hedge and
vegetation clippings;



      (7)   Manufactured items, such as washers, dryers, hot water
heaters and appliances and equipment not containing refrigerants;



      (8)   Twenty-five pounds or less of construction and
demolition solid waste generated by a resident;



      (9)   Hedge clippings, such as oleanders; and



      (10)   Rubbish consisting only of cardboard, wooden boxes,
brush, furniture, appliances, weeds and cuttings from trees or shrubs may be
kept separately, without depositing in containers. Bulk materials, such as
leaves and lawn clippings, if not placed in containers, shall be in a sack or
receptacle for ease of loading. Compost piles may be maintained for
fertilization purposes and matter used for fertilization purposes only be
transported, kept and used. Nothing in this section shall be constructed as
to permit the violations of any provision of this code, any ordinance or any
rule or regulation of the department.



   (H)   Items of bulk trash which are not acceptable for normal
residential collection include:



      (1)   More than 25 pounds of construction and demolition solid
waste generated by a resident or any amount generated by a contractor;



      (2)   Vehicles or equipment parts in excess of 20 pounds;



      (3)   Metal material in excess of 20 pounds;



      (4)   Tires;



      (5)   Pipe over one inch in diameter or over four feet in
length;



      (6)   Cement, cement blocks, bricks, asphalt, stones and dirt;



      (7)   Lead acid batteries; and



      (8)   Hazardous materials.



   (I)   It shall be a violation of this chapter to place unacceptable
items, an amount exceeding 20 cubic yards or improperly placed bulk trash
items out for collection. The responsible party shall remove and dispose of
all bulk trash improperly placed, bulk trash exceeding 20 cubic yards and any
unacceptable items of bulk trash at their own expense.



   (J)   The town municipality may abate any violation of this section
pursuant herein.



   (K)   Bulk trash shall be collected once per month on a date
determined by the Director.



   (L)   Additional bulk trash collections may be requested for an
additional fee pursuant to § 52.100.



   (M)   The Director may require that yard waste be separated from
other bulk trash for collection in an alternative manner.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. IV, § 18-252) (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004; Ord.
604-13, passed 12-2-2013) Penalty, see § 52.999



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 52.065  AUTHORITY TO ENFORCE.



      The Director shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. In
addition, the Director is authorized to abate conditions, which in the
opinion of the Director are an incipient or imminent threat to the health or
safety of any person or persons or constitute a public nuisance.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. IV, § 18-260) (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004; Ord.
604-13, passed 12-2-2013)



§ 52.066  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Director is authorized to make reasonable and necessary rules and
regulations to carry out provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. IV, § 18-261) (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004; Ord.
604-13, passed 12-2-2013)



§ 52.067  ENFORCEMENT AND CORPORATION OF OTHER DEPARTMENTS.



   Upon request from the Director, the Police Department, Town Attorney or
the Florence Code Enforcement Officer have the authority to assist and
cooperate in the enforcement of this chapter.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. IV, § 18-263) (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004; Ord.
604-13, passed 12-2-2013)



§ 52.068  ISSUANCE OF CITATION OR NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



      (A)   If the municipality finds a violation of this chapter,
the municipality may notify the owner or responsible party through the
issuance of a notice of violation or it may issue a citation.



   (B)   If a notice of violation is issued and the violation is not
corrected within the specified period, a civil citation or criminal complaint
may be issued by any person authorized by this chapter. If a notice of
violation of this chapter is issued, it shall include:



      (1)   Identification of property in violation;



      (2)   Statement of violations in sufficient detail to allow an
owner or responsible party to identify and correct the problem;



      (3)   Re-inspection date;



      (4)   Address and phone number of a municipality
representative to contact; and



      (5)   A cost estimate to correct the violations, if the
municipality intends to abate the violation.



   (C)   Any notice given for any purpose under this chapter shall be
deemed effective on the date when written notice is delivered or mailed to
the property owner or responsible party. If the municipality intends to abate
the violation, any mailed service must be certified, return receipt
requested. Nothing herein shall preclude the municipality from giving
additional verbal or written notice at its discretion. If the municipality
does elect to give any additional notice in any instance, it shall not
thereby become obligated to give additional notice thereafter in the same or
other situations.



   (D)   Nothing in this section shall require the issuance of a notice
of violation prior to the commencement of civil or criminal violation
proceedings.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. IV, § 18-264) (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004; Ord.
604-13, passed 12-2-2013)



§ 52.069  THREATS AND INTIMIDATION.



   No person shall, by threatening to use or by using violence or physical
force, intentionally obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer,
employee, contractor or authorized representative of the municipality who is
lawfully engaged in the enforcement or execution of the provisions of this
chapter.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. IV, § 18-265) (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004; Ord.
604-13, passed 12-2-2013) Penalty, see § 52.999



SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITIES



§ 52.085  DISPOSAL SITE; DESIGNATION; ENFORCEMENT.



   There is hereby established at the places and locations as the Council
may from time to time designate, by motion or order, a place for the dumping
and depositing of solid waste, bulk waste, recyclables, rubbish and garbage
and any place or location shall be known, and the same is hereby designated
as, the municipal disposal site.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. IV, § 18-271) (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004; Ord.
604-13, passed 12-2-2013)



§ 52.086  DISPOSAL SITE; RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The municipality is hereby authorized to make rules and regulations in
cooperation and agreement with the health authorities designating the manner
of and hours and limits of time of dumping or depositing rubbish and garbage
in violation thereof; providing that before the rules and regulations become
effective, appropriate signs shall be placed at or upon the premises of the
municipal disposal site giving notice of the rules and regulations.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. IV, § 18-272) (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004; Ord.
604-13, passed 12-2-2013)



SOLID WASTE FEES



§ 52.100  LEVEL OF SOLID WASTE FEES; NO EXCEPTIONS.



   Monthly solid waste fees shall be established by the Council as part of
the annual budget process.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. IV, § 18-277) (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004; Ord.
385-05, passed 6-20-2005; Ord. 453-07, passed 1-16-2007; Ord. 559-11, passed
6-6-2011; Ord. 604-13, passed 12-2-2013)



§ 52.101  PAYMENT OF SOLID WASTE FEES.



   All solid waste fees set forth in this chapter shall be charged to the
customer in accordance with the provisions set forth herein.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. IV, § 18-278) (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004; Ord.
510-09, passed 7-6-2009; Ord. 604-13, passed 12-2-2013)



§ 52.102  CREDITS AND DEBITS OF SOLID WASTE FEES.



   (A)   The Finance Director may not grant credits for missed pickups.



   (B)   If an error occurs where either a customer has received town
solid waste service, but was not charged, or a customer was charged solid
waste service he or she did not receive, except for missed pickups, a debit
or credit may be approved.



   (C)   The Finance Director will research the customer account to
determine whether a credit or debit is owned and the amount to be debited or
credited.



   (D)   The length of time for either a debit by the town or a credit
to the customer shall be limited to 36 months prior to the date when the
customer notifies the town of the error or the date the town discovers the
error.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. IV, § 18-279) (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004; Ord.
604-13, passed 12-2-2013)



§ 52.103  METHOD OF COLLECTING FEES.



   (A)   The method of collecting fees shall be established by the
Finance Director, who shall have the authority necessary to ensure the
collection of the fees. All fees shall be due and payable on the last day of
the month following billing.



   (B)   If payment is not made, the collection service may be
suspended and the collection container may be removed; however, the owner or
occupant shall still be responsible for mandatory fees pursuant to §
52.002(B).



   (C)   A deposit is required on sanitation accounts with no water
service. When a container is delivered to a residential account that has
established or reestablished service, or the container was picked up for
non-payment, the deposit will be charged and remain on the account for two
years (see Town of Florence Schedule of Fees).



   (D)   A fee may be imposed to restart the service in the event a
service order is issued and a container is removed for non-payment. A
collection container shall be delivered and service restarted upon receipt of
all fees and payment (see Town of Florence Schedule of Fees).



   (E)   Charges for service will commence when the customer has or
should have established service, whether used or not. If service is
established between the first day of the month and the fifteenth day of the
month, a full month charge will be billed. If service is established between
the sixteenth day of the month and the last, a half-month charge will be
billed.



   (F)   When a property will be unoccupied for a period of time,
suspension of service and collection of fees will be permitted for a period
of not less than one month but not more than 12 months for residential
service units, provided that they are unoccupied. If service is discontinued
between the first day of the month and the fifteenth, a half-month charge
shall be billed. If service is discontinued between the sixteenth of the
month and the last day of the month, a full month charge will be billed.



   (G)   All requests for such suspension of service shall be in
writing, on a form provided by the town, and must be received prior to the
first day of the month that the suspension is to begin.



   (H)   If any dispute arises from the return date of a customer, the
Director or the Finance Director may use any means possible to establish the
date of return. Any uncollected fees arising from billing for the date of
return will be added to the monthly bill and will become due and payable on
the next billing cycle.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. IV, § 18-280) (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004; Ord.
559-11, passed 6-6-2011; Am. Ord. 567-11, passed 12-15-2011; Ord. 604-13,
passed 12-2-2013)



§ 52.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   A person convicted of a violation of division (A) of § 52.022
is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than
$250 nor more than $2,500, and, in the discretion of the court, by
imprisonment for a term of not more than six months. In no case shall a
person convicted of a violation of § 52.022(A) be eligible for suspension or
commutation of a sentence unless the person is placed on probation with the
condition that the minimum mandatory fines be paid.



   (B)   (1)   Any responsible party who commits, permits,
facilitates or aids and abets any violation of this chapter, or who fails to
perform any act or duty required by this chapter, is guilty of a Class 1
misdemeanor.



      (2)   Each day that any violation of this chapter, or the
failure to perform any act or duty required by this chapter exists shall
constitute a separate violation or offense.



      (3)   The owner of record of a property at which a violation
of this chapter exists shall be presumed to be the person having lawful
control over any such building, structure or parcel of land. If more than one
person is determined to be an owner of the property, such persons shall be
jointly and severally liable for the violation. Any presumption arising from
this subsection shall be rebuttable.



      (4)   If a responsible party served with a notice of violation
or citation by the municipality fails to correct the violation within the
period specified, the municipality may correct or abate the condition as
described in the notice and, in addition to any fine which may be imposed for
a violation of any provision of this chapter, the responsible party shall be
liable for all costs which may be assessed pursuant to this chapter for the
correction or abatement of the condition.



      (5)   If in the opinion of the Director any condition which is
in violation of this chapter constitutes an imminent health or safety hazard
or a public nuisance, the Director may immediately abate the hazard without
notice. The abatement of an imminent health or safety hazard or nuisance
shall be limited to the minimum work necessary to remove or abate the hazard
or the nuisance.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. IV, § 18-266) (Ord. 346-04, passed 6-21-2004; Ord.
604-13, passed 12-2-2013)



TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      71.   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



      72.   GENERAL RULES OF VEHICLE OPERATION



      73.   STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING



      74.   MAGISTRATE-CIVIL TRAFFIC COURT



CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   70.01   Status of violations



   70.02   Operating motorized skateboards and motorized play vehicles;
definitions; prohibitions; violations



   70.03   Use of coasters, roller skates and similar devices restricted



   70.04   Obstruction of view



   70.05   All-terrain vehicle operation; definitions; prohibitions;
penalty



§ 70.01  STATUS OF VIOLATIONS.



   Violations of this chapter are civil traffic violations.



(Prior Code, Ch. 17, Art. I, § 17-1)



Statutory reference:



   Civil traffic violations, see A.R.S. §§ 28-1591 et seq.



   Traffic ordinances to be civil traffic violations, see A.R.S. § 28-626



§ 70.02  OPERATING MOTORIZED SKATEBOARDS AND MOTORIZED PLAY VEHICLES;
DEFINITIONS; PROHIBITIONS; VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Purpose and intent.  It is the purpose and intent of this
enactment to provide for the regulation of motorized skateboards and
motorized play vehicles in order to protect the safety of pedestrians,
bicyclists, motor vehicle drivers and operators of motorized skateboards and
motorized play vehicles alike. The increasing prevalence of motorized
skateboards and growing concerns about their safe uses requires local
regulation in order to protect the public safety. The state has granted
municipalities express authority to regulate or prohibit the operation of
motorized skateboards. Therefore, the Mayor and Council find it is in the
public interest to prohibit the operation of motorized skateboards and
motorized play vehicles except on private property.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      MOTORIZED PLAY VEHICLE.  A coaster, scooter, any other
alternatively fueled device or other motorized vehicle that is self-propelled
by a motor or engine, gas or electric, and which is not otherwise defined in
A.R.S. Title 28, as a MOTOR VEHICLE, MOTORCYCLE, MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLE,
MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR or ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE.



      MOTORIZED SKATEBOARD.  A self-propelled device that has a motor,
gas or electric, a deck on which a person may ride and at least two tandem
wheels in contact with the ground, and which is not otherwise defined in
A.R.S. Title 28, as a MOTOR VEHICLE, MOTORCYCLE, MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLE,
MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR or ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE.



   (C)   Prohibited operation.



      (1)   No motorized skateboard or motorized play vehicle may be
operated on any public sidewalk, roadway or any other part of a highway or on
any bikeway, bicycle path or trail, equestrian trail or shared-use path.



      (2)   No motorized skateboard or motorized play vehicle may be
operated on any private property of another without the written permission of
the owner, the person entitled to immediate possession of the property or the
authorized agent of either.



      (3)   No person shall operate a motorized skateboard or
motorized play vehicle on any private property in a manner causing excessive,
unnecessary or offensive noise which disturbs the peace and quiet of any
neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to a reasonable person
of normal sensitivity.



   (D)   Responsibilities of parents, guardians and legal custodians.



      (1)   The parent, guardian or legal custodian of any minor
shall not authorize or knowingly permit the minor to violate any of the
provisions of this section.



      (2)   If a fine is imposed upon a minor who is found to be in
violation of this section, the parents or legal guardian having custody or
control of the minor shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor for
payment of the fine, whether or not the parents or guardian knew of or
anticipated a violation of this section.



   (E)   Violation declared civil traffic violation.  Any violation of
this section is punishable as a civil traffic violation pursuant to § 10.99.



(Prior Code, Ch. 17, Art. I, § 17-2)  (Ord. 370-05, passed 3-21-2005) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.03  USE OF COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES AND SIMILAR DEVICES RESTRICTED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person upon roller skates or riding any
coaster, toy vehicle or similar device to go upon any roadway except while
crossing a street on a crosswalk, and when crossing, the person shall be
granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all the duties applicable
to pedestrians.



(Prior Code, Ch. 17, Art. I, § 17-2.1)  (Ord. 377-05, passed 4-18-2005) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.04  OBSTRUCTION OF VIEW.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or allow any tree,
hedge, billboard or other obstructions which prevent persons driving vehicles
on public streets, alleys or highways from obtaining a clear view of traffic
when approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk.



(Prior Code, Ch. 17, Art. I, § 17-3)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.05  ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE OPERATION; DEFINITIONS; PROHIBITIONS; PENALTY.



   (A)   Purpose and intent.



      (1)   It is the purpose and intent of this enactment to
provide for the regulation of all-terrain vehicles in order to protect the
health, welfare, and safety of property owners, pedestrians, bicyclists,
motor vehicle drivers, and operators of all-terrain vehicles alike.  The
increasing prevalence of all-terrain vehicles and growing concerns about
their safe use requires local regulation in order to protect the public
safety.



      (2)   The state has granted municipalities the authority to
regulate or prohibit the operation of all-terrain vehicles on public streets
and highways within the town. Therefore, the Mayor and Council find it is in
the public interest to prohibit the operation of all-terrain vehicles except
as permitted pursuant to this section.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE.  A motor vehicle that satisfies all of the
following:



      (1)   Is designed primarily for recreational non-highway
all-terrain travel;



      (2)   Is 50 or fewer inches in width;



      (3)   Has an unladen weight of 800 pounds or less;



      (4)   Travels on two or more tires designed primarily for
all-terrain use; and



      (5)   Has a seat to be straddled by the operator and
handlebars for steering control.



   MOTOR VEHICLE.  A self-propelled vehicle.



   PRIVATE PROPERTY.  Any residential, commercial, industrial, mining or
agricultural property which is not owned by the operator of the all-terrain
vehicle, including any private road or driveway, or any canal bank, ditch, or
way owned or maintained by an irrigation district, a municipality or any
political subdivision of the  state, and without regard to whether the
private road, driveway, canal bank, ditch, or way is an easement across the
property of another.



   (C)   Prohibited operation.



      (1)   No all-terrain vehicle may be operated on any private
property without the permission of the owner of the property.



      (2)   No all-terrain vehicle may be operated upon any public
street, road or highway within the town, whether paved or unpaved, or within
the right-of-way of the public street, road or highway, unless meeting all
the requirements of the State Department of Motor Vehicles relating to the
operation of motor vehicles on public streets, roads and highways.



      (3)   No all-terrain vehicle shall be operated in a manner
which causes excessive noise or dust.



      (4)   An all-terrain vehicle which is designed for one rider
may not be operated at any time with a passenger.



      (5)   Any person 15 years of age or less riding or being
transported on an all-terrain vehicle must wear a helmet meeting the
requirements of all state and federal laws and regulations.



   (D)   Responsibilities of parents, guardians, and legal custodians.



      (1)   The parent, guardian, or legal custodian of any minor
shall not authorize or knowingly permit the minor to violate any of the
provisions of this section.



      (2)   If a fine is imposed upon a minor who is found to be in
violation of this section, the parents or legal guardian having custody or
control of the minor shall be jointly and  severally liable with the minor
for payment of the fine, whether or not the parents or guardian knew of, or
anticipated a violation of this section.



   (E)   Violation declared a criminal traffic violation. Any violation
of this section is punishable as a Class 3 misdemeanor traffic offense
pursuant to § 10.99.



(Ord. 484-08, passed 6-2-2008)



CHAPTER 71: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



Section



   71.01   Duty of Police Chief generally



   71.02   Records of traffic violations



   71.03   Investigation of accidents



   71.04   Traffic accident studies



   71.05   Traffic accident reports



   71.06   Directing traffic



   71.07   Traffic control devices



   71.08   Authority to designate crosswalks, establish safety zones
and mark traffic lanes



   71.09   Authority to place turning markers



   71.10   Authority to place restricted turn signs



   71.11   One-way streets and alleys



   71.12   Regulation of traffic at intersections



   71.13   Parking violations; liability and enforcement



§ 71.01  DUTY OF POLICE CHIEF GENERALLY.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Police Chief to provide for the
enforcement of the street traffic regulations of the municipality and all of
the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the municipality, to
make arrests for traffic violations, investigate accidents and to assist in
developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions and to carry out all
duties specially imposed upon the Police Chief by this chapter.



   (B)   Any peace officer of the municipality may be authorized by the
Police Chief to perform any of the duties of the Police Chief included in
this chapter.



(Prior Code, Ch. 17, Art. II, § 17-31)



§ 71.02  RECORDS OF TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   The Police Chief shall keep a record of all violations of the
traffic laws of the municipality or of the state vehicle laws of which any
person has been charged, together with a record of the final disposition of
all the alleged offenses. The record shall accumulate during at least a
five-year period and from that time on the record, shall be maintained
complete for at least the most recent five-year period.



   (B)   All forms for records of violations and notices shall be
serially numbered. For each month and year, a written record shall be kept
available to the public showing the disposal of all the forms.



   (C)   All records and reports shall be public records.



(Prior Code, Ch. 17, Art. II, § 17-32)



§ 71.03  INVESTIGATION OF ACCIDENTS.



   It shall be the duty of the Police Chief to investigate traffic
accidents and to arrest and assist in the prosecution of those persons
charged with violations of law causing or contributing to the accidents.



(Prior Code, Ch. 17, Art. II, § 17-33)



§ 71.04  TRAFFIC ACCIDENT STUDIES.



   Whenever accidents at any particular location become numerous, the
Police Chief shall conduct studies of the accidents and determine remedial
measures.



(Prior Code, Ch. 17, Art. II, § 17-34)



§ 71.05  TRAFFIC ACCIDENT REPORTS.



   (A)   The Police Chief shall maintain a suitable system of filing
traffic accident reports. Accident reports, or cards referring to them, shall
be filed alphabetically by location.



   (B)   The Police Chief shall receive and properly file all accident
reports made to him or her under state law or under any law of the
municipality, but all the accident reports made by drivers shall be for the
confidential use of the municipality, and no report shall be admissible in
any civil or criminal proceeding other than upon request of any person making
the report or upon request of the court having jurisdiction, to prove a
compliance with the laws requiring the making of any report.



(Prior Code, Ch. 17, Art. II, § 17-35)



§ 71.06  DIRECTING TRAFFIC.



   (A)   The Police Chief is hereby authorized to direct all traffic by
voice, hand or signal.



   (B)   Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire,
may direct or assist the Police Chief in directing traffic thereat or in the
immediate vicinity.



(Prior Code, Ch. 17, Art. II, § 17-36)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate traffic by means of police officers, see A.R.S.
§ 28-627(A)(2)



   Obedience to police, see A.R.S. § 28-622



§ 71.07  TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.



   The Police Chief, with the approval of the Council, shall place and
maintain traffic control devices, signs and signals when and as required
under the traffic regulations of the municipality to make effective the
provisions of the regulations, and may place and maintain the additional
traffic control devices as he or she may deem necessary to regulate traffic
under the traffic laws of the municipality or under state law or to guide or
warn traffic.



(Prior Code, Ch. 17, Art. II, § 17-37)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate traffic by means of traffic signals, see A.R.S.
§ 28-627(A)(2)



   Traffic signs, signals and the like, see A.R.S. §§ 28-641et seq.



§ 71.08  AUTHORITY TO DESIGNATE CROSSWALKS, ESTABLISH SAFETY ZONES AND MARK
TRAFFIC LANES.



   The Police Chief is hereby authorized, on approval by the Council:



   (A)   To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or
lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in
his or her opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the
roadway, and at the other places as he or she may deem necessary.



   (B)   To establish safety zones of the kind and character and at the
places as he or she may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians.



   (C)   To mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at the places as
he or she may deem advisable, consistent with the traffic laws of the
municipality.



(Prior Code, Ch. 17, Art. II, § 17-38)



§ 71.09  AUTHORITY TO PLACE TURNING MARKERS.



   The Police Chief is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs
within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by
vehicles turning at the intersections, and the course to be traveled as so
indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law.



(Prior Code, Ch. 17, Art. II, § 17-39)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to install turning markers, buttons and the like, see A.R.S.
§ 28-751(3)



   Obedience to turn restrictions, see A.R.S. § 28-751(3)



§ 71.10 AUTHORITY TO PLACE RESTRICTED TURN SIGNS.



   The Police Chief, on approval by the Council, is hereby authorized to
determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a
right, left or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at the intersections. The
making of the turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and
permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated
on the signs or the signs may be removed when the turns are permitted.



(Prior Code, Ch. 17, Art. II, § 17-40)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate or prohibit turns at intersections, see A.R.S. §
28-627(A)(9)



   Obedience to turn restrictions, see A.R.S. § 28-644



§ 71.11  ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.



   (A)   The Council shall, by resolution, designate any streets or
alleys which are to be limited to one-way traffic.



   (B)   When any resolution of the Council designates any one-way
street or alley, the Police Chief shall place and maintain signs giving
notice thereof, and no regulation shall be effective unless the signs are in
place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be
placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite
direction is prohibited.



(Prior Code, Ch. 17, Art. II, § 17-41)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to designate 1-way streets, see A.R.S. § 28-627(A)(4)



   Obedience to 1-way street signs, see A.R.S. § 28-728



§ 71.12  REGULATION OF TRAFFIC AT INTERSECTIONS.



   (A)   The Council shall, by resolution, designate through streets
and intersections where stops are required and intersections where vehicles
shall yield the right-of-way.



   (B)   When any resolution of the Council shall designate any through
street or intersection where vehicles are to stop or yield the right-of-way,
the Police Chief shall erect and maintain the appropriate signs at every
location where a vehicle must stop or yield the right-of-way.



(Prior Code, Ch. 17, Art. II, § 17-42)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to designate through highways, see A.R.S. § 28-627(A)(6)



   Stop signs, yield signs and the like, see A.R.S. §§ 28-773 and 28-855



§ 71.13  PARKING VIOLATIONS; LIABILITY AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Parking a civil traffic violation; definition.  Violations of
any provision of any town ordinance or provision of this code which regulates
the time, place or method of parking is a civil traffic violation. PARKING
means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not.



   (B)   Parking violations; persons liable.



      (1)   It is unlawful for a vehicle to be parked in violation
of any town ordinance or provision of this code regulating the time, place or
method of parking. Violations of any town ordinance or provision of this code
regulating the time, place or method of parking which are continuous in
nature shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.



      (2)   Whenever a vehicle is parked in violation of a town
ordinance or provision of the code regulating the time, place or method of
parking, the owner or owners of the vehicle, the registered owner or owners
of the vehicle and the person who parked or placed the vehicle where the
violation occurred, shall be jointly and individually liable for the
violation and for the civil sanction prescribed herein.



      (3)   A vehicle parked in contrary to or inconsistent with any
town ordinance or provision of this code regulating the time, place or method
of parking which provides that “no person” may stop, stand or park a
vehicle at a designated location or contrary to any limitations, restrictions
or other provision regulating the time, place or method of parking is deemed
to be parked in violation of the ordinance or the provision of this code.



      (4)   Whenever a motor vehicle is parked upon the public
right-of-way or other property in violation of this code and the vehicle has
previously been the subject of five or more violations of the parking
provisions of this code within a 12-month period but the civil sanctions
prescribed under the code for those violations have not been satisfied, then
the vehicle shall be deemed to constitute a public nuisance and the owner of
the vehicle consents to immobilization, towing and impoundment of the
vehicle. A possessory lien is hereby created and attached to the vehicle for
the payment, in cash or its equivalent, of all current and accumulated
parking tickets and for reasonable costs associated with immobilization,
towing and impoundment, before the vehicle is released.



   (C)   Parking notice, issuance.



      (1)   In an action involving unlawful parking, a copy of the
notice need not be personally served upon the owner or operator of the
vehicle but may be served by attaching a copy to the vehicle.



      (2)   The notice shall include the date, time, location of the
violation, the state license number of the vehicle unlawfully parked,
reference to the town code violated and notice that within five working days
from the date on which the notice was issued the sanction for the violation
must be paid and received by the town or a request made and received by the
town for a hearing to contest the alleged violation.



   (D)   Response to parking notice.  Within five working days from
the day on which the notice was issued, the person or persons liable for the
parking violation shall respond to the notice by one of the following methods:



      (1)   By appearing in person, by representation, by deposit in
a town collection box or by mail to the town within the five-day period,
admitting responsibility for the violation and paying the civil sanction
prescribed for the violation;



      (2)   By contacting the town in person, by representation, by
mail or by deposit in a town collection box within the five-day period a
request for a hearing to contest the alleged violation; or



      (3)   By appearing in person at the town court and requesting
an initial appearance before a hearing officer to explain the circumstances
of the alleged violation. The hearing officer at the initial appearance may
accept the defendant's explanation and dismiss the notice of violation or
shall inform the defendant that the civil sanction must be paid or a request
must be made for a civil traffic hearing to contest the alleged violation.



   (E)    Schedule of fines.



      (1)   The list of violations and fines in the Town of Florence
Schedule of Fees are the minimum fines that may be imposed when the defendant
responds to the notice in a timely manner. Any vehicle parked in violation of
a town ordinance or other provision of this code other than those in the
schedule of fees shall cause the person or persons liable for the violation
to be assessed a minimum fine of $10.



      (2)   Each occurrence or day that the violation continues
shall constitute a separate violation and shall give rise to a separate fine.



   (F)   Civil traffic complaints; hearings.



      (1)   If a defendant has not made a timely request for a
hearing pursuant to divisions (D)(1) or (D)(2) above, or has failed to timely
respond to the notice and has not paid the fine as requested by division
(D)(1) above, a civil traffic complaint and summons will be issued by the
town court unless the town prosecutor determines that a complaint shall not
be requested.



      (2)   Failure to respond to a civil traffic complaint and
summons will result in a default judgment for the amount of the fine.



      (3)   A civil traffic hearing for a parking violation may be
heard by a civil-traffic hearing officer pursuant to applicable state statute
and the Arizona Supreme Court Rules of Procedure in civil traffic violation
cases. The hearing officer may make the orders as may be necessary and proper
to dispose of the cases.



(Prior Code, Ch. 17, Art. II, § 17-43)  (Ord. 204-95, passed 10-16-1995) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 72: GENERAL RULES OF VEHICLE OPERATION



Section



   72.01   Obedience required



   72.02   Limitations on turning around



   72.03   Processions regulated



   72.04   Vehicle weight restrictions



§ 72.01  OBEDIENCE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully fail or refuse to
comply with any lawful order or direction of any police officer or Fire
Department official.



(Prior Code, Ch. 17, Art. III, § 17-66)  Penalty, § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Obedience to police, see A.R.S. § 28-622



§ 72.02  LIMITATIONS ON TURNING AROUND.



   The driver of any vehicle shall not turn the vehicle so as to proceed
in the opposite direction upon any street in a Business District and shall
not upon any other street so turn a vehicle unless the movement can be made
in safety and without interfering with other traffic.



(Prior Code, Ch. 17, Art. III, § 17-67)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.03  PROCESSIONS REGULATED.



   (A)   A funeral procession composed of a procession of vehicles
shall be identified by the methods as may be determined and designated by the
Police Chief.



   (B)   No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles
comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion
and when the vehicles are conspicuously designated. This provision shall not
apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals
or the Police Chief.



   (C)   Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as
near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the
vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe.



(Prior Code, Ch. 17, Art. III, § 17-68)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.04  VEHICLE WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Definition.  For the purpose of this section the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      VEHICLE.  A device in, on or by which a person or property is or
may be transported or drawn on a public highway, excluding devices moved by
human power or used exclusively on stationary rails or tracks.



   (B)   Restrictions.



      (1)   A person shall not drive or move and the owner of a
vehicle shall not knowingly cause or permit to be driven or moved on a
highway a vehicle or vehicles of a weight exceeding the limitations set forth
in A.R.S. §§ 28-1091 et seq., the provisions of which are adopted by
reference as though fully contained in this section.



      (2)   Exceptions.  The weight and load provisions of this
section do not apply to:



         (a)   Fire apparatus;



         (b)   Urban public transit transportation system
vehicles;



         (c)   Implements of husbandry, including farm tractors,
that are temporally moved on a highway;



         (d)   Emergency vehicles;



         (e)   School buses;



         (f)   Personal use pickup trucks and recreational
vehicles;



         (g)   Vehicles operated under the terms of a special
permit issued pursuant to this section; and



         (h)   Users of highways within the town limits that are
within the state highway system and under the jurisdiction of the state that
are in compliance with weight requirements of state law.



      (3)   Escort vehicle operators are not responsible for
violations of this section committed by the operator of the escorted vehicle
or the owner of the escorted vehicle.



   (C)   Weighing of vehicles.



      (1)   Any town police officer having reason to believe that
the weight of a vehicle or vehicle and load does not conform to the
requirements set forth in this section has the same powers and authority to
stop and weigh and to direct the driver or operator as any police or peace
officer has under the authority of A.R.S. § 28-1102 concerning state roads.



      (2)   A town police officer may require the weighing of a
commercial vehicle by means of portable scales at any time.



      (3)   A driver or operator of a vehicle shall not knowingly
fail or refuse to stop and submit the vehicle and load to a weighing or
knowingly fail to refuse to drive or move the vehicle as requested by a town
police officer to the nearest public scales, if the scales are within two
miles.



   (D)   Unlawful weight.  If, on weighing a vehicle and load, a town
police officer determines that the weight does not conform to the
requirements set forth in this section, the officer may require the driver or
operator to stop the vehicle in a suitable place and remain standing until
the portion of the load is removed as necessary to reduce the gross weight to
the limit permitted by law.  A driver or operator of a vehicle shall not
knowingly fail to refuse the direction of the officer to stop the vehicle in
a suitable place and remain standing until the portion of the load is removed
as necessary to reduce the gross weight to the limit permitted by law.



   (E)   Damage to the street.



      (1)   Any person driving any vehicle, object or contrivance
upon any street, highway or highway structure shall be liable for all damage
which the street, highway or structure may sustain as a result of any illegal
operation, driving or moving of the vehicle, object or contrivance, or as a
result of operating, driving or moving any vehicle, object or contrivance
weighing in excess of the maximum weight in this section, even if authorized
by a special permit issued as provided in this section.



      (2)   When the driver is not the owner of the vehicle, object
or contrivance, but is so operating, driving or moving the same with the
express or implied permission of the owner, than the owner and driver shall
be jointly and severally liable for any damage.



   (F)   Overweight permits.  The Town Manager, or his or her
designee, upon application in writing and good cause shown, may issue a
special permit in writing authorizing the applicant to operate a vehicle or
load exceeding the maximum specified in this section on any street under the
jurisdiction of the town.



   (G)   Penalties.



      (1)   A person who violates any provision of this section is
subject to a civil penalty as follows:



 



If the excess weight is:
 
The minimum fine is:


1 to 1,250 pounds
 
$100


1,251 to 1,500 pounds
 
$200


1,501 to 2,000 pounds
 
$300


2,001 to 2,500 pounds
 
$400


2,501 to 3,000 pounds
 
$500


3,001 to 3,500 pounds
 
$840


3,501 to 4,000 pounds
 
$980


4,001 to 4,500 pounds
 
$1,120


4,501 to 4,750 pounds
 
$1,260


4,751 to 5,000 pounds
 
$1,400


5,000 pounds and over
 
$1,400 plus an additional $100 for each 1,000 pounds of excess weight to the
maximum fine of $2,000




 



      (2)   The forgoing minimum fines do not include all applicable
state and local enhancement fees, surcharges and assessments, which shall be
charged in addition to these minimum fines.



      (3)   A person who commits a second violation of this section
within three months of a preceding judgment is guilty of a Class 1
misdemeanor.



      (4)   A person who commits a second violation of this section
within six months of a preceding judgment is guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor.



      (5)   A person who commits a second violation of this section
within one year of a preceding judgement is guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor.



(Ord. 591-13, passed 2-4-2013)



CHAPTER 73: STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING



Section



   73.01   Parking prohibited in specified places



   73.02   Blocking traffic



   73.03   Parking adjacent to schools



   73.04   Authority to erect signs restricting parking



   73.05   Time limit



   73.06   Forty-eight-hour continuous parking



   73.07   Designation of places; angle parking permitted



   73.08   Obedience to angle parking sign markings



   73.09   Parking prohibited in spaces reserved for the physically
disabled



   73.10   Emergency no parking



   73.11   Parking, standing, loading or unloading of commercial motor
vehicles on Main Street between Butte Avenue and Ruggles Street prohibited



   73.12   Unarmed police aides



 



   73.99   Penalty



§ 73.01  PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES.



   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or at the
direction of a police officer or traffic control device, no person shall
stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of the following places:



   (A)   On a sidewalk;



   (B)   In front of a public or private driveway or the entrance to an
alley;



   (C)   Within an intersection;



   (D)   Obstructing a fire hydrant;



   (E)   On a crosswalk;



   (F)   In violation of posted no parking sign or within the area of a
red painted curb;



   (G)   So as to obstruct the view of other traffic of any flashing
beacon, stop sign or traffic signal;



   (H)   Within a designated bus stop;



   (I)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction
when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct the view of other traffic;



   (J)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the
edge or curb of a street (double-parked);



   (K)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, every vehicle
stopped or parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be so
stopped or parked with the right-hand wheel of the vehicle parallel to and
within 18 inches of the right-hand curb;



   (L)   It is unlawful to park a vehicle so close as to interfere with
or obstruct any fire apparatus or fire rescue vehicle which has stopped in
response to a fire alarm or rescue services;



   (M)   It is unlawful to park a vehicle in a fire lane; and



   (N)   On the wrong side of the street headed opposite the flow of
traffic.



(Prior Code, Ch. 17, Art. IV, § 17-91)  (Ord. 204-95, passed 10-16-1995) 
Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.02  BLOCKING TRAFFIC.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park any
motor vehicle, or other vehicle, upon a street in the municipality in such
manner or under the conditions as to leave available less than 20 feet of the
width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, except that
a person may stop temporarily, in the actual loading or unloading of
passengers, or, when necessary, in the observance of traffic signs or signals
of the Police Chief.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle,
or other vehicle, within an alley or entrance to a private driveway except
for the loading or unloading of materials, and not then unless the loading or
unloading can be accomplished without blocking the alley to the free movement
of vehicular traffic.



(Prior Code, Ch. 17, Art. IV, § 17-92)  (Ord. 197-95, passed 7-6-1995; Ord.
204-95, passed 10-16-1995)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.03  PARKING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS.



   When signs are erected indicating no parking on that side of the street
adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any
designated place for one hour before school opens until one hour after school
closes on any school day.



(Prior Code, Ch. 17, Art. IV, § 17-93)  (Ord. 197-95, passed 7-6-1995; Ord.
204-95, passed 10-16-1995)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.04  AUTHORITY TO ERECT SIGNS RESTRICTING PARKING.



   The Police Chief, upon approval by the Council, may erect signs
requiring parking at an angle to the curb, allowing parking on the left-hand
curb on one-way streets, notifying drivers that parking is prohibited by
ordinance, and restricting parking in any way that may be necessary. When the
signs are erected, no person shall stop or stand a vehicle in disobedience to
the signs.



(Prior Code, Ch. 17, Art. IV, § 17-94)  (Ord. 197-95, passed 7-6-1995; Ord.
204-95, passed 10-16-1995)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.05  TIME LIMIT.



    No person may park a vehicle upon any roadway or in any municipal
parking lot for a consecutive period of time longer than that indicated by
official signs installed to limit the parking.



(Prior Code, Ch. 17, Art. IV, § 17-95)  (Ord. 204-95, passed 10-16-1995;
Ord. 490-08, passed 11-17-2008 )  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.06  FORTY-EIGHT-HOUR CONTINUOUS PARKING.



   (A)   No person shall park a vehicle in the same place on a public
right-of-way in excess of 48 consecutive hours after placement on the vehicle
of written notification of prohibition of this section and the fact that the
vehicle may be removed under A.R.S. § 28-872.



   (B)   The notification shall be placed by the Police Department in a
reasonably conspicuous location on the vehicle.



(Prior Code, Ch. 17, Art. IV, § 17-96)  (Ord. 204-95, passed 10-16-1995) 
Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.07  DESIGNATION OF PLACES; ANGLE PARKING PERMITTED.



   The Town Engineer shall determine upon what streets angle parking shall
be permitted and shall mark or sign the streets, but the angle parking shall
not be indicated upon any state highway within the town unless the State
Highway Commission has determined by resolution or order entered in its
minutes that the roadway is of sufficient width to permit angle parking
without interrupting the free movement of traffic.



(Prior Code, Ch. 17, Art. IV, § 17-97)  (Ord. 204-95, passed 10-16-1995)



§ 73.08  OBEDIENCE TO ANGLE PARKING SIGN MARKINGS.



   Upon those streets which have been signed or marked for angle parking,
it is unlawful to park a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge
of the roadway indicated by the signs or markings.



(Prior Code, Ch. 17, Art. IV, § 17-98)  (Ord. 204-95, passed 10-16-1995)
Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.09  PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPACES RESERVED FOR THE PHYSICALLY DISABLED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle other than one
bearing a license plate with the international wheelchair symbol or
displaying a placard issued under state law for this purpose in a parking
space reserved for use by physically disabled persons whether on public
property or private property available for public use, when the space is
designated and described in division (B) below.



   (B)   Parking spaces subject to these provisions shall be clearly
and conspicuously designated as being reserved for the physically disabled.
The designation shall include a standard symbolic disabled parking sign
bearing the number of this section of this code and conforming to
specifications for design and placement. The posting of the sign or signs
shall authorize the police to enforce the provisions of this section and
shall hereby constitute a waiver of any objection by the owner of the
property to enforcement of the section by the Police Department.



(Prior Code, Ch. 17, Art. IV, § 17-99)  (Ord. 204-95, passed 10-16-1995) 
Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.10  EMERGENCY NO PARKING.



   (A)   No person shall park a vehicle upon any public highway, street
or parking lot in violation of an emergency no parking sign that has been
conspicuously posted.



   (B)   The Chief of Police is authorized to post emergency no parking
signs on public highways, streets and/or parking lots for the purpose of
street maintenance, construction, street fairs, parades or any community
related event. The duration of emergency no parking shall be no longer than
72 hours. After a reasonable attempt has been made to contact the owner(s),
any vehicle parked in violation shall be removed at the owner's expense.



(Prior Code, Ch. 17, Art. IV, § 17-100)  (Ord. 210-95, passed 2-20-1996) 
Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.11  PARKING, STANDING, LOADING OR UNLOADING OF COMMERCIAL MOTOR
VEHICLES ON MAIN STREET BETWEEN BUTTE AVENUE AND RUGGLES STREET PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Definition of commercial and recreational vehicles.  For the
purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context indicates or requires a different meaning.



      COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE.  A prohibited commercial motor vehicle
means a motor vehicle or combination of motor vehicles used to transport
passengers or property for a private business purpose if the motor vehicle
either:



         (a)   Has a gross combined weight rating of more than
26,000 pounds inclusive of a towed unit with a gross vehicle weight rating of
more than 10,000 pounds;



         (b)   Has a gross vehicle weight rating of more than
26,000 pounds; and



         (c)   Is of any size and is used in the transportation
of materials found to be hazardous under the Hazardous Materials
Transportation Act.



      GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING.  The weight which is assigned by
the vehicle manufacturer to a vehicle and which represents the maximum
recommended total weight including vehicle and load for the vehicle.



      RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLE.  A prohibited recreational motor
vehicle means a motor vehicle or vehicle combination that is designed to be
used for private pleasure use and includes vehicles commonly called motor
homes, pick-up trucks with campers and vehicles towing travel trailers, used
exclusively to transport personal possessions or persons for non-commercial
purposes.



   (B)   Exceptions by permit and fees.  The Chief of Police, or his
or her designee, is hereby authorized to issue a one-trip or annual permit
excepting commercial or recreational vehicles otherwise subject to the
operation of this section when and under the circumstances specified in the
permit it is the finding of the Chief of Police, or his or her designee, that
the proposed use does not constitute a threat to the public health and safety
and the public convenience or necessity requires the issuance of a permit. A
person seeking a permit shall submit an application, accompanied by the
appropriate fee established in the Town of Florence Schedule of Fees.



   (C)   Automatic exemptions.  The following vehicles or uses shall
be exempt from the operation of this section:



      (1)   Recreational vehicles using the street on a one time
single trip basis for travel only;



      (2)   Vehicles owned or under hire by a governmental entity;



      (3)   Commercial vehicles owned by a utility company using the
street for utility service or repairs;



      (4)   Commercial vehicles owned by an armored car company and
using the street for delivery;



      (5)   Any other commercial or recreational vehicle using the
street on a one-trip basis for an emergency medical or emergency public
safety purpose; and



      (6)   Pickups with shell campers that do not extend above the
cab or beyond the sides of the vehicle.



(Prior Code, Ch. 17, Art. IV, § 17-101)  (Ord. 255-98, passed 4-20-1998;
Ord. 642-15, passed 12-7-2015)



§ 73.12  UNARMED POLICE AIDES.



   (A)   It is the purpose and intent of this enactment to provide for
the occasional appointment of unarmed police aides by the Chief of Police or
his or her designee when such appointments are determined to be necessary and
desirable for the purpose of providing efficient and cost-effective
enforcement of the parking regulations contained in this chapter.



   (B)   The Chief of Police or designee is authorized to appoint
unarmed police aides for the purpose of enforcement of the town ordinances
relating to the standing and parking of vehicles.



   (C)   Upon appointment by the Chief of Police, unarmed police aides
shall be empowered to commence an action for violation of the provisions of
Chapter 73 in the Municipal Court.



(Ord. 487-08, passed 7-21-2008)



§ 73.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any violation of § 73.01(A) shall be punishable by a fine of
$36;



   (B)   Any violation of § 73.01(B) shall be punishable by a fine of
$36;



   (C)   Any violation of § 73.01(C) shall be punishable by a fine of
$36;



   (D)   Any violation of § 73.01(D) shall be punishable by a fine of
$65;



   (E)   Any violation of § 73.01(E) shall be punishable by a fine of
$36;



   (F)   Any violation of § 73.01(F) shall be punishable by a fine of
$36;



   (G)   Any violation of § 73.01(G) shall be punishable by a fine of
$36;



   (H)   Any violation of § 73.01(H) shall be punishable by a fine of
$65;



   (I)   Any violation of § 73.01(I) shall be punishable by a fine of
$65;



   (J)   Any violation of § 73.01(J) shall be punishable by a fine of
$36;



   (K)   Any violation of § 73.01(K) shall be punishable by a fine of
$36;



   (L)   Any violation of § 73.01(L) shall be punishable by a fine of
$65;



   (M)   Any violation of § 73.01(M) shall be punishable by a fine of
$65;



   (N)   Any violation of § 73.01(N) shall be punishable by a fine of
$36;



   (O)   Any violation of § 73.02(A) shall be punishable by a fine of
$36;



   (P)   Any violation of § 73.02(B) shall be punishable by a fine of
$36;



   (Q)   Any violation of § 73.03 shall be punishable by a fine of $36;



   (R)   Any violation of § 73.05 shall be punishable by a fine of $36;



   (S)   Any violation of § 73.06 shall be punishable by a fine of $36;



   (T)   Any violation of § 73.08 shall be punishable by a fine of $36;



   (U)   Any violation of § 73.09 shall be punishable by a fine of
$110;



   (V)   Any violation of § 73.10 shall be punishable by a fine of $65:



   (W)   Any violations of § 73.11 shall be punished as a civil
traffic violation with a maximum fine of $250 per occurrence.



(Prior Code, Ch. 17, Art. IV, § 17-101)  (Ord. 255-98, passed 4-20-1998;
Ord. 561-11, passed 6-6-11)



CHAPTER 74: MAGISTRATE-CIVIL TRAFFIC COURT



Section



   74.01   Established; jurisdiction



   74.02   Appointment of Magistrate



   74.03   Appointment of hearing officers



   74.04   Qualifications for appointment



   74.05   Powers and duties



   74.06   Compensation



   74.07   When and where court held



   74.08   Trial by jury



   74.09   Magistrate Pro Tem



   74.10   Establishment of fees for services provided by the
Magistrate Court



§ 74.01  ESTABLISHED; JURISDICTION.



   There is established in the municipality, a Magistrate-Civil Traffic
Hearing Court. This court shall have exclusive jurisdiction of all criminal,
civil traffic and/or all other violations of this code and other ordinances
of the municipality, and concurrent jurisdiction with the Justice of the
Peace of the precinct in which the municipality is located of all criminal
and/or civil traffic and/or all other violations of laws of this state
committed within the municipal limits.



(Prior Code, Ch. 10, § 10-1)  (Ord. 102, passed 12-7-1987)



Statutory reference:



   Court jurisdiction, see A.R.S. §§ 22-301 and 22-402



   Court required, see A.R.S. § 22-402



§ 74.02  APPOINTMENT OF MAGISTRATE.



   (A)   The presiding officer of the Magistrate Court shall be the
Magistrate who shall be appointed by the Council. The Magistrate shall serve
a term of two years unless sooner removed for cause, which includes, but is
not limited to, malfeasance conduct which is inimical to the administration
of the court or which brings discredit to the municipality or court,
misfeasance or nonfeasance of office.



   (B)   The appointment and/or reappointment of the Magistrate shall
be made by the Council. The Council may, at its discretion, reappoint the
presiding Magistrate or may advertise the position, request written
applications and also request oral interviews with whatever number of
finalists it may designate by motion made and approved.



   (C)   If the Council chooses or needs to advertise as it deems
appropriate to fill the position of Magistrate, the application period shall
be as may be set by the Council. Applications may be made available through
the Town Clerk and must be presented to the Town Clerk for consideration by
the Council.



(Prior Code, Ch. 10, § 10-2)  (Ord. 102, passed 12-7-1987)



Statutory reference:



   Appointment of judge, see A.R.S. § 22-403



§ 74.03 APPOINTMENT OF HEARING OFFICERS.



   The Town Manager may, from time to time, appoint hearing officers for
limited terms to preside over civil traffic violation cases when, after
having been fully briefed by the Magistrate with respect to that office's
procedures, workload and the like, it appears that the appointment of the
hearing officers is necessary to assure prompt disposition of civil traffic
violation cases. Hearing officers may hear and dispose of civil traffic
violation cases under supervision of the presiding officer of the Magistrate
Court and their disposition of the civil traffic violations is appealable to
the Superior Court pursuant to A.R.S. Title 22, Chapter 4, A.R.S. §§ 22-401
et seq.



(Prior Code, Ch. 10, § 10-3)  (Ord. 102, passed 12-7-1987)



§ 74.04  QUALIFICATIONS FOR APPOINTMENT.



   All persons interested in applying for or wishing appointment to the
Office of Magistrate, Magistrate Pro Tem or civil traffic violation hearing
officer, shall meet the following minimum qualifications for consideration
for the position:



   (A)   Magistrate and Magistrate Pro Tem qualifications and
educational requirements:



      (1)   The person must be a qualified elector of the state and
county.



      (2)   The person must have attained the age of 21 years.



      (3)   The person must be of good moral character.



      (4)   The person, before assuming office, or as soon as
practicable thereafter, shall receive orientation from an experienced judge
of that court system and shall attend the orientation program for judges of
courts of limited jurisdiction offered by the State Supreme Court. In
addition, all other educational requirements set forth in Administrative
Order 85-2 shall be complied with.



   (B)   Hearing officer qualifications and educational requirements:



      (1)   The person must be a qualified elector of the state and
county.



      (2)   The person must have attained the age of 21 years.



      (3)   The person must be of good moral character.



      (4)   A civil traffic hearing officer must complete the State
Supreme Court approved course of instruction for civil traffic hearing
officers prior to sitting as hearing officer.



(Prior Code, Ch. 10, § 10-4)  (Ord. 102, passed 12-7-1987; Ord. 107, passed
3-21-1998)



§ 74.05  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Magistrate, Magistrate Pro Tem and hearing officer, shall have the
powers and duties conferred upon them under the provisions of the
Constitution and statutes of the state, this code and the ordinances and
resolutions of the municipality, including, but not limited to the following:



   (A)   Each shall keep a docket in which shall be entered a record of
each case heard and determined by him or her, showing the name of the
defendant, the proceedings had in the matter and an abstract of the judgment
entered, the sentence imposed and the amount of the fine paid, if any.



   (B)   Each shall personally fix and receive all bonds and bails and
receive all fines, penalties, fees and other monies which may be provided by
law to be collected or received by them.



   (C)   In the case of traffic violations not involving the death of a
person, they shall prepare a list of the bail for each violation and
designate a deputy to collect the bail when the court is not open pursuant to
A.R.S. § 22-424.



   (D)   Each shall prepare a schedule of civil traffic violations,
listing a specific deposit for each violation.



   (E)   Each shall designate a person, a specific location and the
hours which the person will be at the location to accept proper deposits for
civil traffic violations and for and on behalf of the court pursuant to
A.R.S. § 22-424.



   (F)   Each shall, at least once each week, pay over to the Treasurer
all fees, fines, penalties and other monies collected by him or her since his
or her last prior settlement with the Treasurer, and shall take the
Treasurer's receipt therefore.



   (G)   The Magistrate shall make a written monthly report to the
Council of all fines imposed and collected and of all sentences of
imprisonment imposed and the terms and nature thereof.



(Prior Code, Ch. 10, § 10-5)  (Ord. 102, passed 12-7-1987)



§ 74.06  COMPENSATION.



   (A)   The Magistrate, Magistrate Pro Tem and hearing officer shall
receive the compensation as the Council may set at the time of his or her
appointment.



   (B)   The compensation of the Magistrate may not be increased or
decreased during the two-year term of office of the Magistrate. The
compensation shall not be increased nor decreased in the event the Council is
filling a vacancy in the Office of Magistrate because of the resignation or
removal of the officer as specified herein above during his or her term.



(Prior Code, Ch. 10, § 10-6)  (Ord. 102, passed 12-7-1987)



§ 74.07  WHEN AND WHERE COURT HELD.



   The Council shall provide a suitable place for the Magistrate-Civil
Traffic Hearing Court to hold its sessions and the court shall be open for
transaction of business on the days and during the hours as the Magistrate
may designate and/or otherwise notice and/or during the hours as the Council
may direct.



(Prior Code, Ch. 10, § 10-7)  (Ord. 102, passed 12-7-1987)



§ 74.08  TRIAL BY JURY.



   The right of trial by jury shall be granted in all cases of such a
nature as were triable before a jury at common law and as are triable by jury
under the Constitution and laws of the state. Each juror for every day's
attendance in the magistrate's court shall be paid the sum of $15 by the
municipality.



(Prior Code, Ch. 10, § 10-8)  (Ord. 102, passed 12-7-1987)



Statutory reference:



   Jury trials, see A.R.S. §§ 22-425et seq.



§ 74.09  MAGISTRATE PRO TEM.



   (A)   In the absence of the Magistrate, the presiding officer of the
Magistrate Court shall be a Magistrate Pro Tem. A Magistrate Pro Tem shall be
appointed by the Town Manager as needed and shall serve only for the period
of time that the Magistrate is absent, incapacitated, disqualified or
otherwise unable to serve, or until the time as a vacancy in the Magistrate's
office is filled by Council appointment as set out in § 74.02.



   (B)   If the Council chooses or needs to advertise as it deems
appropriate to fill the position of Magistrate Pro Tem, the application
period shall be as may be set by the Council. Applications may be made
available through the Town Clerk and must be presented to the Town Clerk for
consideration by the Council.



(Prior Code, Ch. 10, § 10-9)  (Ord. 102, passed 12-7-1987)



§ 74.10  ESTABLISHMENT OF FEES FOR SERVICES PROVIDED BY THE MAGISTRATE
COURT.



   (A)   The Town Magistrate has the authority to establish fees for
the following:



      (1)   Case processing fees. For each case involving a
criminal, criminal traffic or civil traffic offense, the Magistrate Court
shall assess each person a case processing fee for each charge in which there
is an adjudication adverse to the person in that matter. For purposes of this
section, adverse adjudication shall include any and all determinations of
guilt or responsibility including no contest pleas in criminal matters,
irrespective of the punishment or penalty imposed by the Magistrate. These
fees are subject to state surcharges. An additional charge may be added to
each fine by the Superior Court.



      (2)   Warrant issuance administrative fee. When the Magistrate
Court issues a warrant for failure to appear, on a criminal charge,
non-compliance with any court order, failure to pay a fine, failure to pay
restitution or failure to pay any other fees or penalties, the Magistrate
shall impose an administrative fee upon the person for whom the warrant is
issued. This fee shall be added to the sum or sums set forth in the warrant.



      (3)   License reinstatement fee. The Magistrate shall assess a
license reinstatement fee for processing requests for license reinstatement
for those persons whose license was suspended, revoked or cancelled due to
failure to comply with a lawful order of the Magistrate Court, including but
not limited to, the payment of fines, failing to complete counseling, alcohol
or drug screening or failing to appear in the Magistrate Court pursuant to
civil traffic violations.



      (4)   Deferred prosecution and probation fee. A deferred
prosecution and probation fee shall be imposed on each criminal charge for
which the court defers prosecution of an offense pursuant to Rule 38 of the
Arizona Rules of Criminal Procedure or places an offender on probation for a
criminal offense. In addition to the waivers provided in this section, this
fee shall also, upon request of the town prosecutor, be waived or held in
abeyance during the period of deferred prosecution or probation.



      (5)   Jail cost recovery fee. Any person who is arrested for a
misdemeanor or is convicted of a misdemeanor criminal offense in the
municipal court, and who, as a consequence, is sentenced to a term of
incarceration in the county jail or any other detention facility authorized
by law, shall pay a jail cost recovery fee to reimburse the town for its
actual expenses incurred by reason of such confinement.



      (6)   Order to show cause fee. Magistrate Court may assess the
defendant an on order to show cause fee for each order to show cause issued
for failure to comply with terms of probation, payment schedules, or as
required by Court order.



      (7)   Indigent administrative assessment fee. In addition to
the court appointed attorney reimbursement cost, the Magistrate may order
indigent defendants to pay an administrative assessment fee when the
magistrate has appointed legal counsel pursuant to the Arizona rules of
criminal procedure.



      (8)   Collection fee and charges. In the event the court
engages in a collection agency for collection of restitution, fines,
sanctions, costs and fees, the Municipal Court shall assess the defendant a
collections fee to be added to the amount owed to the court. The defendant
shall be liable for all costs of collections, including fee charged by the
agency and/or attorney's fee. The Municipal Court may also enter into an
agreement with the State of Arizona for attachment of the defendant's state
income tax refund, lottery winnings that exceed $600, and/or any possible
mandated by an Administrative Order by the Supreme Court of Arizona.



   (B)   Authority to waive fee. The Magistrate may waive all or a
portion of the fees established by the article when, in the Magistrate's
opinion, the waiver would be in the interest of justice. A finding that the
person is indigent and has no anticipated future source of funds from which
the fee(s) may be paid would support waiver of all or part of the fees in the
interest of justice. Fee modifications may be updated by written directive of
the Arizona Supreme Court, Arizona Legislature, Pinal County Superior Court,
or by the town Magistrate Court.



(Prior Code, Ch. 10, § 10-10)  (Ord. 102, passed 12-7-1987; Ord. 502-09,
passed 3-16-2009; Ord. 643-15, passed 12-7-2015)



TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   ANIMALS



      91.   FIRE PREVENTION



      92.   POLICE DEPARTMENT



      93.   NUISANCES



      94.   HEALTH



      95.   PARKS AND RECREATION



      96.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



      97.   MUNICIPAL CEMETERY



CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS



Section



   90.01   County Animal Control Ordinance adopted by reference



   90.02   Definitions



   90.03   Restrictions on places where kept



   90.04   Swine, fowl or bees



   90.05   Roaming livestock



   90.06   Powers and duties of enforcement agent



   90.07   Interference with enforcement agent prohibited



   90.08   Animals causing a disturbance



   90.09   Vaccinations



   90.10   Dog licensing



   90.11   Kennel permit requirements



 



   90.99   Penalty



§ 90.01  COUNTY ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The Pinal County Animal Control Ordinance, dated June 4, 2010, is
hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if set out in full.



(Prior Code, Ch. 3, § 3-2)  (Ord. 98, passed 9-21-1987; Ord. 539-10, passed
7-6-2010; Ord. 622-14, passed 9-2-2014)



§ 90.02  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning.



   ANIMAL.  Any animal of a species that is susceptible to rabies, except
man.



   AT LARGE. Being neither confined by an enclosure nor physically
restrained by a leash, lead, harness or a rider. The requirement to secure or
control a dog with a leash shall not apply within private, gated communities;
in such cases, dogs shall only be required to be under the owner’s or
custodian’s control.



   COUNTY.  Pinal County Animal Care and Control.



   CUSTODIAN. The person whom an owner has entrusted with keeping,
maintaining and controlling his or her animal, or a person who keeps, harbors
or maintains an animal.



   DISTURBANCE.  A disturbance caused by an animal that is distressing,
loud or unusual, and disturbs the peace or quiet of any place, neighborhood,
family or persons in the town for an unreasonable amount of time, and is
documented by an enforcement agent.



   ENCLOSURE.  A fence or structure of at least six feet in height,
suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and suitable to confine a
vicious animal. Such enclosures shall be securely locked and designed with
secure side, top and bottom, and shall be designed to prevent the animal from
escaping.



   ENFORCEMENT AGENT.  That person, whether employed by the town or
otherwise provided for, who is responsible for the enforcement of this
chapter, and may include an officer of the Police Department.



   IMPOUND. The enforcement agent’s act of taking or receiving into
custody any animal for the purpose of confinement in an authorized pound in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



   KENNEL.  An enclosed, controlled area, inaccessible to other animals,
in which a person keeps, harbors or maintains five or more dogs under
controlled conditions.



   LEASH.  A chain, rope or strap, made of leather, fabric or other
material that is:



      (1)   Not more than six feet in length;



      (2)   Capable of being fastened to a collar or harness of a
dog and used to lead, restrain and control the dog; and



      (3)   Of sufficient strength for those purposes.



   LIVESTOCK. Any equine, cattle, sheep, goat, asses, bovine, pig, hog or
swine. EQUINE shall have the same definition as contained in A.R.S. §
12-553(E).



   OWNER.  The person who most recently purchased, adopted or otherwise
legally acquired an animal.



   POUND.  Any establishment authorized for the confinement, maintenance,
safekeeping and control of animals that come into the custody of the
enforcement agent in the performance of his or her official duties.



   PRIVATE PROPERTY.  Any residential, commercial, industrial, mining or
agricultural property that is not owned by the owner of the livestock or
animal.



   RABIES QUARANTINE AREA. Any area in which a state of emergency has been
declared to exist due to the occurrence of rabies in animals in or adjacent
to this area.



   REPETITIOUS DISTURBANCE. A disturbance, as defined herein, that occurs
on more than two occasions over a period of 30 days or less.



   VACCINATION.  The administration of an anti-rabies vaccine to animals
by a veterinarian or in authorized pounds by employees trained by a
veterinarian.



   VETERINARIAN.  Any veterinarian licensed to practice in this state, or
any veterinarian employed in this state by a governmental agency.



   VETERINARY HOSPITAL.  Any establishment operated by a veterinarian
licensed to practice in this state that provides clinical facilities and
houses animals or birds for dental, medical or surgical treatment. A
VETERINARY HOSPITAL may have adjacent to it, in conjunction with it, or as an
integral part of it, pens, stalls, cages or kennels for quarantine,
observation or boarding.



   VICIOUS.  An animal having a propensity to bite, attack, chase or
otherwise endanger the safety of any human being or other animal without
provocation, either on public or private property, and is declared VICIOUS
after a hearing before a Justice of the Peace.



   The following shall be prima facie evidence of an animal’s VICIOUS
nature:



      (1)   Has, without provocation, attacked or bitten a person
engaged in a lawful activity; or



      (2)   Has, while off the property of the owner and without
provocation, killed or seriously injured another animal; or



      (3)   Has, without provocation, chased, confronted or
approached a person on a street, sidewalk or other public property in a
menacing fashion such as would put an average person in fear of attack; or



      (4)   Has, without provocation, exhibited a propensity,
tendency or disposition to attack, cause injury or threaten the safety of a
person or other animal; or



      (5)   Has attacked in a manner that causes or should cause its
owner to know that it is potentially vicious; or



      (6)   Has been trained for dog fights or is owned or kept for
dog fighting.



(Ord. 488-08, passed 10-20-2008; Ord. 622-14, passed 9-2-2014)



§ 90.03  RESTRICTIONS ON PLACES WHERE KEPT.



   (A)   No corral, barn, enclosure or other structures for the purpose
of housing, keeping or caring for any animal shall be allowed within 50 feet
of the boundary between the owner’s lot or lots and any adjacent, occupied
residential lot or lots, unless it is a fly-tight enclosure approved by the
County Health Department.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or allow any
stable or place where any animal is, or may be kept, to become unclean or
unwholesome.



(Prior Code, Ch. 3, § 3-3)  (Ord. 98, passed 9-21-1987; Ord. 622-14, passed
9-2-2014)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.04  SWINE, FOWL OR BEES.



   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of the County Sanitary
Code and the County Animal Control Ordinance to the contrary, it shall be
unlawful to keep, maintain and hold any swine, adult male poultry or bees
within the municipality, except that adult male poultry or fowl and miniature
potbellied pigs may be kept, provided they are so kept to be in accordance
with all of the provisions of all ordinances.



   (B)   Adult male poultry or fowl and miniature potbellied pigs shall
be at all times penned or confined and not allowed to run-at-large, and no
more than three potbellied pigs shall be allowed per household.



   (C)   POTBELLIED PIG shall mean only miniature Vietnamese potbellied
pigs or other similar miniature potbellied pigs that do not exceed 100 pounds
in weight. Further, any person owning, keeping, possessing, harboring or
maintaining any potbellied pig in excess of four months of age shall be
required to register and pay the license fees as prescribed by the town or
the county for the keeping of dogs and cats.



(Prior Code, Ch. 3, § 3-5)  (Ord. 98, passed 9-21-1987; Ord. 173, passed
9-20-1993; Ord. 622-14, passed 9-2-2014)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.05  ROAMING LIVESTOCK.



   (A)   Purpose and intent.



      (1)   It is the purpose and intent of this section to provide
for the regulation of roaming livestock in order to protect the health,
safety and welfare of motor vehicle drivers and property owners. The
increasing prevalence of roaming livestock within the town requires local
regulation in order to protect the public safety.



      (2)   The state has granted municipalities the authority to
prohibit the roaming of animals within the town. Therefore, the Mayor and
Council find it is in the public interest to prohibit the roaming of
livestock within the town pursuant to this section.



   (B)   Roaming at large of livestock prohibited.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, or cause to
be kept, any horses, mules, cattle, burros, goats, sheep or other livestock
or fowl within the town, unless the person shall keep the livestock or fowl
in a pen or similar enclosure to prevent their roaming at-large.



      (2)   No horse, cow, sheep, goat, burro, mule or other
livestock so kept shall be allowed within 100 feet of any occupied
residential dwelling other than that of the owner.



Prior Code, Ch. 3, § 3-4  (Ord. 98, passed 9-21-1987; Ord. 488-08, passed
10-20-2008; Ord. 622-14, passed 9-2-2014)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.06  POWERS AND DUTIES OF ENFORCEMENT AGENT.



   (A)   The enforcement agent shall:



      (1)   Enforce the provisions of this chapter and the
regulations promulgated hereunder.



      (2)   Issue citations for the violation of the provisions of
this chapter and the regulations promulgated hereunder.



      (3)   Be responsible to contact the County Animal Control Unit
to confirm or declare a rabies quarantine area within the area of
jurisdiction. When a quarantine area has been declared, County Animal Control
Officers shall meet with the State Veterinarian and representatives from the
Department of Health Services and the Game and Fish Department to implement
an emergency program for the control of rabies within area. Any regulations
restricting or involving movement of livestock within the area shall be
subject to approval by the State Veterinarian.



   (B)   The enforcement agent is authorized to use whatever force
reasonably necessary to remove animals that are being confined within a motor
vehicle or enclosed space, when it appears that the animal’s life or health
is endangered by extreme heat or lack of ventilation within the vehicle or
enclosed space. The enforcement agent or the enforcement agent’s employer
shall not be liable for damages to property caused by such removal.



   (C)   The enforcement agent is authorized to go on private property
in order to enforce this chapter or to take up any animal that is found at
large, or is considered a disturbance or a repetitious disturbance, or to
take up any dog found without required vaccination, licensing or
identification tags; however, the enforcement agent may not enter a private
structure for this purpose without a valid warrant or the consent of an
occupant. The enforcement agent, at his or her discretion, may remove the
animal for placement at the pound. In the judgment of the enforcement agent,
if any dog at large or other animal that is dangerous or fierce and a threat
to the public’s safety cannot be safely impounded, it may be slain.



(Ord. 622-14, passed 9-2-2014)



§ 90.07  INTERFERENCE WITH ENFORCEMENT AGENT PROHIBITED.



   No person shall interfere with the enforcement agent in the performance
of his or her duties.



(Ord. 622-14, passed 9-2-2014)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.08  ANIMALS CAUSING A DISTURBANCE.



   It shall be unlawful to allow any animal to create a disturbance or
repetitious disturbance by barking, howling, baying, or making any other
distressing, loud or unusual sound as defined herein.



(Ord. 622-14, passed 9-2-2014)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.09  VACCINATIONS.



   Any person keeping, harboring or maintaining a dog over the age of
three months within the town for a period in excess of 30 consecutive days
shall have the dog vaccinated pursuant to county procedures.



(Ord. 622-14, passed 9-2-2014)  Penalty, see § 90.99



Statutory reference:



   Vaccination of dogs, see A.R.S. § 11-1010



§ 90.10  DOG LICENSING.



   (A)   Any person keeping, harboring or maintaining a dog over the
age of three months within the town for a period in excess of 30 consecutive
days shall license the dog with the county.



   (B)   Dogs over the age of three months shall wear a collar or
harness to which is attached a valid license tag. Dogs used for control of
livestock, dogs used or trained for hunting, dogs exhibited or trained at a
kennel club event, or dogs engaged in races approved by the state racing
commission, while being transported to and from such events, need not wear a
collar or harness with a valid license attached; provided that they are
properly vaccinated, licensed and controlled.



   (C)   If any dog is at large on the public streets, public parks,
public property or the private property of a person other than the owner,
then its owner or custodian is in violation of this chapter.



   (D)   Any custodian of a dog or person whose dog is at large is in
violation of this chapter. A dog is not at large:



      (1)   If it is restrained by a leash, chain, rope or cord not
more than six feet in length, and of sufficient strength to control its
action.



      (2)   If it is used for control of livestock, while being used
or trained for hunting or being exhibited or trained at a kennel club event,
or while engaged in races approved by the Arizona Racing Commission.



      (3)   While it is actively engaged in dog obedience training,
accompanied by and under the control of its owner or trainer; provided, that
the person training it has in his or her possession a dog leash not more than
six feet in length and of sufficient strength to control it, and, further,
that it is actually enrolled in or has graduated from a dog obedience
training school.



      (4)   If it, whether on or off the premises of the owner or
custodian, is controlled as provided in division (D)(1), or is within a
suitable enclosure that actually confines the dog.



   (E)   Any dog(s) at large shall be apprehended and impounded by an
enforcement agent and turned over to County Animal Control.



      (1)   The agent shall have the right to enter upon private
property when it shall be necessary to do so in order to apprehend any dog
that has been found at large. Such entrance upon private property shall be in
reasonable pursuit of such dog(s), and shall not include entry into a
domicile unless it be at the invitation of the occupant.



      (2)   The agent may issue a citation(s) to the dog owner or
person acting for the owner when the dog is at large. The procedure of the
issuance of notice to appear shall be as provided for peace officers in
A.R.S. § 13-3903, except the enforcement agent shall not make an arrest
before issuing the notice. The issuance of citation(s) pursuant to this
chapter shall be subject to provisions of A.R.S. § 13-3899.



      (3)   In the judgment of the enforcement agent, any dog at
large or other animal that is dangerous, vicious, or fierce and a threat to
human safety that cannot be safely impounded may be immediately slain.



(Ord. 622-14, passed 9-2-2014)  Penalty, see § 90.99



Statutory reference:



   County dog license, see A.R.S. § 11-1008



   Display of license, see A.R.S. § 11-1102



§ 90.11  KENNEL PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   A person operating a kennel shall obtain a permit issued by
the county, unless each individual dog is licensed.



   (B)   A dog remaining with the kennel is not required to be licensed
individually by the county. A dog leaving the controlled kennel conditions
shall be licensed by the county, unless the dog is only being transported to
another kennel that has a permit issued by the respective governmental entity.



(Ord. 622-14, passed 9-2-2014)  Penalty, see § 90.99



Statutory reference:



   County kennel licenses, see A.R.S. § 11-1009



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person found responsible for violating any provisions of
this chapter, except as otherwise provided herein, will be assessed a civil
penalty in the amount not to exceed $250 per offense for each first offense,
and a fine not to exceed $500 per offense for each second or subsequent
offense(s) committed within 36 months.



   (B)   A person issued a civil citation for violating this chapter
may request a hearing in the same manner as a dispute arising for civil
traffic violations, which shall be adjudicated by the Town Magistrate. The
state’s burden of proof shall be by a preponderance of the evidence.
Appeals shall be taken pursuant to A.R.S. § 22-425(B), and in accordance
with Arizona Superior Court Rules of Appellate Procedure - Civil.



   (C)   Any person who allows livestock to roam at large in violation
of § 90.05 is guilty of the following misdemeanors:



      (1)   Any person who allows livestock to roam at large within
the town is guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor;



      (2)   Any person who allows livestock to roam at large upon
the private property of another within the town is guilty of a Class 2
misdemeanor; and



      (3)   Any person who allows livestock to roam at large within
or upon any public right-of-way within the town is guilty of a Class 1
misdemeanor.



(Ord. 488-08, passed 10-20-2008; Ord. 622-14, passed 9-2-2014)



CHAPTER 91: FIRE PREVENTION



Section




Fire Department




   91.01   Creation and composition



   91.02   Compliance with regulations required



   91.03   Fire Chief; appointment and powers and duties



   91.04   Authority to enter adjacent property



   91.05   Interference



   91.06   Barricades



   91.07   Investigations



   91.08   Equipment



   91.09   Fire protection outside the town



   91.10   Authority of the Chief and Fire Department



   91.11   Authority to inspect



   91.12   Right of entry



   91.13   New construction and alterations



   91.14   Right-of-way and alarms



   91.15   Fireworks



 



   91.99   Penalty




FIRE DEPARTMENT




§ 91.01  CREATION AND COMPOSITION.



   (A)   There is hereby created a Fire Department for the town, which
shall consist of a Chief, and as many regular full-time, part-time,
paid-on-call and volunteer firefighters as may be deemed necessary from time
to time by the Town Council upon recommendation of the Town Manager and Fire
Chief. Only the Fire Chief and all regular full-time firefighters shall be
subject to and receive benefits as provided for all full-time town employees,
but all the full-time, part-time, paid-on-call and volunteer firefighters
shall be subject to the town personnel rules and regulations. Further,
part-time and paid-on-call firefighters shall be eligible for participation
in the Volunteer Firefighter's Pension Fund, and the Chief and full-time
firefighters shall be eligible to participate in the State or Public Safety
Retirement Fund.



   (B)   Full-time, part-time and paid-on-call firefighters shall be
appointed by the Town Manager upon recommendation of the Fire Chief in
compliance with the town's personnel rules and regulations. The appointees
shall be able-bodied citizens whose residence or business activities are
normally within the confines of the town.



(Prior Code, Ch. 7, Art. II, § 7-26)  (Ord. 299-10, passed 10-16-2000; Ord.
365-05, passed 1-18-2005)



§ 91.02  COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS REQUIRED.



   The Fire Department shall be operated and managed in accordance with
the Departmental rules and regulations as may from time to time be
recommended by the Fire Chief and Town Manager and approved by the Town
Council.



(Prior Code, Ch. 7, Art. II, § 7-27) (Ord. 299-00, passed 10-16-2000)



§ 91.03  FIRE CHIEF; APPOINTMENT AND POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Chief of the Fire Department shall be appointed by the Town
Manager. It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief to:



   (A)   Be accountable for the personnel, morale and general
efficiency of the Fire Department;



   (B)   Direct the operations of the Fire Department, subject to the
rules and regulations thereof;



   (C)   Be present at all fires and emergencies, if possible responds,
plans and directs the handling thereof. During the process of a fire or
emergency response, the authority of the Fire Chief shall be absolute in all
matters directly concerning the emergency or the extinguishment of a fire and
the disposition of property endangered by it;



   (D)   Conduct suitable drill or instructions in the operation and
handling of equipment, first-aid and rescue work, salvage, a study of
buildings in the town, water supplies and all other matters generally
considered essential to the safety of life and property from fire;



   (E)   Assist the proper authorities in suppressing the crime of
arson by investigation or causing to be investigated the cause, origin and
circumstances of all fires;



   (F)   Inspect buildings and premises and serve written notice upon
the owner or occupant to abate, within a specified time, any and all fire
hazards that may be found. For the purpose of conducting the inspections, the
Chief is empowered to enter any and all buildings and premises with the town
at any reasonable hour. Any person served with the written notice shall
comply and notify the Chief of his or her compliance within a reasonable time;



   (G)   Keep complete records of all fires, inspections, apparatus and
equipment, personnel and other information about the work of the Department
available for inspection and furnish to the Town Manager upon request; and



   (H)   Enforce or cause to be enforced all ordinances, laws and
regulations of the town and state, insofar as they pertain to fire and
safety, in accordance with the adopted Uniform Fire Code.



(Prior Code, Ch. 7, Art. II, § 7-28) (Ord. 299-00, passed 10-16-2000)



§ 91.04  AUTHORITY TO ENTER ADJACENT PROPERTY.



   It is lawful for any firefighter acting under the direction of the
Chief and another officer in command to enter upon the premises adjacent to,
or in the vicinity of, a building or other property that is on fire for the
purpose of extinguishing the fire, and no person shall hinder, resist or
obstruct any firefighter in the discharge of his or her duty as herein above
provided.



(Prior Code, Ch. 7, Art. II, § 7-29) (Ord. 299-00, passed 10-16-2000) 
Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.05  INTERFERENCE.



   The operations of the Fire Department in connection with extinguishing
any fire or other emergency shall not be obstructed. Lawful commands of the
Chief or officer of the Fire Department in charge of the scene, or any part
thereof or any police officer assisting the Fire Department, shall not be
disobeyed.



(Prior Code, Ch. 7, Art. II, § 7-30)  (Ord. 299-00, passed 10-16-2000)



§ 91.06  BARRICADES.



   The Chief or officer of the Fire Department in charge at the scene of
an emergency is authorized to place ropes, guards, barricades or other
obstructions across a street, alley, place or private property in the
vicinity of the operation so as to prevent accidents or interference with the
lawful efforts of the Fire Department to manage and control the situation and
to handle fire apparatus.



(Prior Code, Ch. 7, Art. II, § 7-31)  (Ord. 299-00, passed 10-16-2000)



§ 91.07  INVESTIGATIONS.



   The Fire Department is authorized to investigate promptly the cause,
origin and circumstances of each and every fire occurring in the jurisdiction
involving loss of life or injury to person or destruction or damage to
property and, if it appears that the fire is of suspicious origin, it is
authorized to take immediate charge of all physical evidence relating to the
cause of the fire and is authorized to pursue the investigation to its
conclusion. The Chief is authorized to investigate the cause, origin and
circumstances of authorized releases of hazardous materials. The Police
Department is authorized to assist the Fire Department in its investigations
when requested to do so.



(Prior Code, Ch. 7, Art. II, § 7-32)  (Ord. 299-00, passed 10-16-2000)



§ 91.08  EQUIPMENT.



   The Department shall be equipped with the apparatus and other equipment
as may be required from time to time to maintain its efficiency and properly
protect life and property from fire. Recommendations concerning needed
apparatus and equipment shall be made by the Fire Chief and Town Manager and
approved by the Town Manager or Town Council consistent with the town's
purchasing rules. All equipment of the Department shall be safely and
conveniently housed in the place or places as may be designated by the
Council. No person shall use any fire apparatus or equipment for any private
purpose nor shall any person willfully take away or conceal any article used
in any way by the Department. No person shall enter any place where fire
apparatus is housed or handle any apparatus or equipment belonging to the
Department unless accompanied by, or having special permission of an officer
or authorized member of the Department. No fire apparatus or equipment shall
be hired out or permitted to leave the fire station except in response to a
call for aid at a fire within the approved response area or in response to a
call for aid at a fire in an area of fire protection service authorized by
the Town Council or under a mutual aid agreement or for maintenance, training
and/or public events.



(Prior Code, Ch. 7, Art. II, § 7-33)  (Ord. 299-00, passed 10-16-2000) 
Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.09  FIRE PROTECTION OUTSIDE THE TOWN.



   The Council may enter into agreements or contracts to furnish fire
protection outside the town or enter into mutual aid agreements, and the Fire
Department is authorized to render firefighting service pursuant to the terms
of the agreements or contracts.



(Prior Code, Ch. 7, Art. II, § 7-34)  (Ord. 299-00, passed 10-16-2000)



§ 91.10  AUTHORITY OF THE CHIEF AND FIRE DEPARTMENT.



   The Chief is authorized to administer and enforce the Uniform Fire
Code. Under the Chief’s jurisdiction, the Fire Department is authorized to
enforce all ordinances of the jurisdiction pertaining to:



   (A)   The prevention of fires;



   (B)   The suppression or extinguishment of dangerous or hazardous
fires;



   (C)   The storage, use and handling of hazardous materials;



   (D)   The installation and maintenance of automatic, manual and fire
alarm systems and fire extinguishment equipment;



   (E)   The maintenance and regulation of exits and fire escapes;



   (F)   The maintenance of fire protection and the elimination of fire
hazards on land and in buildings, structures and other property, including
those under construction; and



   (G)   The investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of
fire and unauthorized releases of hazardous materials.



(Prior Code, Ch. 7, Art. II, § 7-35)  (Ord. 299-00, passed 10-16-2000)



§ 91.11  AUTHORITY TO INSPECT.



   The Fire Department shall inspect, as often as necessary, buildings and
premises, including the other hazards or appliances designated by the Chief
for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected, any conditions
which would reasonably tend to cause fire or contribute to its spread, or any
violation of the purpose or provisions of the Uniform Fire Code and of any
other law or standard affecting fire safety.



(Prior Code, Ch. 7, Art. II, § 7-36)  (Ord. 299-00, passed 10-16-2000)



§ 91.12  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   The town shall adopt from time to time the most appropriate version of
the Uniform Fire Code and the Fire Department of the town, under the
supervision of the Fire Chief, with or without the assistance of the town's
building and code enforcement officer, shall whenever necessary, make an
inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the Uniform Fire Code.
Whenever the Chief has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any
building or upon any premises any condition which makes the building or
premises unsafe, the Chief is authorized to enter the building or premises at
all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty authorized by
the Uniform Fire Code. Provided however, that if the building or premises is
occupied, the Chief shall first present credentials and demand entry, and if
refused shall secure a warrant and if the building or premises is unoccupied,
the Chief shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other
persons having charge or control of the building or premises and demand entry
or in the alternative secure a warrant.



(Prior Code, Ch. 7, Art. II, § 7-37)  (Ord. 299-00, passed 10-16-2000)



§ 91.13  NEW CONSTRUCTION AND ALTERATIONS.



   (A)   Construction or work for which Fire Department approval is
required, shall be subject to inspection by the Chief and the construction
shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved by
the Chief.



   (B)   Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed
to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of the Uniform Fire Code
or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Inspections presuming to give
authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or of other
ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of the permit applicant, contractor or
both to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection
purposes. Neither the Chief nor the jurisdiction shall be liable for expense
entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow
inspection.



(Prior Code, Ch. 7, Art. II, § 7-38)  (Ord. 299-00, passed 10-16-2000)



§ 91.14  RIGHT-OF-WAY AND ALARMS.



   (A)   All motor equipment of the Department shall have right-of-way
over all other non-emergency traffic when responding to an alarm. No
unauthorized vehicle shall follow within 600 feet of any apparatus belonging
to the Fire Department nor park any vehicle or otherwise cause any
obstructions to be placed within ten feet of the entrance to any fire station
or other place where fire or emergency apparatus is stored or within 15 feet
of any fire hydrant. No person shall drive any vehicle over a fire hose
except on specific orders from the Fire Chief or other officer in charge
where the hose is used.



   (B)   Suitable arrangements or equipment shall be provided to all
members of the Fire Department so that they may be notified and properly
respond in the event of an alarm. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly
turn in, or cause to be turned in, a false alarm.



(Prior Code, Ch. 7, Art. II, § 7-39)  (Ord. 299-00, passed 10-16-2000) 
Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.15  FIREWORKS.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      (1)   CONSUMER FIREWORKS.  Those fireworks defined by A.R.S.
§ 36-1601.



      (2)   DISPLAY FIREWORKS.  Those fireworks defined by A.R.S.
§ 36-1601.



      (3)   FIREWORK.  Any combustible or explosive composition,
substance or combination of substances, or any article prepared for the
purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion,
deflagration or detonation, that is a consumer firework, display firework or
permissible consumer firework as defined by A.R.S. § 36-1601.



      (4)   NOVELTY ITEMS.  Federally deregulated novelty items
that are known as snappers, snap caps, party poppers, glow worms, snakes, toy
smoke devices, sparklers, and certain toys as defined in A.R.S. § 36-1601.



      (5)   PERMISSIBLE CONSUMER FIREWORKS.  Those fireworks as
defined by A.R.S. § 36-1601 that may be sold within the town even where the
use of those items has been prohibited.



      (6)   SUPERVISED PUBLIC DISPLAY.  A monitored performance of
display fireworks open to the public and authorized by permit by the Fire
Chief or his or her designee.



   (B)   Fireworks prohibited; exceptions.



      (1)   The use, discharge or ignition of fireworks within the
town is prohibited.



      (2)   Nothing in this section or article shall be construed to
prohibit the use, discharge or ignition of novelty items or the occurrence of
a supervised public display of fireworks.



      (3)   Permits may be granted by the Fire Chief or designee for
conducting a properly supervised public display of fireworks. Every such
public display of fireworks shall be of such character and so located,
discharged or fired, only after proper inspection and in a manner that does
not endanger persons, animals, or property. A permit shall not be issued, and
may be revoked, during time periods of high fire danger warnings. The Fire
Chief has authority to impose conditions on any permits granted.



      (4)   Failure to comply with any permit requirements issued by
the Fire Chief is a Class 1 misdemeanor criminal offense punishable by a fine
of up to $2,500 plus applicable surcharges and up to six months in jail, or
both.



   (C)   Sale of fireworks.



      (1)   No person shall sell or permit or authorize the sale of
permissible consumer fireworks to a person who is under 16 years of age.



      (2)   No person shall sell or permit or authorize the sale of
permissible consumer fireworks in conflict with state law.



   (D)   Posting of signs by persons engaged in the sale of fireworks;
civil penalty.



      (1)   Prior to the sale of permissible consumer fireworks,
every person engaged in such sales shall prominently display signs indicating
the following:



         (a)   The use of fireworks, except novelty items as
defined by Town Code, including permissible consumer fireworks is prohibited;
and



         (b)   Consumer fireworks authorized for sale under state
law may not be sold to persons who are under 16 years of age.



      (2)   Signs required under this section shall be placed at
each cash register and in each area where fireworks are displayed for sale.



      (3)   The Fire Chief or designee shall develop regulations
concerning the size and color of the required signs and shall develop a model
sign. The required sign regulations and model sign shall be posted on the
town’s website and filed with the Clerk’s Office.



      (4)   Failure to comply with divisions (D)(1) and (2) of this
section is a Class 1 misdemeanor criminal offense punishable by a fine of up
to $2,500 plus applicable surcharges and up to six months in jail, or both.



   (E)   Authority to enforce violations of this article; means of
enforcement.



      (1)   A Town Police Officer or the Town Attorney may issue
criminal complaints to enforce violations of this § 91.15.



      (2)   The Florence Fire Chief or his or her designee, or any
person authorized pursuant to this section to issue a criminal complaint, may
also issue a notice of violation specifying actions to be taken and the time
in which they are to be taken to avoid issuance of a criminal complaint.



      (3)   A Town Police Officer or the Town Attorney may issue
criminal complaints to enforce this article.



   (F)   Liability for emergency responses related to use of fireworks;
definitions.



      (1)   A person who uses, discharges or ignites permissible
consumer fireworks, fireworks or anything that is designed or intended to
rise into the air and explode or to detonate in the air or to fly above the
ground, is liable for the expenses of any emergency response that is required
by such use, discharge or ignition. The fact that a person is convicted or
found responsible for a violation(s) of this article is prima facie evidence
of liability under this section.



      (2)   The expenses of an emergency response are a charge
against the person liable for those expenses pursuant to division (F)(1) of
this section. The charge constitutes a debt of that person and may be
collected proportionately by the public agencies, for-profit entities or
not-for-profit entities that incurred the expenses. The person’s liability
for the expense of an emergency response shall not exceed $25,000 for a
single incident. The liability imposed under this section is in addition to
and not in limitation of any other liability that may be imposed.



      (3)   For the purposes of this section:



         (a)   EXPENSES OF AN EMERGENCY RESPONSE means reasonable
costs directly incurred by public agencies, for-profit entities or
not-for-profit entities that make an appropriate emergency response to an
incident; and



         (b)   REASONABLE COSTS includes the costs of providing
police, fire fighting, rescue and emergency medical services at the scene of
an incident and the salaries of the persons who respond to the incident.



   (G)   Penalty.



      (1)   The penalty for violating any prohibition or requirement
imposed by § 91.15 of the Florence Town Code is a punishable Class 1
misdemeanor criminal offense punishable by a fine of up to $2,500 plus
applicable surcharges and up to six months in jail, or both unless another
penalty is specifically provided for.



(Ord. 543-10, passed 9-20-2010)



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   Violations of a provision of this chapter shall be punished as a Class
1 misdemeanor, and the individual shall be subject to a minimum fine of $250
up to a maximum fine of $2,500 and up to six months in jail, or both a fine
and a term in jail as determined by the Town Magistrate to be appropriate
under the circumstances.



(Prior Code, Ch. 7, Art. I, § 7-1)  (Ord. 299-00, passed 10-16-2000)



CHAPTER 92:  POLICE DEPARTMENT



Section



General Provisions



   92.01   Created; composition



   92.02   Compensation of officers



   92.03   Departmental rules and regulations



   92.04   Duties generally



   92.05   Answering calls outside the municipality



Alarm Systems



   92.20   Purpose



   92.21   Definitions



   92.22   Administration by Police Department



   92.23   Alarm business duties



   92.24   Alarm subscriber’s duties



   92.25   Proprietor alarm owner’s responsibilities



   92.26   Permits and exemptions



   92.27   Suspension or revocation of permits; appeal



   92.28   Prohibitions



   92.29   Warning notice



   92.30   Police review of false alarms



   92.31   Appeal procedures



   92.32   Alarm system operation prohibitions



   92.33   Grace period



   92.34   Regulations and prohibitions



   92.35   Confidentiality



Cross-reference:



   For provisions covering creation of Fire Department, see Ch. 91



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 92.01  CREATED; COMPOSITION.



   There is hereby created a Police Department for the municipality which
shall consist of a Chief of Police who shall also serve as Marshal, and as
many police officers as may from time to time be deemed necessary by the
Council for the safety and good order of the municipality.



(Prior Code, Ch. 15, Art. I, § 15-26)



§ 92.02  COMPENSATION OF OFFICERS.



   The Chief of Police and the police officers of the municipality shall
be compensated as determined by the Council. The Chief of Police shall not
receive any perquisites, commissions or compensations for his or her services
as Chief of Police or Marshal, except as the Council may prescribe.



(Prior Code, Ch. 15, Art. I, § 15-28)



§ 92.03  DEPARTMENTAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Police Department shall be operated and managed in accordance with
the Departmental rules and regulations as may from time to time be adopted by
the Council.



(Prior Code, Ch. 15, Art. I, § 15-29)



§ 92.04  DUTIES GENERALLY.



   It is the duty of the Police Department, under the direction of the
Chief of Police to:



   (A)   Enforce this code and the statutes of the state within
jurisdictional limits as conferred by law and to arrest and charge the
violators thereof;



   (B)   Take charge of the jail and all prisoners confined therein,
and all those who are sentenced to labor on the streets or public works of
the municipality, and to see that orders and sentences with reference to such
are fully executed and complied with;



   (C)   Deliver any persons who may be confined in the jail upon
conviction of a crime committed under the jurisdiction of the Magistrate's
Court to any authorized officer of the municipality who shall at any time
request the prisoners. Any authorized person so requesting and receiving
prisoners shall work the prisoners on the streets or alleys of the
municipality or on any and all authorized work as may be determined by the
Council;



   (D)   Render the account of the Police Department, its duties and
receipts as may be required by the Council, and keep records of the office
open to inspection by the Council at any time;



   (E)   Direct traffic and ensure the orderly flow thereof and
investigate and make reports of traffic accidents; and



   (F)   Perform additional duties as may be required by the Council.



(Prior Code, Ch. 15, Art. I, § 15-30)



§ 92.05  ANSWERING CALLS OUTSIDE THE MUNICIPALITY.



   The members of the Police Department are duly authorized to answer
calls for aid and assistance beyond the corporate limits of the municipality
whenever the Chief of Police in his or her discretion shall deem it necessary
to protect lives and property.



(Prior Code, Ch. 15, Art. I, § 15-31)



ALARM SYSTEMS



§ 92.20  PURPOSE.



   This subchapter is intended to regulate the activities and
responsibilities of those persons who purchase, lease or rent and those
persons who own or conduct the business of selling, leasing, renting,
maintaining or monitoring alarm systems, devices or services. It is further
intended to encourage the improvement in reliability of these systems,
devices and services and to insure that the Police Department personnel will
not be unduly diverted from responding to actual criminal activity as a
result of false alarms. This subchapter specifically encompasses “burglar
alarms” and “panic” or “hold-up alarms” both audible and inaudible
(silent).



(Ord. 456-07, passed 9-4-2007)



§ 92.21  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT OF GOD. An unusual, extraordinary, sudden and unexpected
manifestation of the forces of nature, which cannot be prevented by
reasonable human care, skill or foresight.



   ALARM or ALARM SYSTEM.



      (1)   Any electrical instrument(s) or other device(s) which as
one of its purposes is used to protect buildings, premises or persons from
criminal acts, unauthorized entries, fire or medical emergencies by warning
persons of a crime, unauthorized entry, or medical emergency through the
emission or transmission of a sound or signal.



      (2)   Exceptions:



         (a)   Single unit smoke detectors or personal protection
alerting devices which alert only the user and which do not require special
wiring.



         (b)   Alarms installed in or on motorized vehicles.



   ALARM AGENT. Any person who is employed by an alarm business either
directly or indirectly, whose duties include any of the following:
maintaining, servicing, repairing any alarm or alarm system in or on any
building, place or premises. Any person whose duties consist solely of
resetting an alarm following activation shall not be deemed to be an ALARM
AGENT.



   ALARM BUSINESS. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other
entity which owns or conducts the business of selling, leasing, renting,
maintaining or monitoring alarm systems, devices or services, provided,
however, that such activities undertaken by agencies of the town for public
safety purposes and not for profit shall not be deemed an ALARM BUSINESS.



   ALARM SUBSCRIBER. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or
business which leases, rents or purchases any monitored alarm system, device
or service from an alarm business or which leases or rents an audible alarm
system or device.



   AUDIBLE ALARM. A device designed for the detection of an unauthorized
entry on premises and which when activated generates an audible sound on the
premises.



   COMMON CAUSE. A common technical difficulty or malfunction which causes
an alarm system to generate a series of false alarms. Said series of false
alarms shall be counted as one false alarm only if the false alarms have
occurred within a 72 hour period, and the responsible alarm business has
documented, to the Florence Police Department, the action taken to rectify
the cause and a 30 day period expires with the alarm system generating no
additional false alarms from the documented cause.



   FALSE ALARMS. Any activation of an alarm not caused by or as a result
of a criminal act, unauthorized entry, fire, medical emergency or act of God
except for activation for testing purposes when the Police Department has
been given advance notice of such testing, or activation caused by the Police
Department.



   MONITORED ALARM. A device designed for the detection of an unauthorized
entry, criminal activity, medical or life threatening emergencies, in
premises and which when activated generates an inaudible signal to a
monitoring station. A MONITORED ALARM may also generate an audible sound on
the premises.



   POLICE CHIEF or POLICE DEPARTMENT. The Police Chief or the Police
Department of the town.



   PROPRIETOR ALARM. Any alarm, or alarm system which is not leased or
rented from, or owned or maintained under contract by an alarm business.



(Ord. 456-07, passed 9-4-2007)



§ 92.22  ADMINISTRATION BY POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall be administered by the Police
Department.



(Ord. 456-07, passed 9-4-2007)



§ 92.23  ALARM BUSINESS DUTIES.



   The duties of an alarm business shall be as follows:



   (A)   To install and be available to maintain the alarm or alarm
system in good working order and to take reasonable measures to prevent the
occurrence of false alarms.



   (B)   To instruct each of its alarm subscribers and/or the principal
occupants of the building or premises protected by an alarm system in the
proper use and operation of the system. Such instruction will specifically
include all necessary instructions in turning the alarm on and off and in
avoiding false alarms.



   (C)   To provide each purchaser and subscriber with a copy of the
pertinent provisions of this subchapter relating to alarm subscriber duties,
false alarm assessments and appeal procedures.



   (D)   Upon leasing or renting an audible alarm system:



      (1)   To conspicuously place on the premises a sign or decal
identifying the pertinent alarm business including the telephone number to
call when the alarm has been activated.



      (2)   To maintain records of the locations of these alarm
systems, devices or services and the name and telephone number of the person
and alternate to be notified whenever the alarm is activated and to readily
report such information to the Police Department upon request.



      (3)   To inactivate or cause to be inactivated the audible
alarm within one hour of the notification of its activation in the event the
primary and alternate cannot be contacted or do not respond.



   (E)   Upon leasing, renting, selling or monitoring an inaudible
alarm system:



      (1)   To establish a central receiving station in order to
monitor these alarm systems.



      (2)   To organize its central receiving station in order to be
able to readily and positively identify the type of alarm, i.e., burglary,
robbery or hold-up, and the location of the alarm, if there is more than one
system.



      (3)   To maintain records as to each of these alarm systems,
devices or services which should include the name of the owner or occupant of
the premises, the name and telephone number of the subscriber, a primary
person and at least one alternate responsible for responding to the premises
when the alarm is activated, and information concerning whether the alarm
system includes an audible alarm.



      (4)   To make notification of activated alarm systems to the
Police Department in the manner prescribed by the Police Chief including such
reasonable information concerning the alarm system as the Police Department
may request.



      (5)   To arrange for either the alarm subscriber, alarm agent
or other responsible representative to go to the premises of an activated
alarm system in order to be available to assist the Police Department in
determining the reason for activation and securing the premises. In no event
shall there be an unreasonable delay in arriving at the location of the
alarm. If the Police Department departs the premises prior to the arrival of
the subscriber, alarm agent or other responsible representative, then the
subscriber, alarm business or proprietor may document their required response
through the use of time-stamped cards. In the event this requirement is not
met and the Police Department is unable to determine the reason for the
activation, such activation shall be deemed a false alarm.



   (F)   To cease responsibility for an alarm system pursuant to this
subchapter, the alarm business shall promptly notify the Police Department in
the event the alarm business ceases to lease, rent, maintain, service or
monitor any alarm system. Said notice shall be sent within ten days of the
receipt of the warning notice issued pursuant to § 92.29.



   (G)   Alarm businesses which do not monitor, maintain, service or
install alarms or alarm systems shall not be subject to divisions (A), (B),
(C), (D), (E), or (F) of this section, but shall be responsible for
instructing each person who purchases an alarm or alarm system in the proper
use and operation of the alarm. Such instruction will specifically include
all necessary instructions in turning off said alarms(s) and in avoiding
false alarms.



   (H)   Alarm businesses which monitor but do not sell lease, rent,
install, service or maintain alarms or alarm systems shall not be subject to
divisions (A), (B), or (D) of this section.



   (I)   Alarm businesses which sell or install alarms or alarm systems
but do not lease, rent, monitor, service or maintain them shall not be
subject to divisions (A), (D), (E), or (F) of this section.



   (J)   Alarm businesses which sell, install, lease, rent, service or
maintain alarms or alarm systems but do not monitor alarms or alarm systems
shall not be subject to divisions (E)(1), (E)(2), (E)(4) or (E)(5) of this
section.



(Ord. 456-07, passed 9-4-2007)



§ 92.24  ALARM SUBSCRIBER’S DUTIES.



   The duties of an alarm subscriber shall be as follows:



   (A)   To instruct all personnel who are authorized to place the
system or device into operation in the appropriate method of operation.



   (B)   To inform personnel who are authorized to place the alarm
system into operation of the provisions of this subchapter emphasizing the
importance of avoiding false alarms. A current copy of the provisions of this
subchapter shall be maintained on the premises and be made available to
persons who are authorized to place an alarm system into operation.



(Ord. 456-07, passed 9-4-2007)



§ 92.25  PROPRIETOR ALARM OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITIES.



   The duties of the owner of a proprietor alarm shall be as follows:



   (A)   To be familiar with the provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   To maintain the alarm or alarm system in good working order
and take reasonable measures to prevent the occurrence of false alarms.



   (C)   To notify the Police Department of the name and telephone
number of the primary person, and at least one alternate, to be notified in
case the alarm is activated.



   (D)   Upon the purchase of any alarm system device or service which
includes an audible alarm:



      (1)   To notify the Police Department of the name, address and
telephone number of the primary person and at least one alternate who should
be notified when the alarm is activated.



      (2)   To inactivate or cause to be inactivated the alarm
system within 15 minutes of notification of its activation.



(Ord. 456-07, passed 9-4-2007)



§ 92.26  PERMITS AND EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not be applicable to
audible alarms affixed to automobiles or to single unit smoke detectors which
alert only the user and do not require special wiring.



   (B)   A permit from the town shall be required for each alarm
business.



   (C)   Every alarm business shall pay a permit fee as prescribed in
the Town Fee Schedule.



   (D)   Alarm business permits shall be renewed on or before January 1
of each year.



   (E)   The application for these permits shall be submitted to the
office of the Police Chief utilizing the format as may be prescribed by the
Police Chief.



   (F)   The application for an alarm business permit shall include,
but not be limited to:



      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the alarm
business.



      (2)   An express agreement by the alarm business that the
dispatch records of the alarm business relating solely to information to be
supplied to the Police Department in case of an alarm shall be immediately
available at any time for inspection by agents of the Police Department.



   (G)   All applications shall be approved unless it is determined
that the applicant is not qualified for a permit because:



      (1)   The applicant has knowingly and willfully given false
information on the application; or



      (2)   The applicant or any of his or her officers has violated
a provision of this subchapter; or



      (3)   The applicant or any of his or her officers has been
convicted of a felony.



   (H)   A copy of the alarm business permit shall be at all times
physically present at the alarm business’ monitoring station and shall be
available for inspection by the Police Department.



(Ord. 456-07, passed 9-4-2007)



§ 92.27  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMITS; APPEAL.



   (A)   The Police Chief may suspend or revoke an alarm business
permit on any of the following grounds:



      (1)   Failure of the permittee to comply with the requirements
of this subchapter.



      (2)   Conviction of the permittee or any of its officers of a
felony.



      (3)   When any of its officers, agents or directors has
knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material
fact in any report or record required pursuant to this subchapter.



   (B)   The suspension or revocation may be appealed to the Town
Manager in accordance with the provisions of § 92.31 of this subchapter.



(Ord. 456-07, passed 9-4-2007)



§ 92.28  PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct, or
carry on an alarm business without first applying for and receiving a permit
therefor in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, represent
him or herself to be, or operate as, an alarm agent without actually being
employed as an alarm agent within the definition of this subchapter.



(Ord. 456-07, passed 9-4-2007)



§ 92.29  WARNING NOTICE.



   When any alarm system generates two false alarms within a consecutive
180 day period, the Police Department shall send a warning notice to both the
alarm subscriber and alarm business or the proprietor alarm owner that two
subsequent false alarms within said period will subject the notified parties
to the sanctions as provided herein.



(Ord. 456-07, passed 9-4-2007)



§ 92.30  POLICE REVIEW OF FALSE ALARMS.



   (A)   Except as provided in § 92.33, any alarm system which has
four or more false alarms within a consecutive 180 day period shall be
subject to assessment as provided herein.



   (B)   Except as provided in § 92.33, if the Police Department
records four or more false alarms within a consecutive 180 day period:



      (1)   The Police Department shall notify both the alarm
subscriber and alarm business or the proprietor alarm owner by mail of such
fact and direct that a report be submitted to the Police Chief within ten
days of receipt of the notice. The report shall contain specific defenses, if
any, as to why the alleged false alarms should not be considered false
alarms. Evidence that a false alarm was caused by an act of God, common cause
or action of the telephone company shall constitute affirmative defenses to
an assessment for the particular false alarm. In addition, any false alarm
that is reported as such to the Police Department prior to any police
officers arriving at the scene shall also constitute an affirmative defense
to an assessment for the particular false alarm.



      (2)   The report required in division (B)(1) shall be received
within the time specified. If the report is not timely submitted, any
notified party shall be deemed to have waived his or her right to any further
review or bearing as provided herein and the alarm business and alarm
subscriber or the proprietor alarm owner operating the alarm system
generating the false alarms will be assessed pursuant to division (B)(5) of
this section.



      (3)   If the report required by division (B)(1) is submitted,
the Police Chief or his or her designee shall review the specific defenses,
if any, set forth in the report to the initial determination of false alarms.
If it is determined that a valid defense to the initial determination of
false alarm has been accepted, a notice will be sent to all notified parties
that no assessment will be made at that time. The notice shall specifically
set forth the findings and conclusions of the Police Chief with respect to
the review of the report submitted.



      (4)   If the Police Chief or his or her designee determines
that a defense to the initial determination of false alarms has not been
alleged or accepted, a notice shall be sent by mail to both the alarm
subscriber and alarm business or the proprietor alarm owner that they will be
assessed pursuant to division (B)(5) of this section. The notice of decision
shall contain the specific findings and conclusions of the Police Chief with
respect to the review of the report submitted.



      (5)   Assessments imposed pursuant to divisions (B)(2) and
(B)(4) of this section shall be as follows:



         (a)   For the first false alarm within a 180 day
consecutive day period which is subject to assessment hereunder, the amount
of $100.



         (b)   For each subsequent false alarm occurring within
the same 180 day period referred to in division (B)(5)(a) of this section,
$150.



   (C)   The alarm subscriber and the alarm business shall, except as
provided in § 92.31, be jointly and severally responsible for the payment of
assessments imposed upon their alarm system.



(Ord. 456-07, passed 9-4-2007)



§ 92.31  APPEAL PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Any party aggrieved by a decision of the Police Chief or his
or her designee made pursuant to § 92.30(B)(3) or (B)(4) may, within ten
days of receipt of notice of the decision, appeal to the Florence Municipal
Court. A copy of the appeal request shall be sent to the Police Chief or his
or her designee.



   (B)   The request for an appeal shall set forth the specific
objections to the decision of the Police Chief which form the basis of the
appeal.



   (C)   The Florence Municipal Court shall set a time and place for
the hearing as soon as practicable.



   (D)   The hearing proceeding shall be conducted in an informal
process:



      (1)   The Court shall not be bound by the technical rules of
evidence in the conduct of such hearings.



      (2)   All parties to the hearing shall have the right to
present evidence in support of or in opposition to the decision of the Police
Chief.



   (E)   The decision of the Magistrate shall be based upon the
evidence presented and it shall:



      (1)   Affirm the decision of the Police Chief or his or her
designee in which case any assessment imposed pursuant to § 92.30(B)(5)
shall be sustained; or



      (2)   Reverse the decision of the Police Chief or his or her
designee, in whole or in part, in which case the assessment shall be imposed
or rescinded accordingly.



   (F)   When the decision of the Police Chief is affirmed in appeals
involving an alarm subscriber and alarm business permittee, the Town Manager
may designate the alarm subscriber or the alarm business permittee as solely
responsible for the payment of the assessment.



(Ord. 456-07, passed 9-4-2007)



§ 92.32  ALARM SYSTEM OPERATION PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   Upon a final determination of assessment pursuant to §
92.30(B)(2) or (B)(4) or § 92.31(E)(1) of this subchapter for the fourth and
any subsequent false alarms as set forth in § 92.30 of this subchapter, the
responsible party shall tender the fee assessed within ten days of the date
ordered or discontinue operation of the alarm system. In the event the
operation of said alarm system is not discontinued and the assessment not
tendered, its continued operation by the alarm subscriber, alarm business, or
proprietor alarm owner is unlawful.



   (B)   Upon a final determination of assessment pursuant to §
92.30(B)(2) or (B)(4) or § 92.31(E)(1) of this subchapter for the tenth
false alarm within a consecutive 180 day period, it shall be unlawful to
operate the alarm system in such a manner that results in any subsequent
false alarms within a 90 day period from the date of receipt of the final
determination for the tenth false alarm.



(Ord. 456-07, passed 9-4-2007)



§ 92.33  GRACE PERIOD.



   (A)   Newly installed and reinstalled alarm systems shall be allowed
up to ten false alarms within the period of 30 days from the date the alarm
system becomes operational before the alarm system becomes subject to a
review of false alarms. Upon the eleventh false alarm within the 30 day grace
period, the alarm system shall be subject to the provisions of § 92.30(B) as
a first false alarm subject to assessment.



   (B)   The grace period provided in division (A) of this section
shall apply only if the alarm business, or proprietor alarm owner notifies
the Police Chief or his or her designee in writing within ten days of the
completion of installation or reinstallation. The written notice shall
specify the date the system was installed or reinstalled. For reinstalled
alarm systems, the notice shall also describe the nature and extent of the
reinstallation.



(Ord. 456-07, passed 9-4-2007)



§ 92.34  REGULATIONS AND PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to activate any
“hold-up”, “robbery alarm”, or medical emergency for any reason other
than to warn of an actual robbery, or medical emergency, or to activate any
burglar alarm for any reason other than to warn of an unauthorized entry into
an alarm protected premises. This division shall not apply to the testing of
alarm systems when the Police Department has been given advance notice of
such testing.



   (B)   No person or business who (which) purchases, leases or rents
an audible alarm system, device or service shall allow said alarm to sound in
excess of 15 minutes. After an alarm has been audible for a continuous period
of four hours, the town may disconnect or muffle the alarm.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any alarm business to report false
information to the Police Department in connection with the reporting of an
alarm or false alarm. For purposes of this division, “false information”
shall mean any information which is in fact incorrect, when the correct
information is or has been supplied to and placed in the business records of
that alarm business, and which relates to the address of the premises of the
alarm subscriber to which the police are directed, or to the alarm subscriber
or other persons residing on such premises, or to the type of alarm which is
being reported at the premises, such as silent, hold-up, panic, fire, medical
emergency or other specific type of alarm.



   (D)   Acts declared unlawful by the subchapter shall be punishable
by a maximum fine of $2,500 plus surcharges and by up to six months in jail,
or both.



(Ord. 456-07, passed 9-4-2007)



§ 92.35  CONFIDENTIALITY.



   The information furnished and secured pursuant to this subchapter shall
be confidential and shall not be subject to public inspection.



(Ord. 456-07, passed 9-4-2007)



CHAPTER 93: NUISANCES



Section




Lot Clearing




   93.01   Definitions



   93.02   Placement or accumulation of litter; unlawful



   93.03   Removal; generally



   93.04   Removal; by municipality



Cross-reference:



   Offenses involving public peace and order, see Chapter 132




LOT CLEARING




§ 93.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.



   LITTER.  Any rubbish, trash, weeds, filth and debris which shall
constitute a hazard to public health and safety. LITTER includes:



      (1)   All putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes
including garbage, trash, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned
automobiles, solid market and industrial waste;



      (2)   Any deposit, accumulation, pile or heap of brush, grass,
debris, weeds, cans, cloth, paper, wood, rubbish or other unsightly or
unsanitary matter of any kind whatsoever;



      (3)   Any growth of weeds, brush, grass or other vegetable
growth to a height of over six inches;



      (4)   Outside storage of any accumulation of interior
furniture, inoperative or unused appliances, mattresses, bedding, carpeting,
boxes, bags, bottles, barrels, crates, pallets, interior plumbing and
electrical fixtures, shop tools, equipment, inoperable vehicles, automotive
parts, tires and any other miscellaneous junk visible from the public
right-of-way; and



      (5)   Any structure that is so dilapidated as to cause a
hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the public.



   PRIVATE PREMISES.  Any dwelling, house, building or other structure
designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant.
PRIVATE PREMISES includes any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps or
vestibules belonging or appurtenant to the dwelling, house, building or other
structures.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Any street, sidewalk, boulevard, alley or other public
way, and any public park, square, space, ground or building.



(Prior Code, Ch. 12, Art. II, § 12-26)  (Am. Ord. 565-11, passed 10-17-2011)



§ 93.02  PLACEMENT OR ACCUMULATION OF LITTER; UNLAWFUL.



   (A)   It is unlawful for a person to place any litter on any private
or public property not owned or under his or her control, or place and/or
allow to accumulate on any property owned by or under his or her control, any
litter.



   (B)   In addition to any penalty which may be imposed for violation
of this section, a person convicted of violating this section is liable for
all costs which may be assessed pursuant to this subchapter for the removal
of the litter.



(Prior Code, Ch. 12, Art. II, § 12-28)  (Ord. 186-95, passed 1-17-1995) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.03  REMOVAL; GENERALLY.



   (A)   The town's code enforcement officer shall compel the removal
of litter by the procedure outlined in this subchapter.



   (B)   If a person owning or controlling any property fails, neglects
or refuses to remove or properly dispose of litter located on property owned
or controlled by him or her, he or she shall be given written notice to
remove the litter within 30 days from the date the notice was received by him
or her, and prior to the date of compliance on the notice. The notice shall
be received no less than 30 days before the date set thereon for compliance
and shall contain:



      (1)   An estimate of the cost of removal by the municipality;



      (2)   A statement that unless the person owning or controlling
the property complies therewith within 30 days from the date the notice is
received, the municipality will file and prosecute a complaint in the town's
Magistrate Court for a violation of this subchapter and may, in addition at
the expense of the person owing or controlling the property, perform the
necessary work at a cost not to exceed the estimate given in the notice; and



      (3)   A statement that the person may appeal both the notice
and assessment in writing through the Town Manager within 30 days from the
date the notice is received and prior to the date of compliance.



   (C)   The notice shall be personally served on the owner or person
controlling the property, by a police officer of the municipality in the
manner provided in Rule 4(d) of the Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure, or
mailed to the owner or person controlling the property at his or her last
known address by certified or registered mail, or the address to which the
tax bill for the property was last mailed. If the owner does not reside on
the property, a duplicate notice shall also be sent to him or her by
certified or registered mail at his or her last known address.



   (D)   Prior to the date set for compliance on the notice, the owner
or person controlling the property may appeal both the notice and estimated
assessment in writing to the Town Manager and, if at the same time requested,
the Council from the demand of the code enforcement officer. The Town
Manager, and if at the same time requested, the Council, shall within 14 days
after receiving the appeal, hear and determine the same and the decision of
the Town Manager and/or Council shall be final. The Town Manager and/or
Council may either affirm or reverse the decision of the code enforcement
officer or modify the scope of the work as required in the notice.



(Prior Code, Ch. 12, Art. II, § 12-29)  (Ord. 186-95, passed 1-17-1995)



§ 93.04  REMOVAL; BY MUNICIPALITY.



   (A)   When a person to whom notice has been given pursuant to §
93.03, and on or before the date of compliance on the notice, or within the
further time as may have been granted by the Town Manager and/or Council or
Town Magistrate, fails, neglects or refuses to remove the litter from the
property, the Town Manager may cause the same to be removed and disposed of
at the expense of the owner or person controlling the property. Upon
completion of the work, the Town Manager shall prepare a verified statement
of account of the actual cost of the removal or abatement, the date the work
was completed and the street address and the legal description of the
property on which the work was done, including 5% for additional inspection
and other incidental costs in connection therewith, and shall serve a
duplicate copy of the verified statement upon the person owning or
controlling the property in the manner prescribed in § 93.03. The owner or
person controlling the property shall have 30 days from the date of service
upon him or her to appeal in writing to the Town Magistrate from the amount
of the final assessment as contained in the verified statement. If an appeal
is not filed with the Magistrate within the 30 day period, the amount of the
assessment, as determined by the Town Manager, shall become final and
binding. If an appeal is taken, the Magistrate shall hear and determine the
appeal and may affirm the amount of the assessment, modify the amount
thereof, or determine that no assessment at all shall be made. The decision
of the Magistrate shall be final and binding.



   (B)   If no appeal is taken from the amount of the final assessment,
or if an appeal is taken and the Magistrate has affirmed or modified the
amount of the assessment, the original assessment or the assessment as so
modified shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder and from the
date of its recording, shall be a lien on the lot or tract of land until
paid. The lien shall be subject and inferior to the lien for general taxes
and to all prior recorded mortgages and encumbrances of record. A sale of the
property to satisfy a lien obtained under the provisions of this section
shall be made upon judgment of foreclosure or order of sale. The municipality
shall have the right to bring an action to enforce the lien, but the failure
to take the action shall not affect its validity. The recorded assessment
shall be prima facie evidence of the truth of all matters recited therein,
and of the regularity of all proceedings prior to the recording thereof. A
prior assessment for the purposes provided in this section shall not be a bar
to a subsequent assessment for the purposes described herein, and any number
of liens on the same lot or tract of land may be enforced in the same action.



(Prior Code, Ch. 12, Art. II, § 12-30)  (Ord. 186-95, passed 1-17-1995)



CHAPTER 94: HEALTH



Section



   94.01   County Sanitary Code; adopted by reference



§ 94.01  COUNTY SANITARY CODE; ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The Pinal County Sanitary Code is hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated herein as if set out in full.



(Prior Code, Ch. 8, § 8-2)



CHAPTER 95: PARKS AND RECREATION



Section



   95.01   Purpose



   95.02   Authority



   95.03   Enforcement



   95.04   Definitions



   95.05   Use by the general public; hours of use



   95.06   Permit procedures



   95.07   Fees and charges



   95.08   Domesticated animals and wildlife



   95.09   Activities requiring permit



   95.10   Prohibited activities



   95.11   Other



§ 95.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish regulations to provide
for the safe and peaceful use of town park property by the public, for the
recreational benefit and enjoyment of the public and for the protection and
preservation of the property, facilities and natural resources of the town.



(Prior Code, Ch. 13, Art. I, § 13-1)  (Ord. 359-03, passed 12-15-2003)



§ 95.02  AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The Town Council authorizes the Town Manager to promulgate
special rules and administrative policies necessary and appropriate to
administer these regulations and to enforce the same.



   (B)   The policies shall be in writing and made available to the
public during normal business hours in the office of the Town Parks and
Recreation Department.



(Prior Code, Ch. 13, Art. I, § 13-2)  (Ord. 359-03, passed 12-15-2003)



§ 95.03  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Any violations of this chapter shall be unlawful and subject
to criminal prosecution and upon conviction shall be punishable under §
10.99 of the Town Code.



   (B)   Enforcement shall be the responsibility of the Town Manager or
designee to include the Town Parks and Recreation Department, Police
Department or other appropriate town employees.



(Prior Code, Ch. 13, Art. I, § 13-3)  (Ord. 359-03, passed 12-15-2003) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.04  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PARKS AND RECREATION DIRECTOR.  The person immediately in charge of
the Parks and Recreation Department, and to whom all Department employees are
responsible.



   PARK PROPERTY.  Any land, its landscaping and vegetation, buildings,
fixtures, monuments or structures located thereon, devoted to park or
recreational uses and owned, operated or established by the Town of Florence
or the Town Council.



(Prior Code, Ch. 13, Art. I, § 13-4)  (Ord. 359-03, passed 12-15-2003)



§ 95.05  USE BY THE GENERAL PUBLIC; HOURS OF USE.



   (A)   Park property and recreation programs are open to use by all
members of the public regardless of race, sex, national origin, color or
physical disabilities.



   (B)   Permitted hours of use shall be between 5:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m., Sunday through Thursday, and 5:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. Friday and
Saturday, unless the person has acquired the appropriate permit from the Town
Parks and Recreation Department.



   (C)   In park property with functions sports lighting, the hours of
use may be extended to 12:00 midnight for conducting sporting events and
other events approved by permit.



   (D)   Hours of use shall not apply to the use of public sidewalks or
public streets located within any park property which are being used as a
transportation corridor.



   (E)   No person shall enter park property which has been closed to
use and is so posted by the town.



   (F)   Town employees and law enforcement officers acting within
their authority shall be exempt from the provisions of this section.



(Prior Code, Ch. 13, Art. I, § 13-5)  (Ord. 359-03, passed 12-15-2003; Ord.
546-10, passed 11-1-2010)   Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.06  PERMIT PROCEDURES.



   (A)   A permit shall be obtained from the Town Parks and Recreation
Department whenever any person or group desires to reserve town designated
park areas to conduct activities.



   (B)   Application for a permit must be received a minimum of ten
working days prior to the anticipated use, on forms provided by the Town
Parks and Recreation Department.



   (C)   Permits shall be issued to persons 18 years or older by the
Director or designee within a reasonable period of time following receipt of
application, in accordance with this chapter and administrative policies
pertaining to park use.



   (D)   Permits issued pursuant to this section must be in the
possession of the permittee during the activity and shown upon request.



   (E)   Functions shall be confined to the specific part of the
facility assigned to the permit holder.



   (F)   If control personnel, parking attendant, traffic control
devices and the like, are necessary to provide safe and orderly use, they
shall be supplied by the permit holder.



   (G)   Continuous use of facilities by clubs, organizations and
associations shall be permitted through signed agreement which may be
reissued as necessary at the discretion of the Parks and Recreation Director
or designee. A permit issued pursuant to this section shall not exceed one
year.



   (H)   Activities sponsored or co-sponsored by the town shall have
first priority in the use of any park property.



   (I)   Any request for a use not contemplated by this chapter,
administrative policies or denied by the Parks and Recreation Director, may
be forwarded to the Town Manager for consideration.



   (J)   Protest rallies, picketing activities or other gatherings to
exercise free speech rights under the First Amendment shall be exempt from
these permit requirements.



(Prior Code, Ch. 13, Art. I, § 13-6)  (Ord. 359-03, passed 12-15-2003)



§ 95.07  FEES AND CHARGES.



   (A)   The Parks and Recreation Board may be authorized to establish
a uniform schedule of fees for the services with all receipts to be paid into
the general fund of the municipality. The schedule of fees shall become
effective upon approval by the Town Manager.



   (B)   All fees and deposits must be paid prior to use, unless other
arrangements are made with the Parks and Recreation Director or designee and
written within the permit issued.



(Prior Code, Ch. 13, Art. I, § 13-7)  (Ord. 359-03, passed 12-15-2003; Ord.
644-15, passed 12-7-2015)



§ 95.08  DOMESTICATED ANIMALS AND WILDLIFE.



   (A)   With the exception of dogs and cats, no domesticated animal or
wildlife shall be brought onto park property unless authorized by permit.



   (B)   No person shall bring domesticated animals or wildlife upon
park property unless on a leash, and is at all times entirely within the
control of the person bringing it upon park property.



   (C)   Domestic animals are not permitted at any time in certain
posted areas of park property.



   (D)   Persons bringing domestic animals or wildlife upon park
property are responsible for immediate cleanup and removal of the animal's
defecation. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit domestic
animals or wildlife to be on park property unless the person has in his or
her immediate possession an appropriate depository for the transmission of
excrement to a waste receptacle. This provision shall not apply to a person
who is physically disabled.



   (E)   No person shall catch, injure, destroy or interfere in any way
with any wildlife on park property.



(Prior Code, Ch. 13, Art. I, § 13-8)  (Ord. 359-03, passed 12-15-2003) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.09  ACTIVITIES REQUIRING PERMIT.



   The following activities shall not be conducted on park property unless
authorized by permit:



   (A)   Playing an audio device, use a public address device or any
device to amplify music;



   (B)   Operation of a motor vehicle of any type, including, but not
limited to, automobiles, motorcycles, motorbikes, except on roads or parking
areas designated for that purpose;



   (C)   Leaving personal property unattended for more than four hours;



   (D)   Carrying, possessing or discharging a bow and arrow, dart,
firearm, knife with a blade of more than three inches in length or other
dangerous weapons. Law enforcement officers acting within their authority
shall be exempt;



   (E)   Flying or launching powered model airplanes or rockets;



   (F)   Cutting or sawing any live or dead trees or their parts with
any type of equipment, power or otherwise, or remove any live or dead trees;



   (G)   No signs, notices, decorations or objects of any kind shall be
attached to, located on or painted on any part of park property;



   (H)   Conducting or soliciting of any business, trade or occupation;



   (I)   Enclosure of any area or erection of any structures;



   (J)   Planting of vegetation or causing vegetation to be planted;



   (K)   Digging into the surface of park property;



   (L)   Horseback riding; law enforcement officers acting with their
authority shall be exempt;



   (M)   Roller-skating, skateboards and bicycling in areas so posted;
and



   (N)   Use of any portion of a park for golfing purposes, or make use
of any golf clubs or golf balls.



(Prior Code, Ch. 13, Art. I, § 13-9)  (Ord. 359-03, passed 12-15-2003)



§ 95.10  PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.



   The following activities shall be prohibited on park property:



   (A)   Servicing any automobile, including washing, waxing, repairing
or performing other work, except in case of any emergency;



   (B)   Defacing, destroying or injuring in any way, misusing or
removing any park property;



   (C)   Interfering with any town employee acting in the course of his
or her official duties;



   (D)   Possessing and discharging any fireworks or explosives on park
property;



   (E)   Depositing, leaving or spilling refuse or other substances
other than in receptacles provided for this purpose;



   (F)   Depositing refuse from private premises in park property trash
receptacles;



   (G)   Possessing a glass beverage container in any park, trail or
facility, nor shall any person purposely throw, toss or otherwise propel or
break any glass object on park property, park area or access road leading to
park property;



   (H)   Urinating or defecating other than in the proper restroom
facilities provided;



   (I)   Congregating or assembling in or about any restroom or
entry-ways of buildings in such a manner as to hinder or obstruct the proper
use thereof;



   (J)   Violating any regulation posted for the operation of an
individual recreation center or facility;



   (K)   Utilizing a playing field which is wet, or otherwise
unsuitable for play and which may cause damage to the field;



   (L)   Camping or overnight parking; unless it is a town-sponsored
activity;



   (M)   Fires are permitted for the purpose of cooking only in picnic
areas and are restricted to grills constructed for this purpose and privately
owned grills or stoves. Wood fires on park property are prohibited for any
purpose;



   (N)   Trapping, except when necessary by the State Game and Fish
Department or other law enforcement authority; and



   (O)   Consuming spirituous liquor as defined by state law. This
division shall not apply to a person consuming beer from a broken package on
park property except as otherwise posted.



(Prior Code, Ch. 13, Art. I, § 13-10)  (Ord. 359-03, passed 12-15-2003) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.11  OTHER.



   (A)   Lost objects found on park property must be turned over to the
town police or Town Parks and Recreation Department and may be recovered by
proper identification at Police Headquarters or Town Parks and Recreation
Office.



   (B)   Picnic areas not requiring a permit are operated on a “first
come, first serve” basis. Picnic armadas shall be reserved by permit on a
“first come, first serve basis”, which must be made in person at the
Parks and Recreation Office.



(Prior Code, Ch. 13, Art. I, § 13-11)  (Ord. 359-03, passed 12-15-2003)



CHAPTER 96: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section




General Provisions




   96.01   Obstruction of streets and the like



   96.02   Protection of construction; repair



   96.03   Water flow upon streets prohibited



   96.04   Spitting



   96.05   Signs and banners



   96.06   Numbering of structures




Excavations




   96.20   Scope



   96.21   Specifications generally



   96.22   Engineering plans; specifications



   96.23   Backfill and compaction



   96.24   Compaction test reports



   96.25   Surfaced restoration of graveled or earth surfaced roads



   96.26   Miscellaneous provisions



   96.27   Driveway and/or sidewalk policy in the town right-of-way




Street Lighting; Requirements; Improvement Districts




   96.40   Street lighting; requirements



   96.41   Street lighting system; electric utility companies; standards



   96.42   Street lighting systems; design, plans, installations and
dedications



   96.43   Street Light Improvement Districts




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 96.01  OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS AND THE LIKE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct any public street or
alley, sidewalk or park or other public grounds within the municipality by
committing any act or doing any thing which is injurious to the health or
indecent or offensive to the senses, or to do in or upon any streets, alleys,
sidewalks, parks or other public grounds, any act or thing which is an
obstruction or interference to the free use of property or with any business
lawfully conducted by anyone, in or upon, facing or fronting on any of the
streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks or other public grounds in the municipality.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. I, § 16-2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Criminal nuisance, see A.R.S. § 13-2908



   Obstruction of streets, see A.R.S. § 13-2906



§ 96.02  PROTECTION OF CONSTRUCTION; REPAIR.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to walk, ride or drive upon or over
any sidewalk or street crossing during the construction or repair thereof, or
before the same is opened to public use.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. I, § 16-3)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.03  WATER FLOW UPON STREETS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or negligently
permit or cause the escape or flow of water in such quantity as to cause
flooding, or to impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic, to create a hazardous
condition to the traffic, or to cause damage to the public streets of the
municipality.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or negligently
permit or cause the escape or flow of irrigation water in such quantity as to
cause flooding, to impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic, to create a
hazardous condition to the traffic, or to cause damage to the public streets
of the municipality through the failure or neglect to properly operate or
maintain any irrigation structure, delivery ditch or waste ditch in which the
person has a vested right, interest or through the wilful or negligent
failure of the person to accept irrigation water after it has been ordered by
him or her.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. I, § 16-4)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.04  SPITTING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to spit upon any of the public
sidewalks or crosswalks in the municipality or upon any public path, byway or
highway, or in or on any public ground or park in the municipality, or upon
the floor or interior of any public building in the municipality.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. I, § 16-5)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.05  SIGNS AND BANNERS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place any banner or sign upon
any street light pole, traffic signal pole or utility pole without first
obtaining authorization from the Council.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. I, § 16-6)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.06  NUMBERING OF STRUCTURES.



   (A)   The intersection of Main Street and Butte Avenue will be the
starting point for all east-west and north-south street numbers in the
municipality, and all number designations not in conformity with this
designation shall be null and void. The municipality shall maintain a street
numbering map to aid in the use of this numbering system.



   (B)   All occupants or owners of buildings in the municipality that
have been assigned a number shall post that number on the building in a
conspicuous place so as to be readily visible from the street. In no event
shall a numeral be less than four inches in height by two inches in width.



   (C)   Failure to display the correct building number shall be a
misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. I, § 16-7)  (Ord. 92, passed 12-8-1986)




EXCAVATIONS




§ 96.20  SCOPE.



   This subchapter applies to street excavations.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. II, § 16-32)



§ 96.21  SPECIFICATIONS GENERALLY.



   (A)   All work and materials shall conform to the Maricopa
Association of Governments Details, Specifications and Standards approved by
the town (hereinafter referred to as M.A.G. Specifications), and revisions as
to these standard specifications apply to trench backfill material, backfill
compaction and roadway surface restoration except as noted in these special
provisions. In case of conflict between M.A.G. Specifications and these
provisions, the provisions herein shall apply.



   (B)   Other agency specifications for construction material which
are equal to M.A.G. Specifications, listed herein, may be substituted as
satisfactory alternatives with prior written approval of the Director of
Public Works.



   (C)   Other construction methods, which are determined from
engineering studies and laboratory tests, may be substituted as satisfactory
alternatives with prior written approval of the Director of Public Works.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. II, § 16-33)  (Ord. 55, passed 12-15-1983)



§ 96.22 ENGINEERING PLANS; SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   All preparation of plans, specifications, construction and
inspection within a municipal right-of-way shall be performed under the
supervision of a Civil Engineer registered in the state and employed by the
owner, who shall be the Engineer of Record. This provision shall only apply
if the project is of the size or importance that the Director of Public Works
deems it necessary.



   (B)   Plans shall be submitted on a maximum size sheet of 24 inches
by 36 inches and must be neat, clear, legible and complete in all respects.
Profiles will be required in projects involving installation of sewer and
underground irrigation lines in dedicated rights-of-way. Power facilities
must also be submitted in profile where the trade size of a single conduit
exceeds six inches in diameter or where multiple conduits including the
concrete encasements are 60 square inches or greater in cross-section areas.
In addition, profiles may be required by the Director of Public Works in
cases of possible alignment or grade conflicts, cover problems or crossing
conflicts. Plans may be submitted concurrently with the application for a
construction permit but at least 14 working days will be required for review.



   (C)   The Director of Public Works shall require submission of a set
of as-built plans in all cases.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. II, § 16-34)  (Ord. 55, passed 12-15-1983)



§ 96.23  BACKFILL AND COMPACTION.



   (A)   Backfill shall consist of sound earth material (other than
open graded rock) free from concrete, timber, asphalt pavement or other
debris. When select material, or A.B.C. material, is substituted or
specified, it shall conform to the applicable specifications for construction
of highways of the M.A.G. Specifications.



   (B)   Compaction of backfill materials shall be governed by the
following:



      (1)   That portion of the backfill from the bottom of the
trench to eight inches, compacted depth, over the top of the pipe shall be
back-filled with uniformly graded material with maximum size passing a one
and one-eight-inch screen. This material shall be uniformly jetted to ensure
proper bedding of pipe. Backfill around underground electric lines must meet
the specification of the responsible electrical utility.



      (2)   For the purpose of these special provisions, WATER
SETTLING is defined as the addition of water to backfill material in an
excavation in such a quantity as to make the water content of the material
higher than the optimum moisture as determined by Standard Proctor Test
(AASHO T-99). Water settling is not permitted where the excavation is in an
existing pavement or where any portion of the excavation falls within a
distance from the edge of existing pavement or back of curb equal to one-
half the depth of the trench, measured from the edge of pavement or gutter
line.



      (3)   Water settling is permitted in new subdivisions under
the following conditions:



         (a)   Fill material in lifts not exceeding eight feet in
depth shall be leveled, the trench flooded and the material jetted to within
one foot of the pipe with sufficient water to ensure filling of all voids
with backfill material.



         (b)   No paving will be permitted over water settled
trenches until compaction test results have been approved by the Director of
Public Works. Water settling is permitted beyond the limits of division
(B)(2) above with a required compaction of 85%, or the natural compaction of
the native material, whichever is higher.



   (C)   Where an excavation meets the criteria of division (B)(2)
above, the excavation shall be filled with A.B.C. or granular select
material, placed at optimum moisture in lifts sufficiently thin to ensure
required compaction for the full depth of the lift, and in no case greater
than 30 inches compacted depth, unless previously approved in writing by the
Director of Public Works. Granular select material shall not exceed three
inches in diameter and shall be graded in such a manner as to ensure the
exclusion of any and all voids in the backfill. The upper two feet is to be
mechanically compacted to not less than 95% of maximum density. Sufficient
water may be added to raise the moisture content to optimum only. Below these
two feet, the material shall be compacted to not less than 85% of the maximum
density for the backfill material as determined by AASHO Test T-99. Field
determination of density shall be made in accordance with AASHO Test T-147 or
other test procedure previously approved in writing by the Director of Public
Works.



   (D)   The minimum cover for utility lines shall be 36 inches, other
than direct burial cable which shall be 24 inches. The minimum cover for
storm drainage or irrigation pipe shall be 18 inches. COVER is defined as the
difference in elevation between the top of the line or pipe and the ultimate
gutter grade of the roadway. If paving is not completed within 30 days after
installation of the underground facilities, a temporary earth cover
sufficient to meet the above requirements must be placed and maintained.



   (E)   For facilities outside the area defined in division (B)(2)
above, COVER is defined as the difference in elevation between the top of the
line or pipe and the natural or regraded ground surface, whichever is lesser.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. II, § 16-35)  (Ord. 55, passed 12-15-1983)



§ 96.24  COMPACTION TEST REPORTS.



   (A)   The cost of making compaction tests shall be paid by the owner
or the contractor. The tests shall be made at the locations and depths
specified by the Director of Public Works or his or her representative. A
minimum of one set of tests will be required for each four feet of trench
depth for trenches within the area defined in § 96.23(B)(2). The minimum
number of passing tests per set anticipated to prove specification compliance
may be estimated at the following rates:



      (1)   Pavement cut crossings: one test per crossing;



      (2)   Pavement cuts or trenches within two feet of pavement
edge: two tests per 500 lineal feet;



      (3)   At all other locations: one test per 400 lineal feet;



      (4)   Test may be taken at four foot vertical increments in
the same vertical plane at the option of the Engineer of Record; and



   (B)   Copies of all test reports shall be sent directly to the
Engineer of Record from the testing laboratory, and to the Director of Public
Works within five days after tests are conducted.



   (C)   Pavement cutting and restoration shall be as follows:



      (1)   All cuts in asphalt or concrete pavement shall have saw
cut or neat and straight edges. Excavated pavement material shall be removed
from the site.



      (2)   The asphaltic material used for replacement of pavement
cuts shall conform to the applicable M.A.G. Specifications. The thickness of
the pavement and aggregate base replaced shall be consistent with the
thickness of the existing asphalt pavement and base cut shall not be less
than two inches of asphaltic pavement over nine inches compacted depth of
aggregate base compacted to 100% of maximum density for the material. For
Portland cement concrete paving cut replacement, this same specification will
apply. The existing pavement shall be trimmed to a neat edge and the edge
shall be treated with a proper emulsion to ensure a bond between the existing
pavement and the patch.



      (3)   It is required that all roadway crossing of lines four
inches in diameter or less to be installed under pavement which is less than
two years old, be bored under the pavement.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. II, § 16-36)  (Ord. 55, passed 12-15-1983)



§ 96.25  SURFACED RESTORATION OF GRAVELED OR EARTH SURFACED ROADS.



   The surface replacement of gravel surfaced roads shall be consistent
with the existing surface material in place and may consist of select
material or A.B.C. as directed by the Director of Public Works. Fill placed
on existing gravel surfaced roads or earth surfaced roads to obtain minimum
allowable cover over the pipe or utility lines shall be placed to proper
grade for the full width of the existing roadway and shall be compacted and
graded to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. II, § 16-37)  (Ord. 55, passed 12-15-1983)



§ 96.26  MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.



   (A)   The contractor shall secure written permission of the Director
of Public Works prior to the start of any construction operations within a
municipal right-of-way. Three sets of approved plans must be submitted with
the application at least three working days before work is scheduled to begin.



   (B)   The permittee shall notify the property owner or resident of
adjoining occupied property at least two working days prior to disruption of
access to the property, and at no time deny access to the property longer
than one normal working day, and shall provide plank for crossings, if
necessary.



   (C)   The permittee shall maintain all existing traffic control
signs within the construction area, and shall reset all signs in their
original locations as soon as construction operations will permit. The
permittee shall place and maintain traffic warning signs during the course of
work, as required by the Director of Public Works.



   (D)   Only rubber-tired equipment shall be used on pavement except
that crawler equipment using street pads may be used.



   (E)   Existing regulations of the County Health Department, as
applicable, shall be rigidly observed and enforced. Water or approved dust
palliative in sufficient quantities shall be applied during all phases of
construction involving open earth work to prevent the unnecessary discharge
of dust and dirt into the air.



   (F)   During the course of work, the permittee shall maintain the
work area in a clean and orderly condition. Excess excavation, debris and the
like, will not be permitted to accumulate on the road surface or shoulders.
Work shall progress in such a manner that no condition such as soft trenches,
drop-offs from the edge of pavement and the like, will exist. Upon completion
of installation, the permittee shall clean the pavement surface, pull and
dress shoulders and otherwise put in order the entire work area to the
satisfaction of the Director of Public Works. If the work is not completed in
a manner acceptable to the Director of Public Works, the utility or any other
permittee doing the work will be held responsible and further permits will
not be issued pending the completion of the work.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. II, § 16-38)  (Ord. 55, passed 12-15-1983)



§ 96.27 DRIVEWAY AND/OR SIDEWALK POLICY IN THE TOWN RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   The policy applies to concrete driveways and sidewalks that extend from
private property into the town right-of-way and connect to existing pavement
or curb.



   (A)   The homeowner shall get a driveway and/or sidewalk
installation permit from the town building official.



   (B)   (1)   The driveway and/or sidewalk shall be paid for by the
homeowner.



      (2)   If necessary for installation, the homeowner shall pay
for curb and sidewalk saw cut, removal and replacement.



      (3)   Homeowners with existing paved driveways will be allowed
to replace their existing driveways with concrete.



      (4)   These homeowners will be responsible for the proper
disposal of the asphaltic pavement.



   (C)   A one-half-inch thick expansion joint shall be installed at
the property line (right-of-way line) across the driveway and/or sidewalk.



   (D)   The edges of the concrete in the right of way shall be rounded
to a radius of no less than one- fourth inch.



   (E)   In areas where there is no curb, driveways and/or sidewalks
shall be constructed in such a manner that the new concrete will not
interfere with existing drainage along the side of the paved roadway. The
existing paved roadway shall be trimmed to a straight line and the concrete
shall be placed to the edge of pavement. The concrete shall be flush with the
pavement.



   (F)   In areas with existing roll curb, the concrete for the
driveway and/or sidewalk shall be placed flush with the top of the existing
roll curb.



   (G)   In areas with existing vertical curb, with an existing curb
depression at the curb connection, M.A.G. (Maricopa Association of
Governments) Standard Detail 250 shall be used for the sidewalk portion of
the driveway.



   (H)   In areas with existing vertical curb that do not have a curb
depression at the curb connection, the existing curb shall be saw cut and
removed in a manner not to disturb the existing paved roadway. A new
depressed curb and sidewalk shall be installed per M.A.G. Standard Details
250 and 220, Type A.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. II, § 16-39)  (Ord. 280-99, passed 7-19-1999)




STREET LIGHTING; REQUIREMENTS; IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS




§ 96.40  STREET LIGHTING; REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All residential and commercial developments require the
installation and energizing of street lighting on public streets within and
adjacent to the project in accordance with standards established pursuant to
this section.



   (B)   The Town Manager or his or her designee shall promulgate
written standards for the intensity of street lighting, acceptable fixtures
and poles, acceptable locations, installation practices and the other related
matters as the Town Manager or his or her designee determines to be
appropriate.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. V, § 16-180)  (Ord. 410-05, passed 11-7-2005)



§ 96.41  STREET LIGHTING SYSTEM; ELECTRIC UTILITY COMPANIES; STANDARDS.



   (A)   The town is serviced by multiple electric utility companies
(EUC). Different standards for installation and design apply in each service
area.



   (B)   The area includes that portion of the town in which EUC has
been granted a certificate of convenience and necessity to provide electric
utility service by the Arizona Corporation Commission (ACC). The street
lighting shall be designed by the owner's Engineer and the plans submitted to
the town for review and approval. The town may impose a charge on the owner
for each review and approval of the plans. Upon approval of the plans by the
town, the developer shall pay the design and installation costs. The street
lighting system will be inspected by the town and/or EUC prior to final plat
approval. If the town determines that the street lighting system meets town
standards, the street lighting system will be dedicated to the town or EUC in
conjunction with the final plat approval. Ownership of the street lighting
system will be conveyed to the town or EUC by dedication on the final plat,
which upon recording with the Pinal County Recorder, shall constitute
acceptance of the dedication by the town. If the project is not a
subdivision, ownership of the street lighting system shall be conveyed to the
town or EUC by an instrument acceptable to the Town Attorney and recorded in
the office of the Pinal County Recorder.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. V, § 16-181)  (Ord. 410-05, passed 11-7-2005)



§ 96.42  STREET LIGHTING SYSTEMS; DESIGN, PLANS, INSTALLATIONS AND
DEDICATIONS.



   (A)   Developers of residential and commercial property are
responsible for all design, installation, plan review and approval and
energizing costs of street lighting on public streets within their project
and all adjacent minor and major arterial streets fronting their project and
upon which the project has an access point. If a developer of a residential
or commercial property contends that the requirement to install street
lighting adjacent to their site is excessive, an appeal may be filed in
writing with the Town Manager or his or her designee. The determination of
the Town Manager or his or her designee upon the appeal shall be final.



   (B)   The design, plans and installation shall be in accordance with
the standards established by the town and the applicable utility service
provider.



   (C)   The developer shall retain a professional Engineer registered
in the state to prepare the lighting system design and appropriate
calculations relative to illumination levels. Illumination design shall
follow the recommendations of the American National Standard Practice for
Roadway Lighting, Illuminating Engineering Society of North America and town
street lighting standards.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. V, § 16-182)  (Ord. 410-05, passed 11-7-2005)



§ 96.43  STREET LIGHTING IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS.



   (A)   The cost of the electricity, operation and maintenance of the
street lighting system shall be assessed by the town against the owners of
the real property as follows:



      (1)   Within a residential subdivision, the cost of the
electricity, operation and maintenance of all street lights on streets within
the subdivision, including major arterial, minor arterial and collector
streets shall be charged to the property owner(s) through creation of a
Street Light Improvement District. The developer shall initiate the formation
of the Street Light Improvement District prior to the final plat approval by
executing a petition for formation of a Street Light Improvement District in
a form acceptable to the Town Attorney.



      (2)   Within a commercial subdivision, the cost of the
electricity, operation and maintenance of all street lights on streets within
the subdivision, including major arterial, minor arterial and collector
streets on which access is provided to the commercial subdivision shall be
charged to the property owner through creation of a Street Light Improvement
District. The developer shall initiate the formation of the Street Light
Improvement District prior to the final plat approval by executing a petition
for formation of a Street Light Improvement District in a form acceptable to
the Town Attorney.



      (3)   The town shall require each party dedicating the street
lights to the town to warranty the street lights against defects in design,
installation and operation for a two-year period commencing on the date of
dedication. Normal wear and tear arising from the operation of the street
lights shall be excepted from the warranty requirement.



      (4)   For any other property, the cost of the electricity,
operation and maintenance of all street lights fronting the property or on
any street for which access is provided to the property may be charged to the
property owner at the discretion of the town.



   (B)   Any owner of real property upon presentation of a petition
signed by a majority of the owners of real property within the area may
request that the town install additional street lights. Upon review of the
petition by the town, a public hearing shall be held upon the request.
Following the public hearing, upon presentation of a petition for formation
of a Street Light Improvement District in a form acceptable to the Town
Attorney, the Town Council may commence improvement district proceedings to
form a Street Light Improvement District and to assess the cost of the
electricity, operation and maintenance of additional street lights against
the property within the Street Light Improvement District.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. V, § 16-183)  (Ord. 410-05, passed 11-7-2005)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see A.R.S. §§ 48-572et seq.



CHAPTER 97: MUNICIPAL CEMETERY



Section



General Provisions



   97.001   Definitions



   97.002   Scope



   97.003   Exemptions and amendments



   97.004   Enforcement



   97.005   Statements of sales agents



   97.006   Use of guards and responsibility of damage



   97.007   Charge for unusual repairs necessitated by acts of God and
the like



   97.008   Change in address of plot owners



   97.009   Design and construction of memorials



   97.010   Admission



   97.011   Consent required for opening of caskets



   97.012   Roadways and replatting




Interments and Disinterments




   97.030   Compliance with applicable law



   97.031   Permit and general regulations



   97.032   Removal for profit prohibited



   97.033   Relocation allowed



   97.034   Opening of plot



   97.035   Errors in placement



   97.036   Responsibility for permits and embalming



   97.037   Payment required



   97.038   One body per plot



   97.039   Purchase and transfer of interment rights




Control of Plot Work and Decoration




   97.055   Work to be done by town



   97.056   Floral regulations



   97.057   Removal of floral frames



   97.058   Removal of misplaced articles



   97.059   Plants



   97.060   Design and construction of plot boarders




Public Conduct




   97.075   Use of walkways required



   97.076   Trespassing prohibited



   97.077   Flowers, animals and the like



   97.078   Loitering prohibited



   97.079   Disorderly conduct



   97.080   Rubbish



   97.081   Automobiles



   97.082   Notices and advertisements



   97.083   Pets



   97.084   Hours open




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 97.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CEMETERY.  The burial park for earth interments.



   GRAVE.  A space of ground in a burial park used, or intended to be
used, for burial.



   INTERMENT.  The disposition of human remains by burial.



   MEMORIAL.  A marker, tablet, headstone or tombstone name plate.



   MONUMENT.  A memorial of concrete, granite or other approved stone
that extends above the surface of the lawn.



   PLOT.  Space in the cemetery used, or intended to be used, for the
interment of human remains. The term includes and applies to one or more than
one adjoining grave.



   TOWN.  Includes the staff representing Florence Memorial Park.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. IV, § 16-101)  (Ord. 130, passed 2-5-1990)



§ 97.002  SCOPE.



   This chapter applies to the municipal cemetery.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. IV, § 16-102)



§ 97.003  EXEMPTIONS AND AMENDMENTS.



   The town may provide an exemption from this chapter for all interments,
headstones, plot borders and plantings in existence prior to February 5,
1990, and may amend or repeal this chapter.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. IV, § 16-103)  (Ord. 130, passed 2-5-1990)



§ 97.004  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Chief of Police and the Director of Public Works and other
employees as the town may designate, may enforce all rules and regulations
and exclude from the cemetery any person in violation of the cemetery rules.
The town and its designated employees shall have charge of the grounds and
buildings and at all times shall have supervision and control of all persons
in the cemetery, including the conduct of funerals, traffic, employees, plot
owners and visitors.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. IV, § 16-104)  (Ord. 130, passed 2-5-1990)



§ 97.005  STATEMENTS OF SALES AGENTS.



   The certificate of conveyance and this chapter and any amendments
thereto shall be the sole agreement between the town and the plot owner and
no written or oral statement of a sales agent shall be binding upon the town.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. IV, § 16-105)  (Ord. 130, passed 2-5-1990)



§ 97.006  USE OF GUARDS AND RESPONSIBILITY OF DAMAGE.



   The town shall have the right to maintain guards if in its discretion
it deems it necessary, but is under no legal obligation to do so. Whether or
not guards are used, the town disclaims all responsibility for loss or damage
from causes beyond its reasonable control, including but not limited to
damage caused by the elements, an act of God, common enemy, thieves, vandals,
strikers, malicious mischief makers, explosions, unavoidable accidents,
invasions, insurrections, riots or order of any military or civil authority,
whether the damage be direct or collateral.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. IV, § 16-106)  (Ord. 130, passed 2-5-1990)



§ 97.007  CHARGE FOR UNUSUAL REPAIRS NECESSITATED BY ACTS OF GOD AND THE
LIKE.



   If it becomes necessary to repair or reconstruct any marble, granite,
bronze or concrete work on any section or plot or any portion or portions
thereof in the cemetery which has been damaged by the elements, an act of
God, common enemy, thieves, vandals, strikers, malicious mischief makers,
explosions, unavoidable accidents, invasions, insurrections, riots or by the
order of any military or civil authority, the town shall give a ten-day
written notice of necessity for the repair to the plot owner of record. The
notice shall be given by depositing the same in the United States mail
addressed to the plot owner of record at his or her address stated in the
books of the cemetery. If the plot owner fails to repair the damage within a
reasonable time, the town may direct that the repairs be made and charge the
expense against the plot and the plot owner of record.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. IV, § 16-107)  (Ord. 130, passed 2-5-1990)



§ 97.008  CHANGE IN ADDRESS OF PLOT OWNERS.



   It shall be the duty of the plot owner to notify the town of any change
of address. Notice sent to the plot owner at the last address on file in the
office of the town shall be considered sufficient and proper legal notice.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. IV, § 16-108)  (Ord. 130, passed 2-5-1990)



§ 97.009  DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF MEMORIALS.



   (A)   The town officials shall have authority to reject or remove
any plan, design or completed work for any memorial which, on account of
size, design inscription, kind or quality of stone, is, in the opinion of the
town, unsuited to the lot on which it is or will be placed.



   (B)   The town reserves the right to stop all work of any nature
whenever in its opinion proper preparations therefore have not been made, or
when the tools and machinery being used are insufficient, defective or when
the work is being performed in such a manner as to threaten life or property
or so as to interfere with the proper operation of work or when any person
employed on the work violates this chapter.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. IV, § 16-109)  (Ord. 130, passed 2-5-1990)



§ 97.010  ADMISSION.



   The town reserves the right to compel all persons coming into the
cemetery to present proper identifications and/or permits to the town staff
for examination. The town reserves the right to refuse admission to anyone
not a lot owner or relative of a person interred in the cemetery and to
refuse the use of any of the cemetery facilities at any time to any person or
persons who refuse to comply with this chapter or other applicable law.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. IV, § 16-110)  (Ord. 130, passed 2-5-1990)



§ 97.011  CONSENT REQUIRED FOR OPENING OF CASKETS.



   Once the funeral service is completed and the casket is placed in the
receiving vault or other space, the town reserves the right to refuse
permission to anyone to open the casket or to touch the body without the
consent of the legal representatives of the deceased; provided, however, that
if required, the town may take appropriate steps to correct any obnoxious or
improper conditions.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. IV, § 16-111)  (Ord. 130, passed 2-5-1990)



§ 97.012  ROADWAYS AND REPLATTING.



   (A)   Right to replat, regrade and use property.  The right and
privilege at any time and from time to time to resurvey, enlarge, diminish,
replat, alter in shape or otherwise to change all or any part, portion or
subdivision of the property (including the right to lay out, establish,
close, eliminate or otherwise to modify or change the location of roads,
walks or drives) and to file amended maps or plats thereof, and to use the
same for the erection of buildings or for any purpose or uses connected with,
incident to or convenient for the care, preservation or preparation for the
disposal or interment of dead bodies, or other cemetery purposes, together
with easements and rights-of-way over and through the premises for, and the
right and privilege of installing, maintaining and operating pipelines,
conduits or drains for sprinklers, drainage, electric or communication lines,
or for any other purpose, is hereby expressly reserved to the town.



   (B)   No right granted in alleyways.  No easement or right of
interment is granted to any plot owner in any road, drive, alley or walk
within the cemetery, but the road, drive, alley or walk may be used as a
means of access to the cemetery or buildings as long as the town devotes it
to that purpose.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. IV, § 16-112)  (Ord. 130, passed 2-5-1990)




INTERMENTS AND DISINTERMENTS




§ 97.030  COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAW.



   Besides being subject to this chapter, all interments, disinterments
and removals shall also be subject to the orders and laws of the properly
constituted authorities of the town, county and state.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. IV, § 16-121)  (Ord. 130, passed 2-5-1990)



§ 97.031  PERMIT AND GENERAL REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Burial permits shall be obtained prior to any opening of
burial ceremonies, and shall be issued by the town for purposes of
maintaining records of the burial.



   (B)   A permit shall be obtained as required by law for making a
disinterment, but the town shall assume no liability for damage to any casket
or burial case in agreeing to or performing the disinterment.



   (C)   All interments and disinterments must be made at the time, in
the manner and subject to the payment of the charges as set from time to time
on the basis of cost by the cemetery management.



   (D)   All funerals upon reaching the cemetery shall be under the
supervision of the cemetery management.



   (E)   The right is reserved by the town to insist upon at least a
one-week notice prior to any disinterment of remains.



   (F)   No interments or disinterments shall be permitted on Sundays,
or on any of the following holidays: New Year's Day, Lincoln's Birthday,
Presidents Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day,
Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day. An extra charge will be
required for funerals held on Saturday.



   (G)   When instructions from the plot owner regarding the location
of an interment space in a plot cannot be obtained, are indefinite or when
for any reason the interment space cannot be open where specified, the
management may, at its own discretion, open it in the location in the plot as
it deems best and proper, so as not to delay the funeral. The town shall not
be liable in damages for any error so made.



   (H)   Tents, artificial grass, lowering devices and other equipment
owned by the town shall be used exclusively in making interments and
disinterments.



   (I)   The charges for the opening and/or closing of the grave must
be paid and arrangements for the payment of any and all indebtedness due to
the town prior to the time of the issuance of the permit for interment or
disinterment. Opening and closing fees can be paid in advance with the
understanding that they are not refundable.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. IV, § 16-122)  (Ord. 156, passed 1-7-1991)



§ 97.032  REMOVAL FOR PROFIT PROHIBITED.



   Removal by the heirs, of a body, so that the plot may be sold for
profit or removal contrary to the expressed or implied wish of the original
plot owner is repugnant to the ordinary sense of decency and is forbidden.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. IV, § 16-123)  (Ord. 130, passed 2-5-1990)



§ 97.033  RELOCATION ALLOWED.



   A body may be removed from its original plot to a larger plot in the
cemetery when there has been an exchange or purchase for that purpose.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. IV, § 16-124)  (Ord. 130, passed 2-5-1990)



§ 97.034  OPENING OF PLOT.



   The town may open a plot for any purpose on proper written
authorization by any plot owner of record made out on forms approved by the
town and duly filed in its office, unless there are written instruction's to
the contrary on file with the town. When instructions from the plot owner
regarding the location of the interment space in a plot cannot be obtained,
are indefinite or when for any reason the interment space cannot be opened
where specified, the management may, in its discretion, open it in the
location in the plot as it deems best and proper, so as not to delay the
funeral, and the town shall not be liable in damages for any error so made.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. IV, § 16-125)  (Ord. 130, passed 2-5-1990)



§ 97.035  ERRORS IN PLACEMENT.



   The town shall not be held responsible for any order given by
telephone, or for any mistake occurring as a result of erroneous instructions
as to the particular space, size and location in a plot where interment is
desired. Further, the town reserves the right to correct any errors that may
be made either in making interments, disinterments or removals, or in the
description, transfer or conveyance of any interment property either by
canceling the conveyance and substituting and conveying in lieu thereof other
interment property of equal value and in so far as possible similar in
location, as may be selected by the town, or, in the sole discretion of the
town, by refunding the purchase price of the property. In the event the error
shall involve the interment of the remains of any person on the wrong
property, the town also reserves the right to remove and reenter the remains
in the other property of equal value and similar location as may be
substituted therefore.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. IV, § 16-126)  (Ord. 130, passed 2-5-1990)



§ 97.036  RESPONSIBILITY FOR PERMITS AND EMBALMING.



   The town shall not be liable for the interment permit nor for the
identity of the person sought to be interred, nor shall the town be
responsible for the embalming of the body.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. IV, § 16-127)  (Ord. 130, passed 2-5-1990)



§ 97.037  PAYMENT REQUIRED.



   No interment shall be permitted or memorial placed in or on any
property not fully paid for except by special consent of the town in writing
and, in the event the consent is given, any and all interments or memorials
placed in or on the property shall be considered as temporary, and no rights
shall be acquired by the plot purchaser until the property is fully paid for
in cash. Further, in the event the purchaser of the property shall fail to
meet all payments within 30 days after the same are due then the town may
reenter the property and hold the same as its former estate. The town
thereupon shall release the owner from all obligations thereunder, and it may
retain the payments as may have been made toward the purchase of the property
as liquidated damages. The town also reserves the right, without notice, to
remove to single graves, to be chosen by the town, any memorial and each of
the remains then interred on the unpaid for property.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. IV, § 16-128)  (Ord. 130, passed 2-5-1990)



§ 97.038  ONE BODY PER PLOT.



   Not more than one body, or the remains of more than one body, shall be
interred in one grave unless approved by the town, in which case a maximum of
three urns may be placed in one grave. The lot owner must pay the fee set by
the town for each interment.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. IV, § 16-129)  (Ord. 130, passed 2-5-1990; Ord.
281-99, passed 10-18-1999)



§ 97.039  PURCHASE AND TRANSFER OF INTERMENT RIGHTS.



   (A)   Time and charges.  All interments, disinterments and removals
must be made at the time and in the manner and only upon the payment of the
reasonable charges as may be from time to time fixed by the cemetery
management.



   (B)   Consent required for nonresidents.  It is recognized that
special circumstances may arise under which plots should be sold to those who
are not residents. When the instances occur, special dispensation of these
rules may be granted by the town.



   (C)   Transfer charges.  The town may fix a charge as established
in the Town of Florence Schedule of Fees for all transfers of ownership of
interment rights. No transfer of ownership shall be completed or effective
until all fees are paid.



   (D)   Interment rights.  All interment rights are presumed to be
the sole and separate property of the owner named in the instrument of
conveyance.



   (E)   Consent of association.  No transfer or assignment of any
interment rights, or interest therein, shall be valid until the consent of
the town has been endorsed thereon and the same has been recorded in the
books or records of the town.



   (F)   Indebtedness.  The town may refuse to consent to a transfer
or to an assignment as long as there is any indebtedness due to the town from
recorded interment rights owners.



   (G)   May not subdivide plot.  The subdivision of interment rights
is not allowed and no individual shall be interred in any plot not having an
interest therein, except by written consent of all parties interested in the
plot and of the town.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. IV, § 16-130)  (Ord. 130, passed 2-5-1990; Ord.
644-15, passed 12-7-2015)




CONTROL OF PLOT WORK AND DECORATION




§ 97.055  WORK TO BE DONE BY TOWN.



   All grading, landscape work and improvements of any kind and all care
on plots, shall be done, and all trees and shrubs and herbage of any kind
shall be planted, trimmed, cut or removed, and all openings and closings of
plots, and all interments, disinterments and removals shall be made under the
direction of the town.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. IV, § 16-141)  (Ord. 130, passed 2-5-1990)



§ 97.056  FLORAL REGULATIONS.



   No flower receptacles may be placed on any plot unless approved by the
town and they shall be of metal of approved size and design and, in the case
of a burial park, set wholly beneath the level of the lawn. The town shall
have authority to remove all floral designs, flowers, weeds, trees, shrubs,
plants or herbage of any kind from the cemetery as soon as, in the judgment
of the Director of Public Works, they become unsightly, dangerous or when
they do not conform to the standards maintained. The town shall not be liable
for floral pieces, baskets or frames in which or to which the floral pieces
are attached. The town shall not be liable for lost, misplaced or broken
flower vases. The town shall not be liable for plants, herbage or plantings
of any kind damaged by the elements, thieves, vandals or by any other causes
beyond its control.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. IV, § 16-142)  (Ord. 130, passed 2-5-1990)



§ 97.057  REMOVAL OF FLORAL FRAMES.



   Floral frames when removed from the plot site, unless called for within
five days by those lawfully entitled to them, may be disposed of by the town
in any manner it sees fit.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. IV, § 16-143)  (Ord. 130, passed 2-5-1990)



§ 97.058  REMOVAL OF MISPLACED ARTICLES.



   The placing of boxes, shells, toys, metal designs, ornaments, chairs,
settees, vases, glass, wood or iron cases and similar articles shall not be
permitted on cemetery avenues, walks, alleys and roads, and if so placed
shall be removed by the town.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. IV, § 16-144)  (Ord. 130, passed 2-5-1990)



§ 97.059  PLANTS.



   (A)   The placing of permanent plant materials, including trees,
shrubs and ground covers, shall not be permitted on cemetery avenues, walks,
alleys and roads, and if so placed, shall be removed by the town.



   (B)   The planting of permanent plant materials shall adhere to the
following approved plant list which is taken from the Low Water Using Plant
List Pinal Active Management Area.



      (1)   The criteria used in determining plants appropriate for
the cemetery were:



         (a)   Low water usage plants; and



         (b)   Root systems of plants will not be detrimental to
grave sites. For this reason, no trees are approved for grave plot site
planting.



      (2)   For additional information about these plants, consult
either of the following books. Both are at the public library.



         (a)   Plants for Dry Climates by Mary Rose Duffield and
Warren D. Jones.



         (b)   Sunset New Western Garden Book by the editors of
Sunset Books and Sunset Magazine, Lane Publishing Co., Menlo Park, California.



      (3)   When marked with an asterisk (*), only this specific
species or variety can be used.



         (a)   Shrubs.



 


Botanical Name

 

Common Name

 

Plant Height (Feet)






Acacia decora *

 

Acacia/Wattle

 

8




Aloysia triphylla *

 

Lemon Verbena

 

6




Ambrosia deltoidea

 

Triangleleaf Bur-sage

 





Ambrosia dumosa

 

White Bur-sage

 





Atriplex spp.

 

Saltbrush

 

8




Baccharis spp.

 

Desert Broom

 

7




Berberis haematocarpa *

 

Red Barberry

 





Buddleia spp.

 

Summer Lilac

 

10




Caesalpinia spp.

 

Bird of Paradise

 

10




Calliandra spp.

 

Fairy Duster

 

8




Callistemon phoeniceus *

 

Salt Resistant Bottlebrush

 





Callistemon Viminalis “Captain Cook”*

 

Dwarf Bottlebrush

 

5




Calothamnus spp.

 

Net Bush

 

8




Cassia

 

Cassia/Senna

 





Cassia

 


 





-alata

 


 

10




-artemisioides

 


 

5




-bicapsularis

 


 

10




-corymbosa

 


 

10




-didymobotrya

 


 

10




-splendida

 


 

12




-sturtii

 


 

6




-surattensis

 


 

8




-tomentosa

 


 

8




Chrysothamnus nauseosus

 

Rabbit Brush

 





Cistus spp.

 

Rockrose

 

5




Convolvulus cneorum

 

Bush Morning Glory

 

4




Cordia boissieri

 

Texas Olive

 

15




Cordia parvifolia

 

Little Leaf Cordia

 

10





 



 


Botanical Name

 

Common Name

 

Plant Height (Feet)






Dalea spinosa

 

Smoke Tree

 

12




Dodonaea viscosa

 

Hop Bush

 

15




Encelia farinosa

 

Brittlebush

 

3




Ephedra spp.

 

Mormon Tree

 





Eremaea beaufortioides

 

Erema

 





Eremaea pauciflora

 

Snow Gum

 





Eremaea violacea

 

Violet Eremea

 





Erogonum spp.

 

Buckwheat

 

4




Foresiera neomexicana

 

Desert Olive

 

8




Genista hispanica *

 

Spanish Broom

 

2




Grevillea rosmarinifolia *

 

Rosemary

 





Haplopappus laricifolia

 

Turpentine Bush

 





Hyptis emoryi

 

Desert Lavender

 





Jatropha spp.

 


 





Juniperus chinesis varieties *

 

Juniper

 

8




Justicia spp.

 

Shrimp Plant

 

4




Kunzea spp.

 


 





Lantana camera

 

Bush Lantana

 

6




Larrea tridentata

 

Creosote Bush

 

8




Leucophyllum frutescenes

 

Texas Ranger

 

10




Lycium spp.

 


 





Mimosa biuncifera

 

Wait A Minute Bush

 





Mimosa dysocarpa

 

Velvet Pad Mimosa

 





Nerium oleander *

 

Oleander/dwarf varieties only

 





-“Petite Pink” *

 


 

3




-“Petite Salmon” *

 


 

3




-“Algiers” *

 


 

4




-“Casablanca” *

 


 

4





 



 


Botanical Name

 

Common Name

 

Plant Height (Feet)






Plumbago auriculata

 

Cape Plumbago

 

6




Puncia granatum

 

Pomegranate

 

12




Rhus ovata *

 

Mountain Laurel

 

10




Rhus trilobata *

 

Skunkbush

 

5




Rhus virens *

 

Evergreen Sumac

 

6




Rosmarinus officinalis

 

Rosemary

 

4




Ruellia califirnica

 

Reullia

 





Ruellia peninsularis

 

Reulla

 

3




Salvia spp.

 

Sage

 

5




Sececio cineraria (Senecia)

 

Dusty Miller

 





Simmondsia chinensis

 

Jojoba

 

6




Sophora spp.

 

Texas Mountain Laurel

 

15




Tecoma stans

 

Yellow Bells

 

6




Teucrium spp.

 

Bush Germander

 

6




Vauquelinia californica

 

Rosewood

 

15





 



         (b)   Succulents.



 


Botanical Name

 

Common Name




Aloe spp.

 

Aloe




Dasylirion wheeleri

 

Desert Spoon




Hesperaloe parvifloria

 

Red Yucca




Nolina spp.

 

Bear Grass




 



         (c)   Annuals and/or perennials.



 


Botanical Name

 

Common Name






Abronia villosa

 

Sand Verbena




Artotis spp.

 

African Daisy




Argemone pleicantha

 

Prickly Poppy




Baeria chrysostoma

 

Goldfield




Bahia absinthifolia

 

Bahia, Desert Daisy




Baileya multiradiata

 

Desert Marigold




Cassia covesii

 

Cassia




Catharanthus roseus cultivars

 

Madagascar Periwinkle




Celosia spp.

 

Cockscomb




Cosomos spp.

 

Cosmos




Dimorphotheca spp.

 

African Daisy




Dyssodia pentachaeta

 

Dyssodia




Eschscholzia californica

 

California Poppy




Eschscholzia mexicana

 

Mexican Gold Poppy




Gilia leptantha

 

Showy Blue Gilia




Gomphrena globosa

 

Globe Amaranth





 



 


Botanical Name

 

Common Name






Helichrysum bracteatum

 

Everlasting Daisy




Helipterum spp.

 





Kallstoremia grandifloria

 

Arizona Poppy




Layia playtyglossa

 

Tidy Tpis




Lesquerella gordoni

 

Gold Crucifer




Linaria spp.

 

Toadflax




Lupinus densiflorus

 

Lupine




Lupinus sparsiflorus

 





Matricaria grandiflora

 

Pineapple Weed




Melampodium leucanthum

 

Blackfoot Daisy




Mentzelia spp.

 

Blazing Star




Orthocarpus purpurascens

 

Owls Clover




Pectis papposa

 

Chinch Weed




Penstemon spp.

 

Beard Tongue




Phacelia spp.

 





Tagetes spp.

 

Marigold




Ursinia spp.

 

Ursinia





 



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. IV, § 16-145)  (Ord. 130, passed 2-5-1990)



§ 97.060  DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF PLOT BOARDERS.



   (A)   The town officials shall have the authority to review and
reject any plan, design or completed work for any plot border which, on
account of size, design, kind or quality, is, in the opinion of the town,
unsuited to the plot on which it is or will be placed. All the designs and
work shall comply with the following specifications:



      (1)   Border around plots.  Construction materials should be
limited to blocks, brick or concrete. Dimensions should not exceed eight
inches in width nor 20 inches in height above grade or ground level.



      (2)   Fences.  Construction material should be limited to
wrought iron and not exceed 36 inches in height above grade or ground level
including the height of the border or base. The fences should be constructed
in ten foot removable sections.



      (3)   Monuments.  Construction material should be limited to
concrete, granite or other approved stone and should not exceed 36 inches in
height above grade or ground level. Wooden crosses may be allowed if they
maintain 36 inches in height above grade or ground level.



      (4)   Grave caps.  Construction material should be limited to
concrete and should not exceed four feet in width nor eight feet in length
nor eight inches in height. Vaults on top of ground level are not allowed and
shall not be permitted.



   (B)   The plot owner of the interment right or his or her heirs are
responsible for border maintenance.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. IV, § 16-146)  (Ord. 130, passed 2-5-1990)




PUBLIC CONDUCT




§ 97.075  USE OF WALKWAYS REQUIRED.



   Persons within the cemetery grounds shall use only the avenues, walks,
alleys and roads. Any person injured while walking on the grass, unless it is
the only way to reach his or her plot, or while on any portion of the
cemetery other than the avenues, walks, alleys or roads, shall in no way hold
the town liable for any injuries sustained.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. IV, § 16-161)  (Ord. 130, passed 2-5-1990)



§ 97.076  TRESPASSING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Only the plot owner and his or her relatives shall be
permitted on the cemetery plot; plots are sacred and private property and
must not be invaded.



   (B)   Any other person thereon shall be considered a trespasser, and
the town shall owe no duty to the trespasser to keep the property, or the
memorial thereon, in a reasonably safe condition.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. IV, § 16-162)  (Ord. 130, passed 2-5-1990)



§ 97.077  FLOWERS, ANIMALS AND THE LIKE.



   All persons are prohibited from gathering flowers, either wild or
cultivated, or breaking trees, shrubbery or plants, or feeding or disturbing
the birds, fish or other animal life.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. IV, § 16-163)  (Ord. 130, passed 2-5-1990)



§ 97.078  LOITERING PROHIBITED.



   Persons other than plot owners or relatives shall not be permitted to
loiter in the cemetery.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. IV, § 16-164)  (Ord. 130, passed 2-5-1990)



§ 97.079  DISORDERLY CONDUCT.



   Boisterous or unseemly conduct shall not be permitted on cemetery
grounds.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. IV, § 16-165)  (Ord. 130, passed 2-5-1990)



§ 97.080 RUBBISH.



   The throwing of rubbish on the drives and paths or on any part of the
grounds is prohibited.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. IV, § 16-166)  (Ord. 130, passed 2-5-1990) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.081  AUTOMOBILES.



   (A)   Automobiles shall not be driven through the grounds at a
greater speed than 15 mph, and must always be kept on the right-hand side of
the cemetery roadway.



   (B)   Automobiles are not allowed to park or to come to a full stop
in front of any open grave unless the automobiles are in attendance at the
funeral.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. IV, § 16-167)  (Ord. 130, passed 2-5-1990)



§ 97.082  NOTICES AND ADVERTISEMENTS.



   No signs, notices or advertisements of any kind shall be allowed in the
cemetery, unless placed by the town.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. IV, § 16-168)  (Ord. 130, passed 2-5-1990) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.083  PETS.



   Pets shall not be allowed on the cemetery grounds unless leashed.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. IV, § 16-169)  (Ord. 130, passed 2-5-1990) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.084  HOURS OPEN.



   The cemetery grounds shall be open from dawn to dusk.



(Prior Code, Ch. 16, Art. IV, § 16-170)  (Ord. 130, passed 2-5-1990)



TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   LICENSES, TAXATION, AND GENERAL BUSINESS REGULATIONS



      111.   MOBILE FOOD VENDORS



      112.   SPECIAL EVENTS



      113.   [RESERVED]



      114.   [RESERVED]




      115.   PAWNSHOPS, SECOND-HAND DEALERS, JUNK COLLECTORS AND
AUCTION HOUSES




      116.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS



      117.   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE



      118.   CABLE COMMUNICATIONS



      119.   LICENSING OF MEDICAL MARIJUANA-RELATED FACILITIES



      120.   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES



CHAPTER 110:  LICENSES, TAXATION, AND GENERAL BUSINESS REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   110.01   Purpose and scope



   110.02   Definitions




Solicitor Registration




   110.10   Registration fees



   110.11   Identification required



   110.12   License issuance



   110.13   Exhibition of identification and license



   110.14   License revocation




Prohibitions and Restrictions




   110.20   Selling without a license



   110.21   Selling on streets, sidewalks, or in the park without permit



   110.22   Signs to be obeyed




Business License




   110.30   Business license required



   110.31   Application; issuance



   110.32   Term of license



   110.33   Number of licenses



   110.34   License to be exhibited



   110.35   Duties and powers of inspectors



   110.36   Transfer of license



   110.37   Prorating prohibited



   110.38   Payment of license fees



   110.39   Restrictions; suspension; revocation



   110.40   Appeals



 



   110.99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Business licensing and regulation authorized, see A.R.S. §§
9-240(B)(18) and 9-240(B)(19)



   County business and occupation license required, see A.R.S. § 11-1601



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 110.01  PURPOSE AND SCOPE.



   The purpose of this chapter is both regulatory and revenue generating.
The regulations are for the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of
the residents, business owners, and visitors of the town. Regulations found
in other chapters of this title, which pertain to specific types of
businesses, shall be in addition to those found within this chapter.



(Ord. 658-17, passed 11-20-2017)



§ 110.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONTRACTOR.



      (1)   Synonymous with the terms BUILDER, DUAL LICENSED
CONTRACTOR, COMMERCIAL CONTRACTOR, and RESIDENTIAL CONTRACTOR.



      (2)   Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association,
or other organization, or a combination of any of them, that, for
compensation, undertakes to or offers to undertake to, purports to have the
capacity to undertake to, submits a bid or responds to a request for
qualification or a request for proposals for construction services to, does
himself or herself or by or through others, or directly or indirectly
supervises others to:



         (a)   Construct, alter, repair, add to, subtract from,
improve, move, wreck or demolish any building, highway, road, railroad,
excavation, or other structure, project, development, or improvement, or to
do any part thereof, including the erection of scaffolding or any other
structure or work in connection with the construction.



         (b)   Connect such structure or improvements to utility
service lines and metering devices and the sewer line.



         (c)   Provide mechanical or structural service for any
such structure or improvement.



      (3)   CONTRACTOR includes subcontractors, specialty
contractors, floor covering contractors, landscape contractors, and
consultants representing themselves as having the ability to supervise or
manage a construction project for the benefit of the property owner,
including the hiring and firing of specialty contractors, the scheduling of
work on the project, and the selection and purchasing of construction
material.



   SIGN.  Temporary or permanent. See §§ 150.092 through 150.130.



   SOLICITOR.  Any person, individual or corporation, or firm, whether a
resident of the town or not, who travels, or whose agents travel, by foot,
automobile, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house
to house, from street to street, or business to business, taking or
attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares, merchandise, edible
foodstuffs, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery,
or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether
collecting advance payments on such sales or not; provided that such
definition shall include any person or firm who, for themselves or itself, or
for another person or firm hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building,
structure, tent, shop, or any other place within the town for the sole
purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery.



   TRANSIENT MERCHANT, ITINERANT MERCHANT, or ITINERANT VENDOR.  Any
person, corporate or individual, or firm, whether owner or otherwise, whether
a resident of the town or not, who engages, or whose agents engage, in a
temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares, merchandise,
edible foodstuffs or provisions, within the town, and who in furtherance of
such purpose, hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building, structure, motor
vehicle, tent, public room in a hotel, lodging house, apartment, shop, or any
street, alley, or other place within the town for the exhibition and sale of
such goods, wares, merchandise, and edible foodstuffs, either privately or at
public auction. The person or firm so engaged shall not be relieved from
complying with the provisions of this chapter merely by reason of associating
temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant, or auctioneer, or by
conducting such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in
the name of any such local dealer, trader, merchant, or auctioneer.



(Ord. 658-17, passed 11-20-2017)



SOLICITOR REGISTRATION



§ 110.10  REGISTRATION FEES.



   (A)   Any person selling goods, wares, merchandise, magazines, or
services who goes from house to house without an invitation, or to only one
house without an invitation, in the town shall register with the Town Clerk
and obtain an identification card showing such registration.



   (B)   The peddler shall pay a registration/application fee per the
Town Fee Schedule.



   (C)   Any person required to register under this chapter shall pay
the appropriate fee.



(Ord. 658-17, passed 11-20-2017)



§ 110.11  IDENTIFICATION REQUIRED.



   (A)   Applications for registration under the terms of § 110.10 may
be required to furnish two satisfactory photographs of the applicant, one to
be attached to the applicant's license and the other to be retained by the
Police Department. The Chief of Police may require the applicant to file his
or her fingerprint identification with the Police Department. The Chief of
Police shall, when otherwise permitted and pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-1750 and
5 U.S.C. § 9101 or 42 U.S.C. §§ 14611 et seq., forward those fingerprints
accompanied by appropriate fees to the state Department of Public Safety and
the Federal Bureau of Investigation for the purpose of seeking criminal
history record information on the applicant.



   (B)   Applicants may be required to furnish to the Police Department
a complete description of the product to be sold in the town, together with
information regarding sales methods to be used and references that will
enable the Chief of Police to determine whether or not such applicant is
qualified to receive a license as provided in § 110.12. Investigation by the
Chief of Police under the provisions of this chapter shall be completed
within ten business days after the applicant has provided the required
information.



(Ord. 658-17, passed 11-20-2017)



§ 110.12  LICENSE ISSUANCE.



   Licenses shall be issued unless the Chief of Police, or designee,
discovers that any such applicant is deemed not to be a proper person to be
permitted to go from house to house because of any of the following reasons,
in which case, in the interest of public safety and protection, the applicant
shall not be registered:



   (A)   He or she has a felony criminal record;



   (B)   He or she is associated with a company that has engaged in
fraudulent dealings; or



   (C)   The proposed sales proposition includes some element of
trickery, fraud, or deceit.



(Ord. 658-17, passed 11-20-2017)



§ 110.13  EXHIBITION OF IDENTIFICATION AND LICENSE.



   Licensees are required to exhibit their town-issued identification and
certificate of license at the request of any citizen. The Town Clerk's Office
shall issue one license per application. Additional copies may be obtained
for an additional fee according the Town of Florence Fee Schedule.



(Ord. 658-17, passed 11-20-2017)



§ 110.14  LICENSE REVOCATION.



   Licenses under this chapter may be revoked by the town at any time if
deemed necessary in the interest of public safety and protection.



(Ord. 658-17, passed 11-20-2017)



PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS



§ 110.20  SELLING WITHOUT A LICENSE.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to take part in the act of
soliciting, peddling, hawking, selling, or vending of goods, wares,
merchandise, magazines, or services from business to business, from house to
house, or to only one house in the town without having registered with the
Town Clerk and without having obtained a license, without having such ID and
license in possession, or failing to exhibit such ID or license when request
is made.



   (B)   Any violation of this section shall constitute a Class 1
misdemeanor, punishable as provided in § 10.99(C).



(Ord. 658-17, passed 11-20-2017)



§ 110.21  SELLING ON STREETS, SIDEWALKS, OR IN THE PARK WITHOUT PERMIT.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any booth,
stand, or counter in any park, sidewalk, or any right-of-way of the state,
county, or town for the purpose of barter, sale, or trade, or keep or
maintain upon the streets or alleys any wagon, cart, wheel, vehicle, movable
booth, or stand for the purpose of barter or trade, without first obtaining
permission of the state, county, or town and obtaining the proper permit.



   (B)   Any violation of this section shall constitute a Class 1
misdemeanor, punishable as provided in § 10.99(C).



(Ord. 658-17, passed 11-20-2017)



§ 110.22  SIGNS TO BE OBEYED.



   It is unlawful for any peddler, solicitor, or canvasser in the course
of his or her business to ring the doorbell or knock at any building whereon
a sign bearing the words "no peddlers, solicitors, or canvassers" is exposed
to public view.



(Ord. 658-17, passed 11-20-2017)



BUSINESS LICENSE



§ 110.30  BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the business license is to provide an
additional protection to the citizens and visitors of the town from fraud and
misrepresentation; to ensure that sales tax revenues are reported equitably;
and to provide a database of the commercial activities within the community.



   (B)   Requirements. The Town of Florence requires that every person,
firm, corporation, partnership, or other business organization occupying real
property that is properly zoned within the town for business purposes shall
obtain a business license. In addition, similar businesses which are engaged
in business activities within the town but have no fixed place of business in
the town shall also be required to obtain a business license.



   (C)   Types of business licenses. A business license shall be
required of any person, corporation, or partnership based within the town
limits carrying on any trade, calling, profession, occupation, or business.
In addition, contractors (as defined in § 110.02) conducting business within
the town limits shall also be required to obtain a business license. A
business license shall be valid for a period not to exceed one calendar year.



   (D)   Violations.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person, whether as principal or
agent, either for himself or herself, or for another person, or for any
corporation, or as a member of any firm or co-partnership, to commence
practice, transact or carry on any trade, calling, profession, occupation, or
business within the town limits without first having procured a business
license from the town.



      (2)   The practicing or carrying on of any trade, calling,
profession, occupation, or business by any person, corporation, or
partnership without first having procured a license from the town to do so,
or without complying with any and all regulations of such trade, calling,
profession, occupation, or business, as required by other law or by this
chapter, shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter for each and
every day that such trade, calling, profession, occupation, or business is
practiced, carried on, or conducted within the town.



   (E)   Food vendors are required to display a County Health
Department certificate.



   (F)   Exceptions. The only exceptions to the licensing requirements
of this section shall be:



      (1)   Non-profit educational institutions, fraternal and
service clubs, bona fide religious organizations, and agencies of any
federal, state, or local governments.



      (2)   Non-profit private clubs where a basic membership fee
covers the cost of the use of facilities.



      (3)   Fundraising projects of non-profit and bona fide
religious organizations, not conducted on a regular basis.



      (4)   Rental units of three or less, if in a noncommercial
zoning district.



      (5)   Sellers of agricultural produce grown within the town
limits by the seller.



      (6)   Any hobby or craft sales in which the seller is the
creator of a non-paid representative of the creator and for which the gross
sales of each hobbyist and craftsperson shall not exceed $3,000 in any 12
month period.



(Ord. 658-17, passed 11-20-2017)



§ 110.31  APPLICATION; ISSUANCE.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk, upon receipt of a
properly completed application for a business license and verification of the
data contained thereon, to prepare and issue a license under this chapter for
every person, corporation, or partnership required to pay a license fee
hereunder and to state in each license the amount charged for the same, the
period of time covered thereby, the name of the person, corporation, or
partnership to whom issued, and the trade, calling, profession, occupation,
or business, and the location or place of business where the trade, calling,
profession, occupation, or business is to be carried on, transacted, or
practiced.



   (B)   In no case shall any mistake made by the Town Clerk in issuing
any license or collecting the amount of fee for any license or the amount
actually due from any person required to pay for a license as provided
herein, prevent, prejudice, or stop the town from collecting the correct
amount of fee or charge for any license or the amount actually due from any
person required to pay for a license as provided herein, or revoking any
license erroneously issued and refunding the fee collected.



   (C)   No greater or lesser amount of money shall be charged or
received by the Town Clerk for any license than is provided for in this
chapter, and no license shall be issued for any period of time other than as
provided herein.



   (D)   All charges for a license required by this chapter shall be
paid in advance and in lawful money of the United States of America at the
office of the Town Clerk.



(Ord. 658-17, passed 11-20-2017)



§ 110.32  TERM OF LICENSE.



   The renewal charge for annual licenses provided herein shall become due
and payable before January 1 of each calendar year and each year thereafter,
except that any new license charge shall become due and payable and be paid
on or before the day of commencing to carry on, transact, or practice the
trade, calling, profession, occupation, or business for which a license is
required by this chapter.



(Ord. 658-17, passed 11-20-2017)



§ 110.33  NUMBER OF LICENSES.



   (A)   A separate charge for a license shall be paid for each branch
establishment or separate place of business in which any person, corporation,
or partnership shall carry on, transact, or practice a trade, calling,
profession, occupation, or business.



   (B)   When more than one trade, calling, profession, occupation, or
business is carried on, transacted, or practiced by the same person,
corporation, or partnership at one fixed place of business, only one license
shall be required and the charge for such license shall be the highest charge
applicable to any of the activities, and all activities shall be listed on
the license issued.



   (C)   When more than one trade, calling, profession, occupation, or
business shall be carried on, transacted, or practiced by the same person,
corporation, or partnership without any fixed place of business, a separate
license shall be required and a separate appropriate charge be paid for each
activity for which a license is required by this chapter.



(Ord. 658-17, passed 11-20-2017)



§ 110.34  LICENSE TO BE EXHIBITED.



   (A)   Each person, corporation, or partnership having a license and
having a fixed place of business shall keep the license, while in force, at
some conspicuous place or location within the place of business.



   (B)   Each person, corporation, or partnership having a license and
having no fixed place of business shall carry such license with them at all
times, while engaged in any activity for which the license was issued, except
that a person acting for any such corporation, firm, or company may carry
with them a copy of the license which has been issued by the Town Clerk and
plainly marked or stamped "duplicate."



   (C)   Each person, corporation, or partnership having a license
shall produce and exhibit the license whenever requested to do so by any
designated officer of the town or by the Town Clerk.



(Ord. 658-17, passed 11-20-2017)



§ 110.35  DUTIES AND POWERS OF INSPECTORS.



   (A)   The Town Clerk's Office, Town Police, Building Official, and
Fire Marshal are deemed to be the inspectors for the purpose of this chapter.



   (B)   The inspector of licenses and assistant inspectors, each in
the discharge and performance of his or her duties, shall have and exercise
the following powers:



      (1)   To file a complaint for any violation of the provisions
of this chapter with the Municipal Court; and



      (2)   To enter, free of charge and at any reasonable time, any
place of business for which a license is required by this chapter and to
demand exhibition of the license for the current period of time from any
person, corporation, or partnership engaged in carrying on, transacting, or
practicing any trade, calling, profession, occupation, or business at such
place of business and, if such person, corporation, or partnership shall fail
then and there to exhibit such license, such person, corporation, or
partnership shall be liable for the penalties provided for violation of this
chapter.



   (C)   Businesses must obtain their business license prior to opening
to the public. When a business fails to obtain a business license, the
business will be charged the fee for the business license plus $10 per month,
as a penalty, until such time as paid in full for any license required
hereunder and the charge shall be considered delinquent. The Town Clerk shall
not issue a business license until the charge and penalty shall be paid in
full. The fees cannot be waived.



(Ord. 658-17, passed 11-20-2017)



§ 110.36  TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   No license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be
assigned or transferred to any other person, corporation or partnership
without first obtaining permission from the town.



(Ord. 658-17, passed 11-20-2017)



§ 110.37  PRORATING PROHIBITED.



   The town shall have a one-time prorated fee for the annual business
license. Any license obtained after July 1 will be charged half of an annual
license. Annual licenses issued after the December 1 shall pay the full fee
and shall be valid for all of the subsequent year and shall reflect an
appropriate expiration date. No other license fee herein provided shall be
prorated.



(Ord. 658-17, passed 11-20-2017)



§ 110.38  PAYMENT OF LICENSE FEES.



   (A)   All business license fees shall be paid at the office of the
Town Clerk. The licenses shall expire on the last day of December of each
year. License renewal fees shall be paid before expiration of the previous
license. The Town Clerk may require re-application before renewal, if the
Town Clerk determines that there has been a substantial change in the
business.



   (B)   Any business subject to licensing under this chapter, which
fails to pay its license fee within the time period specified in division (A)
above, shall, in addition to any other penalties imposed for violating the
Town Code, be subject to a late penalty fee of $5 per month in addition to
the regular business license fee due and payable.



   (C)   The purpose of the license fee is to help offset the costs
incurred by the town in processing the application for a license and for the
inspection of the premises. The amount of the license fee shall be
established from time to time by resolution of the Town Council.



 

Business License Fee Schedule



Permit

 
Amount




Application fee:


General



Sexually-oriented business (nonrefundable and non-applicable against license
fee)

 




$10



$100



General business license; other than specified below
 

$50



Distiller, brewer, or winery license
 

$125



On-sale retailer: liquor
 

$250



On-sale retailer: beer and wine
 

$175



On-sale retailer: beer only
 

$150



Off-sale retailer: spirituous liquor
 

$150



Off-sale retailer: beer and wine
 

$125



Off-sale retailer: beer only
 

$100



Grocers license: spirituous liquor
 

$200



Grocers license: beer and wine
 

$175



Restaurant retailer: beer and wine
 

$200



Restaurant retailer: beer only
 

$175



Hotel-motel, restaurant retailer, or club: spirituous liquor
 

$250



Bank: capital, surplus, and financial institutions with undivided profits of:


Less than $300,000



$300,000 and over

 




$100



$150



Beauty shop, barber shop, and owner of establishment
 

$50



Individual beautician or barber, or per chair at beauty shop or barber shop
 

$25



Hotels, motels, hospitals, rest homes, sanitariums, and sanatoriums


1-10 rooms



11-50 rooms



Over 50 rooms

 

$25



$50



$75



$100




Food Trucks



Registration fee per person (new fee - will be assessed with fee schedule
update)
 

TBD



Annual fee (new fee - will be assessed with fee schedule update)
 

TBD




Temporary Businesses



Registration fee per person (ID/application)
 

$10



Annual fee (new fee - will be assessed with fee schedule update)
 

TBD



Per day
 

$25



Per month in excess of one month
 

$300




Medical Marijuana



Annual medical marijuana business license application and investigation fee
(business)
 

$500



Annual medical marijuana business license fee (per employee)
 

$250



Annual medical marijuana business license
 

$250




Article 9.700 Sexually-Oriented Businesses



Business license
 

$500



Employee license
 

$100




Carnival/Circus



Registration fee - per employee
 

$10



Business license - per event
 

$75




Other



Late fees per month
 

$5





 



(Ord. 658-17, passed 11-20-2017)



§ 110.39  RESTRICTIONS; SUSPENSION; REVOCATION.



   Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be restricted,
suspended, or revoked by the Town Clerk, after notice and an opportunity for
a hearing, for any of the following causes:



   (A)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the
application for license; and/or



   (B)   Any violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 658-17, passed 11-20-2017)



§ 110.40  APPEALS.



   (A)   Notice of hearing for restriction, suspension, or revocation
of a license shall be given in writing, by the Town Clerk, setting forth
specifically the grounds for the restrictions, suspension, or revocation and
the time and place of the hearing. The notice shall be mailed to the licensee
at the address listed on the business license application at least ten days
prior to the date set for the hearing. The mailing of the notice shall
constitute proper notice to the licensee.



   (B)   Any person aggrieved by the denial of an application for
license or by the restrictions placed upon the license or by the suspension
or revocation of the license shall have the right to appeal to the Town
Manager. The appeal shall be taken by filing with the Town Clerk, within 14
days after the denial, restriction, suspension, or revocation, a written
statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The Town Manager
shall set a time and a place for hearing of the appeal, and notice of the
hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as provided for
notice of a hearing on suspension or revocation. The decision and order of
the Town Manager on the appeal shall be final.



(Ord. 658-17, passed 11-20-2017)



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   Any person found to be in violation of this chapter shall be punished
as provided in § 10.99 for a Class 3 misdemeanor. The conduct of any
business in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation
for each and every day that the business is conducted.



(Ord. 658-17, passed 11-20-2017)



CHAPTER 111: MOBILE FOOD VENDORS



Section



   111.01   Purpose



   111.02   Definitions



   111.03   Compliance with state licensing requirements



   111.04   Permit requirements



   111.05   Operational requirements



   111.06   Violations; suspension and revocation



 



   111.99   Penalty



§ 111.01  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is adopted to protect the health, safety, and welfare of
the town by enacting reasonable regulations for mobile food vendors, their
employees, agents, lessees, or independent contractors, by requiring
compliance with minimum standards for safety and security.



(Ord. 673-19, passed 5-6-2019)



§ 111.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPLICANT.  The person who applies for a license pursuant to this
chapter.



   CONTROLLING PERSON.  A natural person who either has a 10% or greater
interest in the ownership or earnings of the mobile merchant business, or is
any of the following:



      (1)   An officer, director, or any stockholder who owns 10% or
more of a corporation licensee/applicant;



      (2)   A general partner of a limited partnership
licensee/applicant or partner of a non-limited partnership licensee/applicant;



      (3)   An officer, president, member, or secretary of a limited
liability company/corporation licensee/applicant; or



      (4)   The sole proprietor of a sole proprietorship
licensee/applicant.



   DESIGNATED AGENT.  The person designated by the licensee/applicant to
receive notices from the town pursuant to this chapter.



   LEGAL PARKING SPACE.



      (1)   An area designated for vehicle parking in the town
right-of-way that may be paved or unpaved and may be delineated by road
surface markings.



      (2)   LEGAL PARKING SPACE does not include a parking space in
a parking lot on property owned by the town.



   MOBILE FOOD UNIT.  A food establishment that is licensed by this
state, that is readily movable, and that dispenses food or beverages for
immediate service and consumption and other incidental retail items from any
vehicle as defined in A.R.S. § 28-101.



   MOBILE FOOD VENDOR.  Any person who owns, controls, manages, or leases
a mobile food unit, or contracts with a person to prepare foods and vend
from, drive, or operate a mobile food unit.



   MOBILE MERCHANT.  Any person who sells any type of tangible personal
property, including, but not limited to, food and drink, at or adjacent to
the person's mobile sales unit in which such tangible personal property is
carried. This definition shall not include any person working or acting for a
person holding a mobile merchant permit issued in accordance with this
chapter.



   MOBILE SALES UNIT.  Any vehicle used for carrying tangible personal
property for sale at or adjacent to the vehicle in which such tangible
personal property is carried.



   PERMITTEE.  The person who applied for a permit pursuant to this
chapter and in whose name such permit was issued by the town pursuant to this
chapter.



   PERSON.  An individual, partnership, corporation, association, or any
other entity of whatever kind or nature.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  An area of land owned or controlled by the town and
that is used for street or highway purposes.



   SEMI-PERMANENT STRUCTURE.  Equipment or any dining area, including,
but not limited to, tables, chairs, booths, bar stools, benches, and standup
counters.



(Ord. 673-19, passed 5-6-2019)



§ 111.03  COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a mobile food unit or
act as a mobile food vendor without having first obtained a valid license
from the State of Arizona Department of Health Services, pursuant to A.R.S.
§ 36-1761.



(Ord. 673-19, passed 5-6-2019)



§ 111.04  PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person to operate a mobile food
unit at any location within the town without obtaining a permit from the Town
Clerk in accordance with this code. The mobile food vendor shall comply with
the requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   A permit issued pursuant to this chapter, including a renewal
of a permit, is valid from the date of issuance through December 31 of that
year if the mobile food vendor is in compliance with this chapter. The permit
is nontransferable.



(Ord. 673-19, passed 5-6-2019)



§ 111.05  OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS.



   It is unlawful for any person to operate a mobile food unit that does
not meet the requirements of this section.



   (A)   Fire safety and inspection.



      (1)   A mobile food vendor must ensure that the mobile food
unit complies with the version of the International Fire Code in effect at
the time when the permit is issued, state law, and this code relating to fire
and explosion safety standards.



      (2)   A mobile food unit shall be inspected by the Town Fire
Department, or the mobile food vendor shall provide evidence that the mobile
food unit passed a fire inspection by another city or town fire department in
this state within the preceding 12 months.



   (B)   Refuse, trash, and litter maintenance. A mobile food unit
shall:



      (1)   Provide a minimum of one 15-gallon trash receptacle
within 15 feet of each individual mobile food unit for customers and
employees;



      (2)   Maintain an area around the mobile unit clear of litter,
garbage, rubble, and debris; and



      (3)   Transport the trash from the area of operation to an
authorized waste disposal location.



   (C)   Noise restrictions. A mobile food vendor shall not use, play,
or caused to be used or played, any amplifier, loudspeaker, microphone,
amplified music, or any other amplified instrument or device used for the
production of sound in a vending area when the motor vehicle or mobile food
unit from which mobile food vendor is vending is stationary or mobile upon
any right-of-way, park, or other public place. For the purpose of this
division, the factors for determining whether a sound is amplified include,
but are not limited to, the following:



      (1)   The proximity of the sound to sleeping facilities,
whether residential or commercial;



      (2)   The land use, nature, and zoning of the area from which
the sound emanates and the area where it is received or perceived;



      (3)   The time of day or night when the sound occurs; it shall
be presumed that any amplified noise between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. is
disturbing to the public in violation of this section;



      (4)   The duration of the sound; and



      (5)   Whether the sound is recurrent, intermittent, or
constant.



   (D)   Security.



      (1)   The mobile food unit and the surrounding vending area
shall be maintained in a safe and clean manner at all times.



      (2)   A mobile food unit shall have adequate lighting to
ensure customer safety in the vending area. Lighting shall be directed
downwards and away from rights-of-way and adjacent properties.



      (3)   The mobile food unit and its customers shall not
obstruct the movement of pedestrians or other vehicles using the sidewalk,
street, alley, or other public right-of-way.



   (E)   Insurance.



      (1)   If a mobile food vendor attends an event sponsored by
the town or operates on public property, including rights-of-way or property
owned or controlled by the town, the mobile food vendor shall obtain an
insurance policy naming the town as an additional insured in amounts and
coverage terms as required by the town and in accordance with the
requirements of A.R.S. Title 9, Chapter 4, Article 7.2.



      (2)   The insurance company issuing the policy shall be
authorized to issue commercial liability policies in this state by the
Arizona Department of Insurance.



      (3)   The policy shall designate, by manufacturer's serial or
identification number, all mobile food units for which coverage is granted.



      (4)   The policy shall insure the person named in the policy
and any other person using the mobile food vendor with the express or implied
permission of the named insured, against any liability arising out of the
ownership, maintenance, or use of the mobile food unit in the state.



      (5)   Additional terms for insurance coverage may be required
by the town.



   (F)   Location. A mobile food vendor shall operate a mobile food
unit only in Downtown Commercial, Highway Business Commercial, Tourist
Commercial, Professional Office, Public/Institutional, Neighborhood Business,
Neighborhood Office, Light Industrial, and Heavy Industrial zoning districts
in accordance with Chapter 150 and subject to the following limitations and
conditions.



      (1)   Residential area. A mobile food vendor shall not operate
in an area zoned for residential use or within 250 feet of an area zoned for
residential use, except:



         (a)   A mobile food vendor selling only ice cream may
operate on public rights-of-way in areas zoned for residential use; or



         (b)   Subject to applicable laws and this code, a mobile
food vendor may operate on private property in a residential area if the
mobile food vendor obtains a separate agreement with the property owner to
operate a mobile food unit for a maximum of six hours within a 24-hour period
on the private property.



      (2)   Town-owned property. A mobile food vendor shall only
operate in a legal parking space. If the mobile food vendor desires to
operate on town property other than a legal parking space in a right-of-way,
the mobile food vendor shall obtain from the town:



         (a)   A separate license for use, services contract, or
similar agreement, which will be entered into at the town's sole discretion
and applicable law; or



         (b)   A special event permit or similar permission in
accordance with this code.



      (3)   Private property. A mobile food vendor shall obtain
written permission to use any private property where a mobile food unit is
operating and shall provide proof of such written permission on demand by the
town.



      (4)   Notwithstanding the permission of a person owning or
having lawful control of private real property, a mobile food unit shall not
remain in one location on private property for longer than 96 consecutive
hours, unless the town grants permission for a permitted event greater than
four days. ONE LOCATION within this division means a location within a parcel
of land and includes movements from different parked positions within the
same parcel.



   (G)   Parking. A mobile food unit shall comply with this division
and applicable law as it pertains to parking, unless parking is governed by a
separate division or section in this chapter.



      (1)   A mobile food unit shall only operate in a legal parking
space.



      (2)   A mobile food unit, including any semi-permanent
structure used or associated with the mobile food unit, may use no more than
one legal parking space, unless the mobile food vendor has a separate
agreement with the town to use additional legal parking spaces or parking
spaces on town property other than a right-of-way.



      (3)   No mobile food unit exceeding 24 feet may park
diagonally in a diagonal parking space or park in any manner that occupies
more than one diagonal parking space.



      (4)   No mobile food unit shall operate with the serving
window facing street traffic.



      (5)   A mobile food unit shall abide by all parking
regulations, including posted time limits. If there are no other time
restrictions on the use of a legal parking space, a mobile food unit shall
not occupy a legal parking space for more than six hours in a 24-hour period.
OCCUPY within this division means within 100 feet of the place in which the
mobile food unit was initially parked.



      (6)   A mobile food unit shall not occupy a legal parking
space with insufficient parking capacity as prescribed by Chapter 150 and
applicable law, and includes occupying a legal parking space that reduces the
number of available parking spaces surrounding the area which is required for
the principal use or uses of the property associated with the parking spaces
as set forth in A.R.S. Title 9, Chapter 4, Article 7.2.



      (7)   A mobile food vendor shall not claim or attempt to
establish any exclusive right to park at a particular street location, unless
the parking space is part of a permitted event.



   (H)   Signs. A mobile food vendor shall comply with the Sign Code,
pursuant to Chapter 150.



(Ord. 673-19, passed 5-6-2019)



§ 111.06  VIOLATIONS; SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.



   (A)   It is a violation of this chapter for any person to provide
false information on any permit application.



   (B)   It is a violation of this chapter for a person to operate a
mobile food unit that fails to meet all the requirements of this chapter.



   (C)   It is a violation of this chapter for a mobile food vendor to
fail to display the permit or other required documents, including proof of
insurance or fire inspection, to a law enforcement officer or Town Inspector
on demand.



   (D)   The town shall give written notice of a violation to the
permittee or designated agent that may result in the suspension or revocation
of the permit. The notice shall include a description of the violation, the
statutory or code reference, how the permittee can comply with the
requirements, a description of the process whereby a hearing may be
requested, the time limit for requesting a hearing, and a warning that
failure to timely request a hearing may result in suspension or revocation of
the permit. The notice shall be served on the permittee or designated agent
by either personal service or registered/certified mail. Service of the
notice shall be deemed complete upon mailing to, or personal service on, the
permittee or designated agent.



   (E)   The permittee or designated agent receiving a notice under
this section may request a hearing pursuant to § 110.40. If the permittee
fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter by the date provided in
the notice, the town may suspend or revoke the permit, as provided in this
section.



   (F)   In addition to any penalties set forth in this chapter, a
permit shall be suspended if, during the term of the permit, the permittee or
a controlling person has violated any of the provisions of this chapter.
During the suspension period, the permittee shall not operate any mobile food
unit associated with the suspended permit. If a fine is associated with the
violation that is the basis for suspension, the suspension may continue
beyond the period set forth in this division until such time as the permittee
pays the fine. The penalty for a suspension of a permit shall be:



      (1)   For the first suspension of a permit during a 12-month
period, the permit shall be suspended up to 14 calendar days in addition to
other penalties and fines.



      (2)   For the second suspension of a permit during a 12-month
period, the permit shall be suspended for a minimum of 15 calendar days up to
a maximum of 30 calendar days in addition to penalties and fines.



      (3)   For the third suspension of a permit during a 12-month
period, the permit shall be revoked.



   (G)   In addition to a revocation for a third suspension as set
forth above, the town may revoke a permit issued pursuant to this chapter if
the town determines that:



      (1)   A mobile food unit associated with the suspended permit
was operated in the town during the suspension period;



      (2)   A permittee, designated agent, or controlling person,
following the issuance of a permit, is convicted of any offense listed in §
111.04(F)(7);



      (3)   The permittee or designated agent operated, or attempted
to operate, a mobile food unit without a permit;



      (4)   The town previously issued three or more notices of
suspension or violation within a six-month period;



      (5)   The permittee or controlling person has not complied
with a provision of this chapter, or has failed to provide information as
required by this chapter;



      (6)   The application fee, permit fee, or any transaction
privilege tax has not been paid; or



      (7)   The permittee fails to pay outstanding fines or resolve
any violations.



   (H)   If a permit is revoked pursuant to this section, the permit
and its controlling person(s) may not apply for a permit under this chapter
for a period of one year from the date of revocation.



(Ord. 673-19, passed 5-6-2019)



§ 111.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Each day any violation of any provision of this chapter shall
continue shall constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   Criminal penalty. Among other penalties that may apply,
including revocation or suspension of a permit (when applicable), any person
who violates any provision of this chapter, whether or not the act is
specifically stated as being unlawful, shall be guilty of a class 3
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in § 10.99.



(Ord. 673-19, passed 5-6-2019)



CHAPTER 112: SPECIAL EVENTS



Section



General Provisions



   112.01   Definitions



   112.02   Administration



Permits



   112.15   Business license required



   112.16   License fees



   112.17   Required; exemptions



   112.18   Application and fee



   112.19   General application requirements



   112.20   Issuance of permit



   112.21   Prohibited special event conduct; revocation



   112.22   Mistake; collection of correct amount



   112.23   Right of entry



   112.24   Display; identification; permission of property owner;
exhibition upon demand



   112.25   Other certificates or permits required



   112.26   Denial, modification, revocation, or suspension; appeal to
Town Manager



Requirements



   112.40   General requirements



   112.41   Special provisions related to boutiques



   112.42   Special provisions related to fireworks exhibitions



   112.43   Special provisions related to parades and public assemblies



   112.44   Waiver of special event fees



Penalties



   112.55   Violation of chapter



   112.56   Conviction not to excuse nonpayment of fee



   112.57   Prohibited special event locations



   112.58   Court action



§ 112.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BLOCK PARTY.  A gathering of residents of a neighborhood for social
purposes where the gathering is (i) limited to the residents of the immediate
neighborhood and (ii) a public street will be used by the gathering.



   BOUTIQUE.  An event operated by a homeowner, religious organization,
or not-for-profit organization for the purpose of selling local handmade arts
and crafts.



   CARNIVAL, LARGE-SCALE.  A temporary event that generally includes
activities such as amusement rides, entertainment, game booths, food stands,
exhibitions, and animal displays located on one acre or more.



   CARNIVAL, SMALL-SCALE.  A temporary event that generally includes
activities such as amusement rides, entertainment, game booths, food stands,
exhibitions, and animal displays located on less than one acre.



   CIRCUS.  A temporary event or show at which a combination of
attractions and exhibitions, such as rides, illusions, freak shows, eating
concessions, and gaming booths, including a main tent attraction along with
side shows, are available for the purpose of amusement and entertainment and
at which the public pays either an admittance or participation fee.



   CONDUCT.  To commence, manage, own, solicit, canvass, practice,
transact, engage in, or carry on.



   ENGAGING.  The exercise of corporate or franchise powers.



   FIREWORKS EXHIBITION.  An organized event open to the public or to
which invitations have been issued to the public where pyrotechnics are
exploded.



   MULTIPLE SPECIAL EVENTS.  More than one special event held at a single
location.



   PARADE.  Any march, demonstration, procession, motorcade or race
consisting of persons, animals, or vehicles or a combination thereof upon the
streets, parks, or other public grounds within the town intended to attract
public attention that interferes with the normal flow or regulation of
pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic upon the streets, parks, or other public
grounds.



   PROMOTER.  Any person who produces or conducts a special event.



   PUBLIC ASSEMBLY.  Any meeting, demonstration, picket line, rally, or
gathering of more than 50 persons for a common purpose as a result of prior
planning that interferes with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic, exceeds parking capacity, or occupies any public area in a
place open to the general public. PUBLIC ASSEMBLY does not include block
parties.



   SHOW.  Any exhibition, display, production, or gathering intended to
draw the public, including, but not limited to, musical and theatrical
productions, merchandise booths, games of chance, amusements, flea markets,
bazaars, circuses, large-scale carnivals, fairs, conventions, celebrations,
promotions, rallies, and other public gatherings of this nature.



   SIDEWALK.  Any area or way set aside or open to the general public for
purposes of pedestrian traffic, whether or not it is paved.



   SPECIAL EVENT.  Means, but is not limited to, events such as a
boutique, large-scale carnival, circus, fireworks exhibition, multiple
special events, single event swap meet and auction, parade, public assembly,
or show.



   SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT.  A permit required by this chapter.



   SPECIAL EVENT VENDOR.  Any person, other than a show promoter or its
employee, who occupies a space, cell, booth or other temporary structure or
location in conjunction with, associated with, or attendant to an organized
show.



   STREET.  Any place or way set aside or open to the general public for
purposes of vehicular, including bicycle, traffic, including any berm or
shoulder, parkway, right-of-way, or median strip thereof.



   SWAP MEET AND AUCTION, SINGLE EVENT.  Commercial activities held in an
open area where one or more licensed sellers bring goods for auctioning to
the public.



   VENDOR.  Any person, other than a promoter or its employee, who
occupies a space, booth, or other temporary structure or location in
conjunction with, associated with, or attendant to an organized boutique,
single event swap meet and auction.



(Ord. 549-10, passed 1-3-2011)



§ 112.02  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   The Deputy Town Manager, or designee, shall uniformly
administer the special event application process and consider each special
event permit application upon its merits and shall not discriminate in
granting, denying, modifying, revoking, or suspending permits based upon
political, religious, ethnic, racial, disability, sexual orientation, or
gender related grounds.



   (B)   Fees and business licenses fall under the jurisdiction of the
Finance Director.



(Ord. 549-10, passed 1-3-2011)



PERMITS



§ 112.15  BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to participate as a special event
vendor in a special event in the town without first obtaining and maintaining
in effect, the proper business license.



(Ord. 549-10, passed 1-3-2011)  Penalty, see § 112.55



§ 112.16  LICENSE FEES.



   Every applicant for a license under this chapter shall pay the fees
listed in the Town of Florence Fee Schedule. Any participant not listed as a
special event vendor through the special event organization or organizer
permitted by this chapter will pay the license fee per occupation. This
section is for business license fees: see § 112.18 for special event
application fees.



(Ord. 549-10, passed 1-3-2011; Ord. 645-15, passed 12-7-2015)



§ 112.17  REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Unless exempted by division (D) below, it shall be unlawful
for any person to conduct any special event within the town without a special
event permit.



   (B)   All special events that require a special event permit
pursuant to this chapter shall, as a condition of the special event permit,
comply with the requirements of this chapter, the town zoning code, all other
applicable codes and ordinances of the town, and all applicable federal and
state laws.



   (C)   The issuance of a special event permit is not deemed evidence
or proof that the permittee has complied with the provisions of this chapter,
nor shall it prevent prosecution by the town of any violation of this chapter.



   (D)   A special event permit shall not be required when:



      (1)   The general law of the state or federal government
precludes the town from requiring a special event permit for the event; or



      (2)   The event is conducted on property owned or leased by a
school district and used for school purposes or is owned or leased by a
religious institution and used for religious purposes. Examples are a school
book fair, or Parent Teacher Organization (PTO) family night.



(Ord. 549-10, passed 1-3-2011)



§ 112.18  APPLICATION AND FEE.



   (A)   All special event permit applications shall be submitted to
the Deputy Town Manager or designee, who shall determine whether a special
event permit is required. Except as provided in § 112.43 (Parades and public
assemblies), an applicant for a special event permit shall submit such
application at least 60 days prior to the proposed first day of the special
event.



   (B)   Every applicant for a special event permit shall:



      (1)   Pay a nonrefundable application fee in an amount
established by the town fee schedule. If, after submitting the application,
it is determined that the event is not a special event, the fee shall be
refunded; and



      (2)   Complete and submit a special event permit application.



   (C)   The special event permit application shall be forwarded to all
appropriate town departments for review and approval. The application shall
be approved or denied within 15 days from the date it is received.



   (D)   If the application is not approved or denied within the
applicable review period, excluding completion of any required inspections
which will occur on the date of the events, the reviewing official shall be
deemed to have approved the application.



   (E)   Approval by individual town departments to which the
application has been referred shall not prevent the application from being
denied for other reasons.



(Ord. 549-10, passed 1-3-2011; Ord. 645-15, passed 12-7-2015)



§ 112.19  GENERAL APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   Except public assemblies, which shall comply with § 112.43, all
special event permit applications shall include the following information:



   (A)   The name, address, telephone numbers (including cellular
telephone number, if possible), fax number and electronic mail address of the
person or entity seeking to conduct the special event;



   (B)   If applicable, the names, addresses, telephone numbers
(including cellular telephone number, if possible), fax number and electronic
mail address of the headquarters of the organization for which the special
event is to be conducted, if any, and the authorized and responsible heads of
the organization;



   (C)   The requested date(s) of the special event;



   (D)   The location of the special event;



   (E)   The approximate number of persons or vendors who will
participate in or constitute the special event. Large-scale carnivals,
circuses, and shows shall also state the approximate number of and describe
the animals and rides that will be included in the large-scale carnival,
circus, or show;



   (F)   The hours when the special event will start and terminate on
each day it is held;



   (G)   A site plan showing the location of all permanent and
temporary structures (including tents or vendor booths) to be used, parking
areas, public bathroom and trash facilities, and staging areas for the
special event. Site plans for large-scale carnivals, circuses, fireworks
exhibitions, or shows shall also indicate, as appropriate, the locations of
fireworks detonation areas, spectator areas, and rides;



   (H)   A traffic and pedestrian circulation and control plan that
identifies how many off-duty sheriff’s office, police department, or other
law enforcement personnel will be employed;



   (I)   A security plan describing how  (including how many personnel
will be used) to control crowds during the special event and ensure the
safety of those who attend;



   (J)   The approximate number of attendees or spectators;



   (K)   A designation of any public facilities or equipment to be
utilized; and



   (L)   Any additional information that is reasonably necessary to
make a fair determination as to whether a special event permit should be
issued and taking into consideration the proximity to residential uses.



(Ord. 549-10, passed 1-3-2011)



§ 112.20  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The town shall issue a permit as provided for herein when,
from a consideration of the application and from such other information as
may otherwise be obtained, it finds that:



      (1)   The conduct of the event will not substantially
interrupt the safe and orderly movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic
contiguous to its location;



      (2)   The conduct of the event will not require the diversion
of so great a number of town police officers to properly police the areas
contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection of the town;



      (3)   The concentration of persons, vehicles, and/or animals
at the location of the event will not unduly interfere with public works
operations, proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to,
areas contiguous to such location;



      (4)   The conduct of the event is not reasonably likely to
cause injury to persons or property;



      (5)   Adequate sanitation and other required health facilities
are or will be made available in or adjacent to the event location;



      (6)   There are sufficient parking places near or on the site
of the event to accommodate the number of vehicles reasonably expected;



      (7)   The applicant has secured the police protection, if any,
as required by Police Chief; and



      (8)   No event(s) is scheduled elsewhere in the town where the
police resources required for that event(s) are so great that the deployment
of police services for the proposed event would have an immediate and adverse
effect upon the welfare and safety of persons and property.



   (B)   Immediately upon the issuance of a special event permit, the
following will be notified:



      (1)   Town Manager;



      (2)   Code Enforcement Officer;



      (3)   Finance Director;



      (4)   Fire Chief;



      (5)   Chief of Police;



      (6)   Public Works Director/Street Superintendent; and



      (7)   Town Clerk.



   (C)   Each permit shall state the following information:



      (1)   Date(s);



      (2)   Location;



      (3)   Hours of operation; and



      (4)   Such other information as necessary to the enforcement
of this chapter.



   (D)   A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions
and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances.



(Ord. 549-10, passed 1-3-2011)



§ 112.21  PROHIBITED SPECIAL EVENT CONDUCT; REVOCATION.



   (A)   The following prohibitions shall apply to all special events:



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in a
special event for which the person knows a permit has not been granted;



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of, or
responsible for the conduct of, a duly permitted special event to knowingly
fail to comply with any condition of the permit;



      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any
special event activity that would constitute a substantial hazard to the
public safety or that would materially interfere with or endanger the public
peace or rights of residents to the quiet and peaceful enjoyment of their
property;



      (4)   It shall be unlawful for any person participating in a
special event to utilize sound amplification equipment at decibel levels that
exceed those limits imposed by Title XIII, § 132.02 herein unless
specifically authorized by the permit; and



   (B)   The Deputy Town Manager shall have the authority to revoke a
special event permit instantly upon violation of the conditions or standards
for issuance as set forth in this section or when a public emergency arises
where the police resources required for that emergency are so great that
deployment of police services for the special event would have an immediate
and adverse effect upon the welfare and safety of persons or property.



(Ord. 549-10, passed 1-3-2011)  Penalty, see § 112.55



§ 112.22  MISTAKE; COLLECTION OF CORRECT AMOUNT.



   In no case shall any mistake made in stating, fixing, or collecting the
amount of any special event permit fee prevent or prejudice the town from
collecting the correct amount due as provided in this chapter.



(Ord. 549-10, passed 1-3-2011)



§ 112.23  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   The Code Enforcement Officer, police officers, fire official and Deputy
Town Manager shall have and exercise the power to enter, free of charge,
during the special event and to demand the exhibition of the special event
permit from any person conducting the special event. Denial of the right of
entry by any person conducting a special event as required under this chapter
shall be a civil violation.



(Ord. 549-10, passed 1-3-2011)



§ 112.24  DISPLAY; IDENTIFICATION; PERMISSION OF PROPERTY OWNER; EXHIBITION
UPON DEMAND.



   (A)   Every person having a special event permit under the
provisions of this chapter shall keep such permit openly posted and exhibited
in a conspicuous part of such location.



   (B)   Every person having a special event under the provisions of
this chapter shall produce and exhibit such permit, and, when applicable,
written permission to conduct the event at the location or personal
identification, whenever requested to do so by the Deputy Town Manager, any
police officer, fire official or the Code Enforcement Officer.



(Ord. 549-10, passed 1-3-2011)



§ 112.25  OTHER CERTIFICATES OR PERMITS REQUIRED.



   (A)   When any business is required by federal, state, county, or
local law to obtain any other license, permit, certificate, or examination, a
special event permit shall not be issued until the applicant produces proof
of such license, permit, certificate, or examination, including a use permit
required by the zoning code of the town or any license, permit, certificate,
or examination required by various health departments, as provided in A.R.S.
§§ 36-101 et seq.



   (B)   Obtaining any license, permit, certificate, or examination
required by federal, state, county, or local law shall be the sole
responsibility of the applicant.



   (C)   The issuance of a special event permit shall not be evidence
that the town knew or should have known that another permit, certificate, or
examination was required or was otherwise improperly issued.



(Ord. 549-10, passed 1-3-2011)



§ 112.26  DENIAL, MODIFICATION, REVOCATION, OR SUSPENSION; APPEAL TO TOWN
MANAGER.



   (A)   A special event permit application may be denied or a special
event permit may be modified, suspended, or revoked for any of the following
causes.



      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained
in the permit application.



      (2)   Any violation of this chapter or failure to meet any
licensing requirement, including timely payment of fees.



      (3)   Conducting the permitted business in violation of any
federal, state, county, or local law.



      (4)   The permittee is convicted of untrue, fraudulent,
misleading, or deceptive advertising.



      (5)   The permittee is a corporation or similar entity and is
no longer qualified to transact business in the State of Arizona.



   (B)   The applicant shall be notified in writing that the
application has been denied or the permit has been modified, revoked, or
suspended. The letter shall be personally delivered or mailed certified and
shall specify the grounds or reasons for the denial, modification,
revocation, or suspension.



   (C)   The applicant or permittee or any other aggrieved person may
appeal the denial of the application or modification, revocation, or
suspension of the permit to the Town Manager by filing a written statement
fully describing the grounds for the appeal with the Town Clerk within five
business days of the date of the denial letter.



   (D)   The Town Clerk shall set a time and place for a hearing to be
held before the Town Manager within 15 business days of the filing of the
appeal. A notice setting forth the date, time, and place of the hearing shall
be personally delivered or mailed certified by the Town Clerk to the
appellant.



   (E)   The Town Manager shall issue a written decision and mail
notice thereof within five business days after the hearing setting forth the
findings and grounds for the decision to the applicant or permittee.



(Ord. 549-10, passed 1-3-2011)



REQUIREMENTS



§ 112.40  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Special events to be conducted at a town park shall obtain a
permit from the Parks and Recreation Department in addition to a special
event permit.



   (B)   Special events to be conducted on private property shall
obtain authorization from the property owner for the use of the property for
such purpose.



   (C)   If the special event will include sale or service of alcohol,
a special event liquor license is required.



   (D)   If the special event will include the sale of goods or food, a
list of vendors and items to be sold shall be provided with the application
and all applicable laws and regulations regarding transaction privilege
taxes, vendor fee and license and the sale of food shall be complied with.



   (E)   Where a street closure is approved, the applicant must have
written permission from the affected property owners.



   (F)   If the application is for the use of any town property or if
any town services shall be required for the special event, the applicant
shall pay, in addition to an application fee and prior to the issuance of a
permit, the charges for those services in accordance the town fee schedule.



   (G)   The Deputy Town Manager shall consult with the Chief of Police
to determine whether and to what extent additional police protection will be
reasonably necessary for the special event for traffic control and public
safety. This decision shall be based on the size, location, duration, time,
and date of the special event; the expected sale or service of alcoholic
beverages; the number of streets and intersections blocked; and the need to
detour or preempt citizen travel and use of the streets and sidewalks. If
possible, without disruption of ordinary police services or compromise of
public safety, regularly scheduled on-duty personnel will police the special
event. If additional police protection is deemed necessary by the Chief of
Police, he or she shall so inform the Deputy Town Manager. The applicant
shall furnish the town with a police special security services agreement to
secure the police protection deemed necessary by the Chief of Police at the
sole expense of the applicant.



   (H)   No permit shall be granted that allows for the erection or
placement of any structure, whether permanent or temporary, on a town street,
sidewalk, or right-of-way.



(Ord. 549-10, passed 1-3-2011)



§ 112.41  SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATED TO BOUTIQUES.



   A boutique shall be required to obtain and maintain a special event
permit if:



   (A)   The boutique is not carried on wholly within a dwelling unit,
a religion related building, or within a commercial structure;



   (B)   The boutique operates for more than 15 days during a calendar
year;



   (C)   The boutique produces offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust,
odors, heat, or glare;



   (D)   The boutique and any related activities are not limited to the
hours between 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.



   (E)   The boutique does not provide adequate parking, and the
activity generates additional traffic, which would create a traffic or safety
hazard; or



   (F)   The boutique uses more than three off-site temporary signs.
Signs may only be used during the hours that the boutique is open. Placement
criteria and all other applicable sign code restrictions shall apply.



(Ord. 549-10, passed 1-3-2011)



§ 112.42  SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATED TO FIREWORKS EXHIBITIONS.



   The promoter, owner, or operator of a fireworks exhibition, and its
employees, agents, and/or subcontractors, shall strictly comply with all
applicable federal, state, county, and local laws, rules, regulations, and
ordinances in conducting any fireworks exhibition.



(Ord. 549-10, passed 1-3-2011)



§ 112.43  SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATED TO PARADES AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES.



   (A)   No person shall engage in or conduct any parade or public
assembly unless a special event permit is issued by the town.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to the following:



      (1)   Funeral processions;



      (2)   Students going to and from school classes or
participating in educational activities, provided that such conduct is under
the immediate direction and supervision of school authorities;



      (3)   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its
functions; and



      (4)   Spontaneous events occasioned by news or affairs coming
into public knowledge within two days of such public assembly, provided that
the organizer thereof gives written notice to the town at least 24 hours
prior to such parade or public assembly.



   (C)   For single, non-recurring parades or public assemblies, an
application for a permit shall be filed with the Deputy Town Manager at least
30 and not more than 180 days before the parade or public assembly is
proposed to commence. The Deputy Town Manager may waive the minimum filing
period and accept an application filed within a shorter period if, after due
consideration of the date, time, place, and nature of the parade or public
assembly, the anticipated number of participants, and the town services
required in connection with the event, determines the waiver will not present
a hazard to public safety.



   (D)   For parades or public assemblies held on a regular or
recurring basis at the same location, an application for a permit covering
all such parades or assemblies during that calendar year may be filed with
the Deputy Town Manager at least 30 and not more than 180 days before the
date and time at which the first such parade or public assembly is proposed
to commence. The Deputy Town Manager may waive the minimum period after due
consideration of the factors specified in division (C) of this section.



   (E)   The application for a parade or public assembly permit shall
set forth the following information:



      (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of the person
seeking to conduct such parade or public assembly;



      (2)   The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the
headquarters of the organization for which the parade or public assembly is
to be conducted, if any, and the authorized and responsible heads of the
organization;



      (3)   The requested date(s) of the parade or public assembly;



      (4)   The route to be traveled, including the starting and
termination points;



      (5)   The approximate number of persons, animals and vehicles
that will constitute such parade or public assembly and the type of animals
and description of the vehicles;



      (6)   The hours when such parade or public assembly will start
and terminate;



      (7)   A statement as to whether the parade or public assembly
will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be
traveled;



      (8)   The location by street of any staging or assembly areas
for such parade or public assembly;



      (9)   The time at which units of the parade or public assembly
will begin to assemble at any such staging or assembly area;



      (10)   The intervals of space to be maintained between units
of such parade or public assembly;



      (11)   If the parade or public assembly is designed to be held
by, or on behalf of, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for
such permit shall file a letter from that person with the Deputy Town Manager
authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his or her behalf;



      (12)   The type of public assembly, including a description of
activities planned during the event;



      (13)   A description of any recording equipment, sound
amplification equipment, banners, signs, or other attention-getting devices
to be used in connection with the parade or public assembly;



      (14)   The approximate number of participants (spectators are
by definition not participants);



      (15)   The approximate number of spectators;



      (16)   A designation of any public facilities or equipment to
be utilized; and



      (17)   Any additional information that the town finds
reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should
issue.



   (F)   Persons engaging in parades or public assemblies conducted for
the sole purpose of political or other speech protected under the First
Amendment of the United States Constitution are not required to pay for any
police protection provided by the town.



   (G)   The Deputy Town Manager shall issue a permit as provided for
herein when, from a consideration of the application and from such other
information as may otherwise be obtained, he or she finds that:



      (1)   The conduct of the parade or public assembly will not
substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other pedestrian or
vehicular traffic contiguous to its route or location;



      (2)   The conduct of the parade or public assembly will not
require the diversion of so great a number of town police officers to
properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to
prevent normal police protection of the town;



      (3)   The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at
staging or public assembly points of the parade or public assembly will not
unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance
service to, areas contiguous to such staging and public assembly areas;



      (4)   The conduct of the parade or public assembly is not
reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property;



      (5)   The parade or public assembly is scheduled to move from
its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without
unreasonable delays;



      (6)   Adequate sanitation and other required health facilities
are or will be made available in or adjacent to any staging and public
assembly areas;



      (7)   There are sufficient parking places near the site of the
parade or public assembly to accommodate the number of vehicles reasonably
expected;



      (8)   The applicant has secured the police protection
required, if any;



      (9)   Such parade or public assembly is not for the primary
purpose of advertising any product, goods, or event that is primarily for
private profit, and the parade itself is not primarily for profit. The
prohibition against advertising any product, goods, or event shall not apply
to signs identifying organizations or sponsors furnishing or sponsoring
exhibits or structures used in the parade;



      (10)   No parade or public assembly permit application for the
same time and location is already granted or has been received and will be
granted;



      (11)   No parade or public assembly permit application for the
same time but not location is already granted or has been received and shall
be granted, and the police resources required for that prior parade or public
assembly are so great that in combination with the subsequent proposed
application, the resulting deployment of police services would have an
immediate and adverse effect upon the welfare and safety of persons and
property; and



      (12)   No event is scheduled elsewhere in the town where the
police resources required for that event are so great that the deployment of
police services for the proposed parade or public assembly would have an
immediate and adverse effect upon the welfare and safety of persons and
property.



      (13)   The Deputy Town Manager shall act promptly upon a
timely filed application for a parade or public assembly permit but in no
event shall grant or deny a permit less than ten days prior to the event. If
the Deputy Town Manager disapproves the application, s/he shall notify the
applicant either by personal delivery or certified mail at least ten days
prior to the event of his or her action and state the reasons for denial.



   (H)   The Deputy Town Manager, in denying an application for a
parade or public assembly permit, may authorize the conduct of the parade or
public assembly at a date, time, location, or route different from that named
by the applicant. The applicant must, within five days, file a written notice
of acceptance. An alternate parade or public assembly permit shall conform to
the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a permit issued under this
section.



   (I)   Any applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial of a
parade or public assembly permit to the Town Manager. The denied applicant
shall make the appeal within five days after receipt of the denial by filing
a written notice with the Town Clerk. The Town Manager shall act upon the
appeal within five days of receipt of the notice of appeal.



   (J)   Immediately upon the issuance of a parade or public assembly
permit, the Deputy Town Manager shall send a copy thereof to the following:



      (1)   Town Manager;



      (2)   Finance Director;



      (3)   Fire Chief;



      (4)   Chief of Police;



      (5)   Public Works Director;



      (6)   Town Clerk; and



      (7)   Postmaster.



   (K)   Each permit shall state the following information:



      (1)   Starting and approximate ending time;



      (2)   The portions of the streets that may be occupied by the
parade or public assembly; and



      (3)   Such other information as the town shall find necessary
to the enforcement of this section.



   (L)   A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions
and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The parade or
public assembly chairman or other person heading such activity shall carry
the parade or public assembly permit upon his person during the conduct of
the parade or public assembly.



   (M)   The following prohibitions shall apply to all parades and
public assemblies:



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stage, present,
or conduct any parade or public assembly without first having obtained a
permit as herein provided; and



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person participating in a
parade or public assembly to utilize sound amplification equipment at decibel
levels that exceed those limits imposed by Title XIII, § 132.02 of this code
unless expressly authorized by the permit.



   (N)   The public shall conduct itself as follows.



      (1)   No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede,
or interfere with any parade or public assembly or with any person, vehicle,
or animal participating or used in a parade or public assembly.



      (2)   No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles
or persons comprising a parade or public assembly when such vehicles or
persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade or public
assembly.



(Ord. 549-10, passed 1-3-2011)  Penalty, see § 112.55



§ 112.44  WAIVER OF SPECIAL EVENT FEES.



   The Town Council, by a majority vote, in a regularly scheduled Town
Council meeting may waive special event fees, including business license fees
and permit fees, for community-sponsored events. Community-sponsored events
are town events or events that are scheduled by non-profit organizations,
open to town-wide citizen participation, that collect vendor fees as part of
their special event.



(Ord. 549-10, passed 1-3-2011)



PENALTIES



§ 112.55  VIOLATION OF CHAPTER.



   (A)   Any person found to be in violation of this chapter is guilty
of a Class 3 misdemeanor. The conduct of any special event in violation of
this chapter shall constitute a separate violation for each and every day
that such special event is conducted.



   (B)   Any duly authorized officer of the Florence Police Department,
the Florence Code Enforcement Officer and the Florence Town Prosecutor may
cause complaints to be filed against persons violating any of the provisions
of this chapter.



(Ord. 549-10, passed 1-3-2011)



§ 112.56  CONVICTION NOT TO EXCUSE NONPAYMENT OF FEE.



   The finding of responsibility for a civil violation or the conviction
of any person for conducting a special event without a permit, as required
under this chapter, shall not excuse or exempt such person from the payment
of any permit fee or penalty due and unpaid at the time of such conviction.



(Ord. 549-10, passed 1-3-2011)



§ 112.57  PROHIBITED SPECIAL EVENT LOCATIONS.



   No person shall conduct a special event within the town in any
structure or area where conducting such special event is prohibited by the
zoning code of the town or is otherwise prohibited by fire or building code
regulations.



(Ord. 549-10, passed 1-3-2011)



§ 112.58  COURT ACTION.



   In any action brought under or arising out of any of the provisions of
this chapter, the fact that the defendant is a person who conducted a special
event for which a special event permit is required by this chapter, or
exhibited a sign, business card, or other advertisement indicating such
business, shall be prima facie evidence of the liability of such defendant to
obtain a special event permit and pay a permit fee under this chapter.



(Ord. 549-10, passed 1-3-2011)



CHAPTER 113: [RESERVED]



CHAPTER 114: [RESERVED]



CHAPTER 115: PAWNSHOPS, SECOND-HAND DEALERS, JUNK COLLECTORS AND AUCTION
HOUSES



Section



   115.01   Definitions



   115.02   Report to Police Chief required



   115.03   Report to be in English



   115.04   Report filing requirements; failure to meet; penalty



   115.05   Revocation of license



   115.99   Penalty



§ 115.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AUCTION HOUSE.  Any establishment in which is carried on the business
of auctioning articles for sale by public outcry and where the items offered
for auction are sold immediately to the highest bidder.



   JUNK COLLECTOR.  A person not having a fixed place of business in the
town who goes from house to house and from place to place, gathering,
collecting, buying, selling or otherwise dealing in any old rags, sacks,
bottles, cans, papers, metals or other articles commonly known as junk, pawns
or pledges of personal property, or the business of purchasing personal
property and reselling or agreeing to resell the article to vendors, their
personal representatives or their assignees, at prices agreed upon at or
before the time of the purchase, whether the business be the principal or
sole business so carried on, managed or conducted, or merely incidental to,
in connection with or a branch or department of some other business or
businesses.



   PAWNBROKER.  A person engaged in conducting, managing or carrying on
the business of pawn broking or the business of loaning money for himself or
herself or for any other person, receiving as security of the repayment
thereof.



   PAWNSHOP.  Any room, store or place in which the business is engaged
in, carried on or conducted.



   SECOND-HAND DEALER.  A person engaged in, conducting, managing or
carrying on the business of buying, selling or otherwise dealing in
second-hand goods, wares or merchandise or articles, whether the business be
the principal or sole business so carried on, managed or conducted, or be
merely incidental to, in connection with a branch or department of some other
business or businesses.



(Prior Code, Ch. 9, Art. VII, § 9-601)  (Ord. 351-04, passed 9-7-2004)



§ 115.02  REPORT TO POLICE CHIEF REQUIRED.



   Every person licensed to engage in the business of an auction house,
junk dealer, pawnshop or second-hand dealer shall be required to make out and
deliver to the Chief of Police, within two business days after receipt, a
full, true and complete report of all goods, wares, merchandise or articles
received on deposit, in pawn, pledge, trade or exchange or by purchase. The
report shall show the hour of the day and the date when the articles were
received and shall show the signature of the seller and his or her name and
address, as nearly as the same are known or can be ascertained by the auction
house, junk dealer, pawnshop or second-hand dealer, which description shall
reveal the dress, sex, approximate height, age, complexion, color of hair and
any distinguishing marks of the person. The report filed by the auction
house, junk dealer, pawnshop or second-hand dealer shall show the number of
the pawn ticket, if any is given, the amount loaned for the article or the
amount paid therefore, the quantity or number purchased and a brief
description thereof.



(Prior Code, Ch. 9, Art. VII, § 9-602)  (Ord. 351-04, passed 9-7-2004)



§ 115.03  REPORT TO BE IN ENGLISH.



   All reports required by the provisions of this chapter, made out and
delivered to the Chief of Police, shall be written or printed in the English
language in a clear and legible manner.



(Prior Code, Ch. 9, Art. VII, § 9-603)  (Ord. 351-04, passed 9-7-2004)



§ 115.04  REPORT FILING REQUIREMENTS; FAILURE TO MEET; PENALTY.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any pawnbroker, second-hand dealer, junk
dealer or junk collector to deface, alter, change or destroy, part with,
conceal, give away, sell or dispose of any goods, wares, merchandise or
article before or until one week after making out and delivering to the Chief
of Police the report herein above required in accordance with the provisions
herein stated. Special permission to sell in less than seven days may be
obtained upon personal inspection and written permission of the Chief of
Police.



   (B)   Each failure, neglect or refusal to make out and deliver to
the Chief of Police the report required herein, within the time required and
each defacement, alteration, change, destruction, parting with, concealing,
gift, sale or disposition of any goods, wares, merchandise or article before
or until one week after the making out and delivery of the report, shall
constitute a violation of this chapter, punishable as provided in § 10.99.



(Prior Code, Ch. 9, Art. VII, § 9-604)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.05  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   The business license of any person licensed under this chapter may be
revoked by the Council for any violation of this chapter.



(Prior Code, Ch. 9, Art. VII, § 9-605)  (Ord. 351-04, passed 9-7-2004)



§ 115.99  PENALTY.



   Any person found to be in violation of this chapter shall be punishable
as provided in § 10.99 for a Class 3 misdemeanor. The conduct of any
business in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation
for each and every day that the business is conducted.



(Prior Code, Ch. 9, Art. VII, § 9-606)  (Ord. 351-04, passed 9-7-2004)



CHAPTER 116: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS



Section




General Provisions




   116.01   Definitions



   116.02   Classifications



   116.03   Applicability to existing business




Licenses




   116.20   License required



   116.21   Issuance of license



   116.22   License fees



   116.23   Inspections



   116.24   Expiration of license



   116.25   Suspension



   116.26   Transfer of license



   116.27   Appeal




Adult Businesses




   116.40   Adult motels



   116.41   Viewing rooms



   116.42   Escort agencies



   116.43   Nude model studios



   116.44   Public nudity



   116.45   Minors prohibited



   116.46   Hours of operation



   116.47   Exemptions



   116.48   Injunction



   116.49   Revocation of license



 



   116.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 116.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADULT ARCADE.  Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated, slug-operated or for any form of consideration,
electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion
picture machines, projectors, video or laser disc players, or other
image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer
persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



   ADULT BOOK STORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE.



      (1)   A commercial establishment which regularly excludes all
minors from the premises, or a section thereof, because of the sexually
explicit nature of the items sold, rented or displayed therein, or which, as
one of its principal purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of
consideration any one or more of the following:



         (a)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed
matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video
reproductions, slides or other visual representations which are characterized
by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.



         (b)   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are
designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities, excluding
condoms and other birth control, pharmaceutical and disease prevention
products.



      (2)   A commercial establishment may have other principal
business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of
material depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas and still be categorized as an adult book store, adult
novelty store or adult video store. The other business purposes will not
serve to exempt  any commercial establishments from being categorized as an
adult book store, adult novelty store or adult video store so long as one of
its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for
consideration the specified materials which are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no video rental store shall
be deemed to be an adult video store if the offering for sale or rental for
consideration of the specified materials which are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas is not a principle business purpose or is tangential to the
principle business purposes of the commercial establishment. For these
purposes, to constitute a principle business purpose, a commercial video
store must either regularly exclude all minors from the premises or a section
thereof because of the sexually explicit nature of the items sold, rented or
displayed therein, or have at least 30% of its inventory characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.



   ADULT CABARET.  A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment or any other commercial establishment which regularly features
the following:



      (1)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity;



      (2)   Live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; and



      (3)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



   ADULT MOTEL.  A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:



      (1)   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of
consideration, provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and has a sign
visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of
this type of photographic reproductions;



      (2)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time
that is less than ten hours; and



      (3)   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to
sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours.



   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  A commercial establishment where, for
any form of consideration, films, computer simulations, motion pictures,
video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly
shown or displayed which are characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



   ADULT THEATER.  A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a
state of nudity or semi-nudity, or live performances which are characterized
by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual
activities.



   EMPLOYEE.  A person who works or performs any service on the premises
of a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis,
whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor,
agent or otherwise, and whether or not the person is paid a salary, wage or
other compensation by the operator of the business. EMPLOYEE does not include
a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the
premises or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the
premises.



   ESCORT.  A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.



   ESCORT AGENCY.  A person or business association who furnishes, offers
to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.



   ESTABLISHMENT.  Includes any of the following:



      (1)   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented
business as a new business;



      (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a
sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;



      (3)   The addition of any sexually oriented business to any
other existing sexually oriented business; and



      (4)   The relocation of any sexually oriented business.



   LICENSEE.  A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually
oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual or individuals
listed as an applicant on the application for a license.



   NUDE MODEL STUDIO.  Any place where a person who appears in a state of
nudity or who displays specified anatomical areas and is provided to be
observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly
depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. NUDE
MODEL STUDIO shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the state or
a college, junior college or university supported entirely or in part by
public taxation, a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation or a modeling
class, or the facility for such a class, operated in a structure:



      (1)   That has no sign visible from the exterior of the
structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available
for viewing;



      (2)   Where in order to participate in a class a student must
enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and



      (3)   Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at
any one time.



   NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY.  Shall include the following:



      (1)   The appearance of the human male or female genitals,
anus, cleft of the buttocks or areola of the female breast; and



      (2)   A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover the cleft
of the buttocks, anus, male genitals, female genitals or areola of the female
breast.



   PERSON.  An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association or other legal entity.



   SEMI-NUDE or in a SEMI-NUDE CONDITION.  A state of dress in which
opaque clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region and areola of
the female breasts, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting
straps or devices.



   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER.  A business or commercial enterprise that, as
one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration
the following:



      (1)   Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling
between persons of the opposite sex; and



      (2)   Activities between male and female persons and/or
persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of
nudity or is semi-nude.



   SEXUALLY ORIENTATED BUSINESS.  An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult
novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion
picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, sexual
encounter center or any combination of the businesses.



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.  Shall include the following:



      (1)   The human genitals in a state of sexual arousal;



      (2)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, the cleft of the buttocks, anus or the areola of the female breast;
and



      (3)   The appearance of the cleft of the buttocks, anus, male
or female genitals or areola of the female breast.



   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY.  Includes any of the following offenses:



      (1)   Prostitution or promotion of prostitution, procuring or
placing persons in a house of prostitution, operating or maintaining a house
of prostitution, pandering, child prostitution, dissemination of obscenity,
sale, furnishing distribution or display of harmful material to a minor,
sexual performance by a child, possession or distribution of child
pornography, public lewdness, indecent exposure, indecency with a child,
sexual exploitation of a minor, public sexual indecency with a minor, sexual
conduct with a minor, engaging in organized criminal activity, sexual
assault, molestation of a child, gambling, distribution of a controlled
substance, criminal attempt, conspiracy, facilitation or solicitation to
commit any of the foregoing offenses, any similar offenses to those described
above under the criminal or penal code of other states or countries.



      (2)   Offenses for which:



         (a)   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a
misdemeanor offense; and



         (b)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date
of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more
misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within
any 24-month period.



      (3)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have
no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with
the applicant.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.  Includes any of the following:



      (1)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts;



      (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated,
including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; and



      (3)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any
of the activities set forth in divisions (1) and (2) above.



   SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.  The increase
in floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25%, as the floor areas
exist on the date this chapter takes effect.



   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.
Includes any of the following:



      (1)   The sale, lease or sublease of the business;



      (2)   The transfer of securities that constitute a controlling
interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; and



      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar
legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except
for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the
person possessing the ownership or control.



   VIEWING ROOM.  The room, booth or area where a patron of a sexually
oriented business would ordinarily be positioned while watching a film, video
cassette or other video reproduction.



(Prior Code, Ch. 9, Art. VIII, § 9-701)  (Ord. 351-04, passed 9-7-2004)



§ 116.02  CLASSIFICATIONS.



   Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:



   (A)   Adult arcades;



   (B)   Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores or adult video stores;



   (C)   Adult cabarets;



   (D)   Adult motels;



   (E)   Adult motion picture theaters;



   (F)   Adult theaters;



   (G)   Escort agencies;



   (H)   Nude model studios; and



   (I)   Sexual encounter centers.



(Prior Code, Ch. 9, Art. VIII, § 9-702)  (Ord. 351-04, passed 9-7-2004)



§ 116.03  APPLICABILITY TO EXISTING BUSINESS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the activities of all
persons and sexually oriented businesses described herein, whether the
businesses or activities were established or commenced before, on or after
the effective date of the ordinance adopting this chapter.



(Prior Code, Ch. 9, Art. VIII, § 9-703)  (Ord. 351-04, passed 9-7-2004)




LICENSES




§ 116.20  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful:



      (1)   For any person to operate a sexually oriented business
without a valid sexually oriented business license issued by the town for the
particular type of business;



      (2)   For any person who operates a sexually oriented business
to employ a person to work for the sexually oriented business who is not
licensed by the town as a sexually oriented business employee pursuant to
this chapter; and



      (3)   For any person to obtain employment with a sexually
oriented business without having secured a sexually oriented business
employee license pursuant to this chapter.



   (B)   An application for a sexually oriented business license shall
be filed in person at the office of the Finance Director on a form prescribed
and provided by the town.



   (C)   All applicants shall be qualified according to the provisions
of this chapter. The application may request and the applicant shall provide
the information (including fingerprints) as to enable the town to determine
whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in this chapter.



   (D)   If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business
is an individual, the person must sign the application for a license as
applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is
other than an individual, each individual who has a 20% or greater interest
in the business or who will participate directly in decisions relating to
management of the business, shall sign the application for a license as
applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under this chapter and each
applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. All
application signatures shall be made under oath and notarized.



   (E)   The completed application for a sexually oriented business
license shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by
the following documents:



      (1)   If the applicant is:



         (a)   An individual.  The individual shall state his or
her legal name and any aliases and submit proof that he or she is 18 years of
age;



         (b)   A partnership.  The partnership shall state its
complete name and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is
general or limited and a copy of the partnership agreement, if any; and



         (c)   A corporation.  The corporation shall state its
complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation
is in good standing under the laws of its state of incorporation, the names
and capacity of all officers, directors and principal stockholders, and the
name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered
office for service of process.



      (2)   If the applicant intends to operate the sexually
oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, he or she
must state the sexually oriented business's fictitious name and submit the
required registration documents.



      (3)   Whether the applicant, or any person(s) residing with
the applicant, has been convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined
in this chapter, and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the
date, place and jurisdiction of each.



      (4)   Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the
applicant, has had a previous license under this chapter or other similar
sexually oriented business ordinances from another municipality or county
denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually
oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as
well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation and whether the
applicant or a person residing with the applicant has been a partner in a
partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation
that is licensed under this chapter whose license has previously been denied,
suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually
oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked as
well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation.



      (5)   Whether the applicant or a person residing with the
applicant holds any other licenses under this chapter or other similar
sexually oriented business ordinance from another municipality or county and,
if so, the names and locations of the other licensed businesses.



      (6)   The single classification of license for which the
applicant is filing.



      (7)   The location of the proposed sexually oriented business,
including a legal description of the property, street address and telephone
number(s), if any.



      (8)   The applicant's mailing address, residential address and
telephone number.



      (9)   A recent photograph of the applicant(s).



      (10)   Each applicant's driver's license number, Social
Security number and/or his or her state or federally issued tax
identification number.



      (11)   A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the
premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the
business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it
must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the
interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.



      (12)   If an applicant wishes to operate a sexually oriented
business, other than an adult motel, which shall exhibit on the premises, in
a viewing room or booth of less than 150 square feet of floor space, films,
video cassettes, other video reproductions or live entertainment which depict
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, then the applicant
shall comply with the application requirements set forth in this section.



   (F)   Before any applicant may be issued a sexually oriented
business employee license, the applicant shall submit on a form to be
provided by the town the following information:



      (1)   The applicant's name or any other name (including
“stage” names) or aliases used by the individual;



      (2)   Age, date and place of birth;



      (3)   Height, weight, hair and eye color;



      (4)   Present residence address and telephone number;



      (5)   Present business address and telephone number;



      (6)   Date, issuing state and number of driver's permit or
other identification card information;



      (7)   Social Security number; and



      (8)   Proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age.



   (G)   Attached to the application form for a sexually oriented
business employee license as provided above, shall be the following:



      (1)   A color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the
applicant's face, and the applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the
Police Department. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be
paid by the applicant.



      (2)   A statement detailing the license history of the
applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of
the application, including whether the applicant previously operated or is
seeking to operate, in this or any other county, city, state or country has
ever had a license, permit or authorization to do business denied, revoked or
suspended, or had any professional or vocational license or permit denied,
revoked or suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation or
suspension, state the name, the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction
and describe in full the reason for the denial, revocation or suspension. A
copy of any order of denial, revocation or suspension shall be attached to
the application.



      (3)   A statement whether the applicant has been convicted of
a specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter and, if so, the
specified criminal activity involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of
each.



(Prior Code, Ch. 9, Art. VIII, § 9-704)  (Ord. 351-04, passed 9-7-2004) 
Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.21  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Within 30 days after receipt of a completed sexually oriented
business application, the town shall approve or deny the issuance of a
license to an applicant. The town shall approve the issuance of a license to
an applicant unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that
one or more of the following findings is true:



      (1)   An applicant is under 18 years of age;



      (2)   An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in
payment to the town of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against or
imposed upon him or her in relation to any business;



      (3)   An applicant has failed to provide information
reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form;



      (4)   An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been denied a
license by the town to operate a sexually oriented business within the
preceding 12 months or his, her’s or its license to operate a sexually
oriented business has been revoked within the preceding 12 months;



      (5)   An applicant or the applicant's spouse has been
convicted of a specified criminal activity defined in this chapter;



      (6)   The premises to be used for the sexually oriented
business have not been approved by the Health Department, Town Planning
Department, Fire Department, Public Works Director and the building official
as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances;



      (7)   The license fee required by this chapter has not been
paid; and



      (8)   An applicant or the proposed establishment is in
violation of or is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this
chapter or any other applicable provision of state law.



   (B)   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of
the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address
of the sexually oriented business and the classification for which the
license is issued pursuant to this section. All licenses shall be posted in a
conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business
so that they may be easily read at any time.



   (C)   A sexually oriented business license shall issue for only one
classification as found in § 116.02.



   (D)   A sexually oriented business employee shall keep the
employee's license on his or her person or on the premises where the licensee
is then working or performing and shall produce the license for inspection
upon request by a law enforcement officer or other authorized town official.



   (E)   A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to
annual renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by
the town that the applicant has not been convicted of any act during the
existence of the previous license which would be grounds to deny the initial
license application. The renewal of the license shall be subject to the
payment of the fee as set forth in § 116.22.



(Prior Code, Ch. 9, Art. VIII, § 9-705)  (Ord. 351-04, passed 9-7-2004)



§ 116.22  LICENSE FEES.



   (A)   There is an annual non-refundable application fee for a
sexually oriented business license.



   (B)   There is an annual non-refundable application fee for a
sexually oriented business employee license (see Town of Florence Schedule of
Fees).



(Prior Code, Ch. 9, Art. VIII, § 9-706)  (Ord. 351-04, passed 9-7-2004)



§ 116.23  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the
Police Department, Fire Department, Planning Department, Public Works
Department, federal, state, county or town departments or agencies to inspect
the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of insuring
compliance with the law at any time it is occupied or open for business.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a licensee, operator or employee of a
sexually oriented business to refuse to permit a law enforcement officer or
any agency enumerated in division (A) above to inspect the premises at any
time the premises is occupied or open for business.



   (C)   The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an
adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a
permanent or temporary habitation.



(Prior Code, Ch. 9, Art. VIII, § 9-707)  (Ord. 351-04, passed 9-7-2004) 
Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.24  EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance
and may be renewed only by making application as provided in § 116.20.
Application for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration
date, and when made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the
expiration of the license will not be affected.



   (B)   When the town denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall
not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent
to denial, the town finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license
has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license, if at
least 90 days have elapsed since the date denial became final.



(Prior Code, Ch. 9, Art. VIII, § 9-708)  (Ord. 351-04, passed 9-7-2004)



§ 116.25  SUSPENSION.



   (A)   Suspension.  The town shall suspend a license for a period
not to exceed 30 days if it determines that a license or an employee of a
licensee has done any of the following:



      (1)   Violated or is not in compliance with any section of
this chapter;



      (2)   Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented
business premises as authorized by this chapter;



      (3)   Been on the sexually oriented business premises while in
an intoxicated or disorderly condition; or



      (4)   Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the
sexually oriented business premises.



   (B)   Revocation.



      (1)   The town shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension
in division (A) above occurs and the license has been suspended within the
preceding 12 months.



      (2)   The town shall revoke a license if it determines that
any of the following apply:



         (a)   A licensee gave false or misleading information in
the material submitted during the application process;



         (b)   A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use
or sale of controlled substances on the premises;



         (c)   A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on
the premises;



         (d)   A licensee knowingly operated the sexually
oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was
suspended;



         (e)   Except in the case of an adult motel, a licensee
or employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral
copulation, masturbation or sexual contact to occur in or on the licensed
premises. The term SEXUAL CONTACT shall have the same meaning as it is
defined in A.R.S. § 13-1401;



         (f)   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the town,
county or state for any taxes or fees past due;



         (g)   A licensee has been convicted of a SPECIFIED
CRIMINAL ACTIVITY; and



         (h)   On two or more occasions within a 12-month period,
a person or persons committed an offense occurring in or on the licensed
premises of a crime contained within the definition of SPECIFIED CRIMINAL
ACTIVITY, for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons
were employees of the sexually oriented business at the time the offenses
were committed.



   (C)   Length of revocation.  When the town revokes a license, the
revocation shall continue for one year, and the licensee shall not be issued
a sexually oriented business license for one year from the date the
revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the town finds
that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant
may be granted a license, if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the
revocation became effective.



(Prior Code, Ch. 9, Art. VIII, § 9-709)  (Ord. 351-04, passed 9-7-2004)



§ 116.26  TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall
a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a
license at any place other than the address designated in the application.



(Prior Code, Ch. 9, Art. VIII, § 9-710)  (Ord. 351-04, passed 9-7-2004)



§ 116.27  APPEAL.



   (A)   If the town determines that grounds exist for denial,
suspension or revocation of a license under this chapter, it shall notify the
applicant or licensee (respondent) in writing of its intent to deny, suspend
or revoke, including a summary of the grounds therefore. The notification
shall be by certified mail to the address on file with the Town Clerk. Within
ten working days of the date of the notice, the respondent may provide to the
Town Clerk in writing a response which shall include a statement of reasons
why the license or permit shall not be denied, suspended or revoked and may
include a request for a hearing. If a response is not received by the Town
Clerk in the time stated, the denial, suspension or revocation shall be final
and notice will be sent to the applicant or licensee. Within five working
days after receipt of a response, the town shall either withdraw the intent
to deny, suspend or revoked and so notify the respondent in writing by
certified mail or shall schedule a hearing before the Town Manager assembled
for that purpose and shall notify the respondent in writing by certified mail
of the date, time and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be scheduled
not less than 15 nor more than 20 working days after receipt by the town of
the request for a hearing. The hearing shall be conducted in an informal
manner. The respondent may be represented by counsel. The rules of evidence
shall not apply. The Town Manager shall render a written decision within five
working days after completion of the hearing and shall mail a copy of the
decision by certified mail to the address of the respondent on file with the
town. An applicant or licensee may continue to work or perform services under
his, her’s or its temporary permit or license pending receipt of the final
decision of the Town Manager. The decision shall be final at the end of five
working days after it is mailed and shall constitute a final administrative
action.



   (B)   When the decision to deny, suspend or revoke a license becomes
final, the applicant or licensee, whose application for a license has been
denied or whose license has been suspended or revoked, shall have the right
to seek judicial review of the decision in any court of competent
jurisdiction.



(Prior Code, Ch. 9, Art. VIII, § 9-711)  (Ord. 351-04, passed 9-7-2004)




ADULT BUSINESSES




§ 116.40  ADULT MOTELS.



   (A)   Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or a similar
commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a
period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption
that the establishment is an ADULT MOTEL as that term is defined in this
chapter.



   (B)   It is unlawful for a person in control of a sleeping room in a
hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that does not have a
sexually oriented license to rent or sub-rent a sleeping room to a person
and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, to rent or sub-rent
the same sleeping room again.



   (C)   For the purposes of division (B) above, the terms RENT or
SUB-RENT mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of
consideration.



(Prior Code, Ch. 9, Art. VIII, § 9-712)  (Ord. 351-04, passed 9-7-2004) 
Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.41  VIEWING ROOMS.



   (A)   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually
oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises
in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, video
cassette, live entertainment or other video reproduction which depicts
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with
the following requirements:



      (1)   Upon application for a sexually oriented license, the
application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan
thereof, specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the
location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the
premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not
exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the
place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A
professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an Engineer or architect's
blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to
the north or to some designated street or object, and should be drawn to a
designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various
internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an
accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The town may waive the foregoing
diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was
previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has
not been altered since it was prepared.



      (2)   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by
the applicant.



      (3)   No alteration in the configuration or location of a
manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the town.



      (4)   It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure
that at least one licensed employee is on duty and situated in each manager's
station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.



      (5)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such
a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every
area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose,
excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment.
If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the
interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is
an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is
permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations.
The view required in this subdivision must be by direct line of sight from
the manager's station.



      (6)   It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the
view area specified in division (A)(5) above remains unobstructed by any
doors, curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other
materials and, at all times, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to
any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which
patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to  division
(A)(1) above.



      (7)   No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person
at any time.



      (8)   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting
fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons
are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five foot candles as
measured at the floor level.



      (9)   It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the
illumination described above is maintained at all times when any patron is
present in the premises.



      (10)   No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist
between viewing rooms or booths.



      (11)   No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of
any kind between viewing booths or rooms.



      (12)   The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly
inspect the walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or
holes exist.



      (13)   The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing
booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.



      (14)   The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling
surfaces in viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by
nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board or
other porous material shall be used within 48 inches of the floor.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under any
provision of division (A) above to knowingly fail to fulfill that duty.



(Prior Code, Ch. 9, Art. VIII, § 9-713)  (Ord. 351-04, passed 9-7-2004) 
Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.42  ESCORT AGENCIES.



   (A)   An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of
18 years.



   (B)   A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort or
agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years.



(Prior Code, Ch. 9, Art. VIII, § 9-714)  (Ord. 351-04, passed 9-7-2004) 
Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.43  NUDE MODEL STUDIOS.



   (A)   A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age
of 18 years.



   (B)   A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if the
person appears in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model
studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this division if the person
under 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view or visible to any
other person.



   (C)   A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa or
mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a
reception room open to the public.



(Prior Code, Ch. 9, Art. VIII, § 9-715)  (Ord. 351-04, passed 9-7-2004) 
Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.44  PUBLIC NUDITY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly or
intentionally, in or upon the premises of a sexually oriented business,
appear in a state of nudity or depict specified sexual activities.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly or
intentionally, in or upon the premises of a sexually oriented business,
appear in a semi-nude condition, unless the person is an employee who, while
semi-nude, shall be at least ten feet from any patron or customer and on a
stage at least two feet from the floor.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for an employee, while semi-nude, in or
upon the premises of a sexually oriented business, to solicit any pay or
gratuity from any patron or customer or for any patron or customer to pay or
give any gratuity to any employee, while the employee is semi-nude in a
sexually oriented business.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for an employee, while semi-nude, to
touch a customer or the clothing of a customer.



   (E)   An employee may not touch the breast, buttocks or genitals of
a patron, nor may a patron touch the breast, buttocks or genitals of an
employee.



   (F)   A patron in a sexually oriented business may not place any
money on the person or in or on the costume of an employee.



(Prior Code, Ch. 9, Art. VIII, § 9-716)  (Ord. 351-04, passed 9-7-2004) 
Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.45  MINORS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to allow a person under
the age of 18 years on the premises of a sexually oriented business,
punishable as provided in § 10.99 of the Town Code.



(Prior Code, Ch. 9, Art. VIII, § 9-717)  (Ord. 351-04, passed 9-7-2004) 
Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.46  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain
open at any time between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays and
Saturdays, and 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sundays.



(Prior Code, Ch. 9, Art. VIII, § 9-718)  (Ord. 351-04, passed 9-7-2004)



§ 116.47  EXEMPTIONS.



   It is a defense to prosecution that a person appearing in a state of
nudity did so in a modeling class operated as follows:



   (A)   By a proprietary school, licensed by the state, a college,
junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;



   (B)   By a private college or university which maintains and
operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college,
junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;



   (C)   In a structure:



      (1)   Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the
structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available
for viewing;



      (2)   Where, in order to participate in a class a student must
enroll at least three days in advance of the class; or



      (3)   Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at
any one time.



(Prior Code, Ch. 9, Art. VIII, § 9-719)  (Ord. 351-04, passed 9-7-2004)



§ 116.48  INJUNCTION.



   The operation of a sexually oriented business without a valid license
in violation of this chapter shall constitute a nuisance and a person who
operates or causes to be operated the business shall be subject to an action
for injunctive relief as well as prosecution for criminal violations.



(Prior Code, Ch. 9, Art. VIII, § 9-720)  (Ord. 351-04, passed 9-7-2004)



§ 116.49  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   The business license of any person licensed under this chapter may be
revoked by the Council for any violation of this chapter.



(Prior Code, Ch. 9, Art. VIII, § 9-721)  (Ord. 351-04, passed 9-7-2004)



§ 116.99  PENALTY.



   Any person found to be in violation of this chapter shall be punishable
as provided in § 10.99 of the Town Code for a Class 3 misdemeanor. The
conduct of any business in violation of this chapter shall constitute a
separate violation for each and every day that the business is conducted.



(Prior Code, Ch. 9, Art. VIII, § 9-722)  (Ord. 351-04, passed 9-7-2004)



CHAPTER 117: TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE



Section



   117.01   Applicability



   117.02   Definitions



   117.03   License required



   117.04   License proposal



§ 117.01  APPLICABILITY.



   The provisions of this chapter dealing with telecommunications service
do not affect and to not apply to providers of cable television services,
which services are governed separately pursuant to the Town Cable
Communications Ordinance.



(Prior Code, Ch. 9, Art. IX, § 9-800)



§ 117.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CABLE SERVICES.  The offering of cable system services for a fee
directly to the public, or to the users as to be effectively available
directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used.



   CABLE SYSTEM.  Any facility that, in whole or in part, receives
directly or indirectly over the air, and amplifies or otherwise modifies the
signals transmitting programs broadcast by one or more television or radio
stations and distributes the signals together with other signals as
authorized by the Federal Communications Commission and the licensing
authority, by wire or cable to subscribing members of the public who pay for
the service, but the term shall not include the following:



      (1)   Any facility that serves fewer than 50 subscribers; and



      (2)   Any facility that serves only the residents of one or
more apartment dwellings under common ownership and commercial establishments
located on the premises of the apartment dwellings.



   COMMERCIAL MOBILE RADIO SERVICE.  Two-way voice commercial mobile
radio service as defined by the Federal Communications Commission in 47
U.S.C. § 153.



   FACILITIES.  The plant, equipment and property, including but not
limited to poles, wires, pipe, conduits, pedestals, antennae and other
appurtenances placed in, on or under highways, and not owned by the town and
used in the provision of telecommunications services.



   PUBLIC HIGHWAY or HIGHWAY.  All roads, streets and alleys and all
other dedicated public rights-of-way and public utility easements of the town.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS.  The transmission, between or among points
specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing, without change
in the form or content of the information as sent and received. The term does
not include commercial mobile radio services, pay phone services, interstate
services or cable services.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS CORPORATION.  Any public service corporation to the
extent that it provides telecommunications services in this state.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE.  The offering of telecommunications for a
fee directly to the public or to the users as to be effectively available
directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used.



(Prior Code, Ch. 9, Art. IX, § 9-801)  (Ord. 351-04, passed 9-7-2004)



§ 117.03  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No telecommunications corporation shall install, maintain,
construct or operate telecommunications facilities in any public highway in
the town or provide telecommunications service by means of the facilities
unless a license to provide telecommunications services has first been
granted by the Town Council of the town under this chapter.



   (B)   Notwithstanding division (A) above, any telecommunications
corporation that was providing telecommunications service within the state as
of October 31, 1997, pursuant to a grant made to it or its lawful
predecessors prior to the effective date of the Arizona Constitution, may
continue to provide telecommunications services pursuant to that state grant,
until the state grant is lawfully repealed, revoked or amended and need not
obtain any further authorization from the town to provide telecommunications
services; provided, however, that the entity must in all other respects
comply with the requirements applicable to the telecommunications
corporations, as provided in A.R.S. Title 9, Chapter 5, Art. 7.



   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to affect the terms or
conditions of any franchise, license or permit issued by the town prior to
October 31, 1997, or to release any party from its obligations there under.
Those franchises, licenses or permits shall remain fully enforceable in
accordance with their terms. The Town Manager, with the consent of the Town
Council, may enter into agreements with franchise holders, licensees or
permitees to modify or terminate an existing franchise, license or agreement.



   (D)   A license to any telecommunications corporation to use the
highway to install, maintain, construct or operate telecommunications
facilities or to provide telecommunications services under this chapter shall
not authorize the use of the highways to provide any other service; nor shall
the issuance of the same invalidate any franchise, license or permit that
authorizes the use of the highways for any other service; nor shall the fact
that an entity holds a franchise, license or permit to make any other use of
the highway or to provide any other service authorize installation,
maintenance, construction or operation of telecommunications facilities in
any highway in the town or permit the entity to provide telecommunications
services by means of the facilities without obtaining a license hereunder.



   (E)   Any license granted shall not be exclusive.



(Prior Code, Ch. 9, Art. IX, § 9-802)  (Ord. 351-04, passed 9-7-2004) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 117.04  LICENSE PROPOSAL.



   (A)   A telecommunications corporation desiring a license to occupy
the streets and other highways of the town to provide telecommunications
service shall file a proposal with the Town Manager in the form prescribed by
the town, and shall pay a fee determined by the resolution of the Mayor and
Town Council. The amount of the fee shall be reasonably related to the cost
directly incurred by the town relating to the granting or administration of
the license.



   (B)   Each application shall, at a minimum, do the following:



      (1)   Show where the facilities the applicant will use, will
be located or contain other information as the town may deem necessary in
order to ensure that the applicant will comply with requirements for use of
the highways;



      (2)   Identify the applicant, his or her name, address and
telephone number;



      (3)   Contain a description of the services to be provided; and



      (4)   Set out a description of any agreement with any other
entity that would permit the entity to use the facilities.



   (C)   Upon receiving an application for a license that satisfies the
conditions of division (B) above, the town shall promptly proffer a
telecommunications license to the applicant for its review and may inquire
into matters relevant to the issuance of the license. If the applicant agrees
to the terms and conditions of the license, the request shall be approved.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the town need not issue or renew a license if
the applicant has previously had a license or permit revoked, or for any
other reason permitted under Arizona law.



   (D)   As a condition of issuing or renewing a license to use the
public highways to provide telecommunications services, the town may require
that:



      (1)   The applicant shows that he or she has received a
certificate of public convenience and necessity from the State Corporation
Commission;



      (2)   The applicant agrees to comply with the highway use
requirements that the town may establish from time to time;



      (3)   The applicant agrees to provide and maintain accurate
maps showing the location of all the facilities it will use in the highways
within the town and to comply with any other mapping requirements as the town
may establish from time to time; and



      (4)   The applicant obtains the insurance and provide proof of
insurance as required by the town, posts the performance bonds and security
fund required by the town, agrees to fully indemnify the town, its officers,
agents, boards and commissions in a form satisfactory to the town and agrees
that it shall have no recourse against the town for monetary damages as a
result of any damage that may result from the town's exercise of its rights
under the license or applicable provisions of law. The applicant agrees to
comply with and be bound by the administrative and enforcement provisions as
may be prescribed from time to time by the town which may include the
following:



         (a)   Provisions covering assignment;



         (b)   The right to inspect records to determine
compliance by the licensee;



         (c)   Provisions for renewal;



         (d)   Fees and charges contemplated by A.R.S. §
9-582(C);



         (e)   Any license granted by the town pursuant to this
chapter shall commence upon adoption of the license and acceptance of the
license by the provider. The license shall be for a term of five years and
subject to the conditions and restrictions provided in the instrument and
this chapter;



         (f)   Every licensee shall be subject to the town's
exercise of any police, regulatory and other powers as the town now has or
may later obtain, and a license may not waive the application of the same and
must be exercised in strict conformity therewith. Every license shall be
subject to revocation if the licensee fails to comply with the terms and
conditions of the license or applicable law. Provided, however, that a
license shall not be revoked unless the licensee is given written notice of
the defect in performance and fails to cure the defect within 60 days of the
notice, except where the town finds that the defect in performance is due to
intentional misconduct, is a violation of criminal law or is part of a
patterns of violations which the licensee has already had notice and
opportunity to cure. A hearing shall be held before a license is revoked or
not renewed if the licensee requests a hearing;



         (g)   The issuance of a license by the town is not a
representation or warranty that the license is a legally sufficient
substitute for a franchise and is not a representation or warranty that a
franchise is not required; and



         (h)   Any person or entity found guilty of violating any
provision in this chapter shall be punished as provided in § 10.99 of the
Town Code.



(Prior Code, Ch. 9, Art. IX, § 9-803)  (Ord. 351-04, passed 9-7-2004)



CHAPTER 118: CABLE COMMUNICATIONS



Section




General Provisions




   118.01   Title



   118.02   Intent and purposes



   118.03   Definitions




Licenses




   118.20   Authority and administration



   118.21   License characteristics



   118.22   License subject to others laws; police power



   118.23   Interpretation of license terms



   118.24   Applications for grant, renewal, modification or transfer
of licenses



   118.25   Grant of license



   118.26   Insurance; bond; indemnification



   118.27   Minimum facilities and services



   118.28   License application and processing fees



   118.29   Quarterly and financial records



   118.30   Customer service requirements



   118.31   Service discrimination and exclusive programming agreements
prohibited



   118.32   Subscriber privacy and unauthorized reception



   118.33   Construction and use of rights-of-way



   118.34   Technical standards



   118.35   Security deposit



   118.36   Enforcement remedies



   118.37   Performance evaluations



   118.38   Renewal of license



   118.39   Transfers



   118.40   Revocation or termination of license



   118.41   Continuity of service mandatory



   118.42   Unlawful solicitation or acceptance of gifts



   118.43   Liquidated damages



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 118.01  TITLE.



   This chapter is known and may be cited as the “Cable Communications
Ordinance.”



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. V, § 18-300)  (Ord. 343-04, passed 6-21-2004;
Ord. 366-05, passed 3-7-2005)



§ 118.02  INTENT AND PURPOSES.



   It is the intent of this chapter to provide for the regulation and
control of cable television systems operating within the town by the Council,
and, in the public interest: to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare by providing for the grant of one or more licenses for the
construction and operation of a cable system; to provide for the regulation
of each cable system by the town; to provide for the payment of fees and
other valuable consideration by a licensee to the town for the privilege of
using the public rights-of-way, and other public places for constructing and
operating a cable system; to promote the widespread availability of
high-quality cable communications services to town residents and businesses,
including to those who reside in multi-family or multi-use buildings and in
rural areas; to encourage the development of cable as a means of
communication between and among the members of the public and public
institutions; to encourage the provision of diverse information to the
community over cable, and to minimize disruptions of the public domain for
installation and maintenance.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. V, § 18-301)  (Ord. 343-04, passed 6-21-2004;
Ord. 366-05, passed 3-7-2005)



§ 118.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.  Words not
defined are given their meaning in Section 602 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C.
Subsection 522, and, if none, their common and ordinary meaning.



   ACCESS CHANNEL.  One or more channels dedicated in whole or in part
for local noncommercial programming which is set aside for educational and
governmental use, without a charge by the licensee for channel usage and
which is originated by the cable company, provided that such access
programming shall not include:



      (1)   The retransmission of local television broadcast
signals; or



      (2)   Programming produced by persons unaffiliated with the
cable company under the provisions of Section 612 of the Cable Act.



   APPLICANT.  Any person or organization that applies for a license.



   APPLICATION.  A proposal to construct and operate a cable system
within the town, transfer a license, renew a license, or modify a license. An
APPLICATION includes the initial proposal plus all subsequent amendments or
supplements to the proposal and relevant correspondence.



   BASIC CABLE SERVICE or BASIC SERVICE.  Any service tier which includes
the retransmission of local television broadcast signals.



   CABLE ACT.  The Cable Act of 1934, the Cable Communications Policy Act
of 1984, 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., as amended, the 1992 Cable Act, and the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 (“1996 Act”) as amended.



   CABLE SERVICE.  The one-way transmission of video or other programming
service to subscribers and any subscriber interaction required for the
selection or use of such video programming or other service.



   CABLE SYSTEM.  Unless otherwise defined in the license agreement, a
facility, consisting of a set of open and closed transmission paths and
associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is
designed to provide a cable communications service which includes, but is not
limited to, video programming, information services, and communications which
is provided to business and residential subscribers within the town. This
term does not include:



      (1)   A facility that serves only to retransmit the television
signals of one or more television broadcast stations;



      (2)   A facility of a common carrier that is subject, in whole
or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934,
Subsection 201, et seq., except that the facility will be considered a cable
system to the extent that it is used in the transmission of video programming
directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide
interactive on-demand services;



      (3)   Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for
operating its electric utility systems. If any provider operates or maintains
connection to such an unlicensed system, this system is not exempt from the
provisions of the agreement and must either be licensed or the connection
shall cease.



   COMPLAINT.  A subscriber or citizen issue presented in verbal or
written form, to the licensee or the town relating to any aspect of the
licensee's performance under this chapter.



   CONTROL OF A LICENSEE OR APPLICANT.  The legal or practical ability to
direct the affairs of the licensee or applicant either directly or
indirectly, whether by contractual agreement or majority ownership of an
economic interest. In the case of a limited partnership, a change in limited
partner interests shall not constitute a change in control where the limited
partners have no power to participate in the management of the partnership,
and the general partner retains full power.



   COUNCIL.  The present governing body of the town or any future Council
constituting the legislative body of the town.



   DENSITY.  The number of potential subscriber households or businesses
per mile of cable system.



   DWELLING UNITS AND BUSINESSES.  Shall be counted when they are within
250 feet of any portion of the cable distribution system including trunk and
feeder cable lines.



   DWELLING OR OCCUPIED UNIT.  Any separate and distinct structure or
part thereof which exists in finished form, occupied or capable of year-round
occupation, and serves as a residence to one or more persons, or place or
business. Included in this definition, but not limited to this definition
are: all single-family homes, each apartment or multi-family unit, each
condominium unit, patio homes, guest quarters and similar type structures,
and occupied commercial and industrial businesses.



   EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION.  Any public educational institution, which is
accredited by a nationally recognized organization, including local primary
and secondary schools, colleges and universities.



   EG ACCESS CHANNEL or EG CHANNEL.  Any channel set aside for use by an
educational institution or government agency use without a charge by the
licensee for channel usage.



   FAIR MARKET VALUE.  The price that a willing buyer would pay to a
willing seller for a going concern based on the system valuation prevailing
in the industry at the time but with no value allocated to the license itself.



   FCC.  The Federal Communications Commission.



   GOVERNMENT AGENCY.  Any state, local, regional or special government
agency with a physical presence within the town.



   GROSS REVENUES. 



      (1)   Unless defined in the license agreement, shall mean all
cash, credits, property of any kind or nature, or other consideration, less
related bad debts up to a maximum of 1.5% annually of such cash, credits and
property, received directly or indirectly by a licensee, its affiliates,
subsidiaries, parent and any person, firm or corporation in which a licensee
has a financial interest or which has a financial interest in a licensee,
arising from or attributable to the licensee's operation of its cable
television system within the town, including, but not limited to:



         (a)    Revenue from all charges for services provided to
subscribers;



         (b)   Revenue for all charges for the insertion of
commercial advertising upon the cable system;



         (c)   Revenue from all charges for the leased use of
studios;



         (d)   Revenue from all charges for the installation,
removal, connection and reinstatement of equipment necessary for a subscriber
to receive cable service;



         (e)   Revenue from the sale, exchange, use or cablecast
of any programming developed for community use or institutional users.



         (f)   Revenue from all charges for the use of or lease
of leased access channels or band width.



         (g)   Revenue from the production or transmission over
the cable system of video programming by licensee including programming
produced by its mobile facilities.



         (h)   Any other income derived from the cable system as
permitted by law.



      (2)   Shall not include taxes collected by licensee on behalf
of any governmental authority; any surcharges for underground conversion of
cable plant costs; any increase in the value of any stock, security or asset;
the value of complimentary services provided to licensee's employees and is
required by this chapter or any license; and dividends or other distributions
made in respect of any stock or securities, or value received by a licensee
or any of its affiliates, subsidiaries or parent relating to licensee
services or through cooperative advertising.



      (3)   (a)   Shall not include cash, credit, property of any
kind or nature or other consideration received by a licensee's affiliates,
subsidiaries, parent or any person, firm or corporation (“affiliate”) in
which a licensee has a financial interest or which has financial interest in
a licensee for any sales of advertising on the cable system, services to
provide programming on the cable system, production services and/or
telecommunication services which are cable services when such services are
provided by an affiliate, which has all the following characteristics: the
affiliate is a separate legal entity, with separate employees, with separate
financial records (which may be part of consolidated financial reporting
records) and a separate mission; it makes payments to licensee which meet
market standards for the services and industries involved, even if it does
not offer and provide its services to persons other than licensee in the same
industry as licensee; and it was established for valid business purposes and
not with the intent and purpose of circumventing payment of license fees on
gross revenues. Nothing contained in this exclusion from gross revenues shall
be interpreted to exclude from gross revenues such cash, credit, property of
any kind or nature or other consideration which would be considered the
licensee's gross revenues derived from the operation of the cable system
under the Cable Act. Except for gross revenue from such sales of advertising
on the cable system, services to provide programming on the cable system,
production services or telecommunication services which are cable services
received by such affiliate, this subsection shall not exclude from gross
revenues any source of gross revenues which an existing licensee itself is
receiving at the time it is granted a license under this chapter.



         (b)   When a licensee (or an affiliate) holds one or
more other cable television licenses in the county and receives and allocates
gross revenues from subsections (1)(b), (f) and (g), then GROSS REVENUES
derived from subsections (1)(b), (f) and (g) shall be allocated pro rata to
the town based on the ratio of the number of subscribers of licensee (or an
affiliate), in the town to the number of subscribers of licensee (or an
affiliate) in all the jurisdictions in the county, in which licensee (or an
affiliate) holds a cable license. If a licensee does not allocate its gross
revenues derived from subsections (1)(b), (f) and (g) from such other
jurisdictions then the number of subscribers in such jurisdictions shall not
be included in the total number of subscribers in all other jurisdictions.



   INSTITUTIONAL SERVICES.  Video, audio, data and other transmission
services provided by a licensee to institutional users on an individual
application, private channel basis, including, two-way video, audio or
digital signals among institutions, or from institutions to residential
subscribers.



   INSTITUTIONAL USER.  Includes any private, governmental, or academic
organization or facility including but not limited to schools, business,
industry, correctional facilities or other organized body promoting or
organized for some purpose.



   LEASED ACCESS CHANNEL.  A channel designated in accordance with
Section 612 of the Cable Act, for commercial use by persons unaffiliated with
the licensee.



   LICENSE.  The right granted by the town, as described in this chapter,
to a licensee to construct, maintain and operate a cable system over, on, or
under streets, roads and all other public ways, easements, public places and
rights-of-way within all or specified areas of the town. The term does not
include any license or permit that may be required by this chapter or other
laws, ordinances, or regulations of the town for the privilege of transacting
and carrying on a business within the town or for disturbing the surface of
any street or public thoroughfare.



   LICENSE AGREEMENT.  A contract entered into in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter between the town and a licensee that sets forth
the terms and conditions under which the license will be exercised.



   LICENSE FEE.  The fee based on the gross revenue derived from
operating and use of public rights-of-way and for operating a cable
communications system within the limits of the town. The licensee shall pay
the town a fee no less than the percent of the licensee's gross revenues from
all sources attributable to operations of the licensee within its license
area during the period of its license. The percentage is described in later
in this chapter.



   LICENSEE.  Any person or company granted a license under this chapter,
and includes any transferee, successor or assignee of the person or company.



   MALFUNCTION.  An equipment or facility failure that results in the
loss of satisfactory service on one or more channels.



      (1)   MINOR MALFUNCTION.  An equipment or facility failure
that results in the loss of a viewable signal on up to four channels.



      (2)   MAJOR MALFUNCTION.  Has occurred when five or more
channels are affected.



   OUTAGE.  An equipment or facility failure that results in a total loss
of signal on all cable channels affecting three or more subscribers within
one linear mile during any 120-minute period.



   OVERBUILD.  A cable system constructed to serve any subscribers served
by an existing cable system.



   SERVICE CALL.  Results when service problems occur relating to:



      (1)   A total loss of or degraded signal or picture on one or
more channels or services; or



      (2)   Property damage by licensee employees or authorized
contractors.



   STANDARD DROP.  Cable connection which requires no more than a
125-foot drop measured from the nearest point of subscriber's home or place
of business to the nearest active tap on the cable system, involving only one
outlet and standard materials and does not involve a wallfish. In addition, a
STANDARD DROP shall exclude custom installation work including specific
subscriber requested work that requires nonstandard inventory or cable
routing that requires construction methods exceeding reasonable underground
or aerial work.



   SUBSCRIBER.  Any person, business or entity who legally receives any
cable service provided by a cable system but does not include persons who
receive not more than two channels of noncommercial closed circuit video
service which is not made available to the general public.



   TOWN.  The Town of Florence, a municipal corporation of the State of
Arizona, in its current and future boundaries as increased or decreased by
law. Unless otherwise clear from the context, where the term TOWN is used in
this chapter, it means the Town Manager. However, where legislative approval
of an activity is specifically required under this chapter, TOWN means the
Town Manager subject to the approval of the Town Council.



   TOWN MANAGER.  The Chief Executive Officer of the town or designee.



   TWO-WAY CAPABILITY.  The incorporation in a cable system of all
appropriate design and engineering characteristics so that two-way
transmission, including addressability, over the system can be implemented
with a minimum of expense.



   USER.  A person utilizing a cable system's facilities for purposes of
transmission of material or information to subscribers or others.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. V, § 18-302)  (Ord. 343-04, passed 6-21-2004;
Ord. 366-05, passed 3-7-2005)



LICENSES



§ 118.20  AUTHORITY AND ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   Pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-505, as amended, and the Cable Act as
defined herein, as amended, the Town Council may grant one or more licenses
in accordance with this chapter. A person must not construct or operate a
cable system, whether for public or private use, in the town without a
license granted by the Town Council.



   (B)   The Town Council authorizes the Town Manager to enter into
license agreement negotiations with an applicant, however, nothing herein
entitles an applicant to such negotiations, nor does such authorization
entitle an applicant to a license or license agreement. The Town Council
authorized its designee to terminate negotiations with en applicant at any
time.



   (C)   The Town Manager, or Town Manager's designee, has
responsibility for the administration and enforcement of this chapter and any
license agreement, including:



      (1)   Establishing procedures for the conduct of public
hearings and other proceedings required by this chapter or a license
agreement;



      (2)   Conducting public hearings, including designating
hearing officers;



      (3)   Coordinating management and operation of town government
access channels;



      (4)   Providing technical, programming, and operational
support to public agency users of a cable system;



      (5)   Planning and evaluating cable use and the development of
cable services;



      (6)   Approving a transfer of an interest in a licensee;



      (7)   Approving modifications of a license agreement that do
not substantially alter material provisions of the license; and



      (8)   Issuing requests for proposals for licenses.



   (D)   Actions by the Town Manager in the following matters are
subject to approval by the Council:



      (1)   Granting or renewing a license;



      (2)   Approving transfer of a license;



      (3)   Revoking a license;



      (4)   Modifying a license agreement in a manner that
substantially alters material provisions of the license.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. V, § 18-303)  (Ord. 343-04, passed 6-21-2004;
Ord. 366-05, passed 3-7-2005)



§ 118.21  LICENSE CHARACTERISTICS.



   (A)   A license authorizes use of the public rights-of-way for
installing cables, fiber, wires, lines, and other facilities to operate a
cable system, but does not expressly or implicitly authorize the licensee to
provide service to, or install cables, wires, lines, or any other equipment
or facilities on private property without owner consent (except for use of:



      (1)   Compatible easements; or



      (2)   Rights-of-way under the cable act or other applicable
law);



or to use publicly or privately owned utility poles or conduits without a
separate agreement with the owners. It also authorizes the licensee so to
use, operate and provide similar facilities on or to properties rented,
licensed or leased from other persons, firms or corporations, including but
not limited to any public utility or other licensee licensed or permitted to
do business in the town; provided, however, that neither the licensee nor the
third party shall be relieved of any regulation or obligations as to its use
of such facilities in the streets, as required by local building or other
code or ordinance.



   (B)   A license is subject to the paramount right of use by the town
and the public for public purposes. The town reserves the right to authorize
use of public rights-of-way to other persons as it determines appropriate.



   (C)   A license is nonexclusive and does not expressly or implicitly
preclude the issuance of other licenses to operate cable systems within the
town.



   (D)   A license does not convey a property right to the licensee or
a right to renewal other than as may be required by state or federal law.



   (E)   A license agreement constitutes a contract between the
licensee and the town once it has been accepted and approved by the Council
and executed by both parties. A licensee contractually commits itself to
comply with the terms, conditions and provisions of the license agreement and
with all applicable laws, ordinances, codes, rules, regulations, and orders.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. V, § 18-304)  (Ord. 343-04, passed 6-21-2004;
Ord. 366-05, passed 3-7-2005)



§ 118.22  LICENSEE SUBJECT TO OTHER LAWS, POLICE POWER.



   (A)   A licensee is subject to and must comply with all applicable
local, municipal, town, state and federal laws, ordinances, codes, rules,
regulations, and orders including those pertaining to nondiscrimination.



   (B)   A licensee is expressly subject to the town's police power to
adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary for the health, safety, and
welfare of the public, and it agrees to comply with all applicable state laws
and ordinances enacted by the town pursuant to such power.



   (C)   A licensee or other person is not excused from complying with
any of the terms and conditions of this chapter or a license agreement by any
failure of the town, one or more occasions, to require compliance or
performance.



   (D)   Any of the provisions of this chapter may be amended by the
Council at any time. This chapter and such amended provisions shall be
applicable to all existing license agreements; provided, however, that this
chapter and such amended provisions shall not be applicable to an existing
agreement where it would contravene a contractual right of the licensee under
the license agreement, or pose additional contractual burdens on the licensee.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. V, § 18-305)  (Ord. 343-04, passed 6-21-2004;
Ord. 366-05, passed 3-7-2005)



§ 118.23  INTERPRETATION OF LICENSE TERMS.



   (A)   This chapter applies to a license agreement as if fully set
forth in the license agreement.



   (B)   The provisions of a license agreement must be strictly
construed in order to effectuate its objectives consistent with this chapter
and the public interest.



   (C)   A license agreement is governed by, and construed in
accordance with, the laws, rules and regulations of the state, the
Communications Act, as amended, and the FCC rules.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. V, § 18-306)  (Ord. 343-04, passed 6-21-2004;
Ord. 366-05, passed 3-7-2005)



§ 118.24  APPLICATIONS FOR GRANT, RENEWAL, MODIFICATION OR TRANSFER OF
LICENSES.



   (A)   Any person, agency, organization or entity desiring to
construct, install, maintain or operate a cable communication system within
the town shall submit an application to the Council. An application must be
filed with the Town Clerk for grant of a new license, renewal of a license or
transfer of a license under either the formal or informal procedures in
accordance with Section 626 of the Cable Act, as amended, modification of a
license agreement, transfer of a license, or, where approval is required, for
a transfer of an interest in a licensee. An applicant has the burden to
demonstrate compliance with all application requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   All applications filed with the Town Clerk remain the property
of the town. Applications submitted may be returned as incomplete if they do
not comply with all requirements of the town.



   (C)   To be acceptable for filing, an application must:



      (1)   Be submitted in the number of copies required by the
town;



      (2)   Be accompanied by the non-refundable application filing
fee;



      (3)   Conform to any applicable request for proposals, and
contain all required information.



   (D)   Application forms may be obtained from the Town Clerk. If no
formal application is available, a submittal shall include items listed in
this section. All applications must include the names and addresses of
persons authorized to act on behalf of the applicant with respect to the
application.



   (E)   All applications accepted for filing must be made available by
the town for public inspection.



   (F)   An application for the grant of a new license may be filed
pursuant to a request for proposals issued by the town or on an unsolicited
basis. The town may, at its option, issue a request for proposals upon
receipt of an unsolicited application. If the town elects to issue a request
for proposals upon receipt of an unsolicited application, the applicant may
submit an amended application in response to the request for proposals, or
may inform the town that its unsolicited application should be considered as
its response to the request for proposals, or may withdraw its unsolicited
application. An application which is unresponsive to the requirements of a
request for proposals may be dismissed by the town without further
consideration.



   (G)   An application for the grant of a new license, license renewal
or license transfer must contain information requested in the town's license
application form and include information not limited to the following
information:



      (1)   Identification of the ownership and control of the
applicant, including:



         (a)   The names and addresses of the ten largest holders
of an ownership interest in the applicant, and all persons with 5% or more
ownership interest, including the percentage interest held by all such
persons;



         (b)   The persons, if any, who control the applicant;
all officers and directors of the applicant; and



         (c)   Any other business affiliation and cable system
ownership interest of each named person.



      (2)   (a)   A statement addressing whether the applicant,
or any person controlling the applicant, or any officer or major stockholder
of the applicant:



            1.   Has been adjudged bankrupt;



            2.   Has had a cable license revoked; or



            3.   Has been found guilty by any court or
administrative agency of a violation of a security or antitrust law, a
felony, or any crime involving moral turpitude.



         (b)   Any statement under this subsection must identify
the person or persons involved and provide a full explanation of the
circumstances.



      (3)   A demonstration of the applicant's technical, legal and
financial ability, including financing sources and commitments, to construct
and operate the proposed cable facility, including identification of key
personnel.



      (4)   The geographic area to be served by the cable system.



      (5)   A detailed description of the physical facility
proposed, including channel capacity, technical design, performance
characteristics, headend, and access facilities and equipment.



      (6)   A description of the construction of the proposed
system, including an estimate of above-ground and below-ground mileage and
its location, the proposed construction schedule, a description, where
appropriate, of how services will be converted from existing facilities to
new facilities, and information on the availability of space on poles and
conduits including, where appropriate, an estimate of the cost of
rearrangement of facilities to accommodate such use.



      (7)   A description of the services to be provided initially,
including all broadcast and non-broadcast signals to be carried and all
non-television services, and if services will be offered by tiers,
identification of the signals or services, or both, to be included on each
tier.



      (8)   The proposed rate structure including charges for each
service tier, installation, converters, and other equipment or services.



      (9)   A demonstration of how the proposal will reasonably meet
the future cable-related needs and interests of the community, including a
description of how the proposal will meet the needs described in any recent
community needs assessment conducted for the town.



      (10)   An affidavit of the applicant or authorized officer
that:



         (a)   Certifies the truth and accuracy of the
information in the application;



         (b)   Acknowledges the enforceability of application
commitments; and



         (c)   Certifies that the proposal meets all applicable
federal and state requirements.



      (11)   If an applicant proposes to construct a cable system
which would constitute an overbuild, the identification of the area where the
overbuild would occur, the potential subscriber density in the area to be
served by competing cable systems, and other information as necessary for the
town to make its determination under § 118.25(E).



      (12)   Any other information necessary to demonstrate
compliance with the requirements of this chapter and information that the
town may reasonably request of the applicant.



   (H)   An application for modification of a license agreement must
include, at a minimum, the following information:



      (1)   The specific modification requested;



      (2)   The justification for the requested modification,
including the impact of the requested modification on subscribers and others,
and the impact on the applicant if the modification is not approved;



      (3)   A statement whether the modification is sought pursuant
to Section 625 of the Cable Act, and, if so, a demonstration that the
requested modification meets the legal standards of the Cable Act; and



      (4)   Any other information necessary for the town to make a
determination on the requested license modification.



   (I)   An application for approval of a transfer of a license or a
transfer of an interest in a licensee must comply with the requirements of §
118.39.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. V, § 18-307)  (Ord. 343-04, passed 6-21-2004;
Ord. 366-05, passed 3-7-2005)



§ 118.25  GRANT OF LICENSE.



   (A)   The town may grant a license for a period not to exceed 15
years to serve all or any specified geographic areas of the town. If a
license is granted, a provider must be able to provide service to a density
of at least 25 dwelling or occupied units per lineal mile.



   (B)   The town may make the grant of a license conditioned on the
completion of construction within a specified time or the performance of
other specific obligations and specify that the failure of the licensee to
comply with the condition will void the license without further action by the
town.



   (C)   A public hearing must be held on each application for a new
license that meets all requirements of this chapter. At least 15 calendar
days’ public notice must be given before the public hearing. At the public
hearing, the Town Manager may accept written and oral testimony and any other
material relevant to the application. If more than one application has been
submitted, the applications may be considered in the same proceeding.



   (D)   In evaluating an application for a new license, the town must
consider:



      (1)   The applicant's character;



      (2)   The applicant's technical, financial, and legal
qualifications to construct and operate the proposed system;



      (3)   The nature of the proposed facilities, equipment, and
services;



      (4)   The applicant's record of cable performance in other
communities, if any; and



      (5)   Whether the proposal will serve the public interest.



   (E)   Where an applicant proposes to overbuild an existing cable
system, the town must also consider:



      (1)   The beneficial effects of competition, including any
reduced rates to consumers, higher technical standards, and more varied
programming offerings; and



      (2)   Any interference or disruption of or interconnectability
to the existing licensee's operations or service.



   (F)   Based upon the application, the written and oral testimony and
other material presented at the hearing, and any other information relevant
to the application, the Town Manager must notify the applicant of the
proposed grant or the denial of the application.



   (G)   The Town Manager and the applicant must tentatively agree on
the terms of a license agreement prior to the required public hearings and
prior to consideration by the Town Council. The Town Manager may chose to
seek input from the Town Council if a dispute on terms of the agreement is
unresolved.



   (H)   The town must make the text of a proposed license agreement
available to the public, as proposed cable TV licenses are approved by
ordinance and in accordance to state and local public notice requirements.



   (I)   After complying with the requirements of this section, the
Town Manager may submit recommendations to grant one or more licenses and
proposed license agreements to the Council. The Council must approve or
disapprove the grant of a license.



   (J)   Every license grant is subject to a license processing fee in
an amount not to exceed the town's reasonable costs in considering the
application, less the amount of the application filing fee. Within 30 days of
the date the grant of the license is approved by the Council, the town must
notify the approved applicant of the amount of the license acceptance fee and
its method of calculation. If the license acceptance fee is not paid within
30 days of the date the town notifies the approved applicant of the amount,
the grant is void. Before the license is effective, the approved applicant
must demonstrate compliance with the bond, insurance, and similar provisions
of the license agreement.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. V, § 18-308)  (Ord. 343-04, passed 6-21-2004;
Ord. 366-05, passed 3-7-2005)



§ 118.26  INSURANCE; BOND; INDEMNIFICATION.



   (A)   A licensee must have the following insurance coverage in force
at all times during the license period:



      (1)   Workmen's compensation insurance to meet all state
requirements.



      (2)   General comprehensive liability insurance not less than
$1,000,000 per occurrence, $1,000,000 per aggregate limit, and $1,000,000 for
property damage; and



      (3)   Automobile liability insurance covering all vehicles as
specified in the license but not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence,
$1,000,000 per aggregate limit, and $1,000,000 for property damage; and



      (4)   Any additional types of insurance and coverage amounts
as the town may require. All insurance policies must be with sureties
qualified to do business in the state and in a form approved by the Town
Attorney. The town may accept a self-insurance plan that assures comparable
protection in lieu of these insurance policies.



   (B)   To ensure the licensee's performance of license obligations, a
licensee must have in force at all times during the license period, a bond in
a form approved by the Town Attorney, consisting of cash, an irrevocable
letter of credit, or a performance bond. A performance bond must be provided
by a surety qualified to do business in the state. The bond must be to the
benefit of the town or to other parties as necessary to ensure the faithful
performance and discharge of obligations imposed by law and the license
agreement. Except for an incumbent licensee, the minimum bond amount must not
be less than $250,000.



   (C)   A licensee must, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, hold
harmless, and defend the town, its officials, boards, commissions, agents,
and employees, against any claims, suits, causes of action, proceedings and
judgments for damages or equitable relief arising out of the construction,
maintenance, or operation of its cable system regardless of whether the act
or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by the
license. This requirement includes claims arising out of copyright
infringement or a failure by the licensee to secure consent from the owner,
authorized distributor, or licensee of a program to be delivered by the cable
system.



   (D)   In an overbuild situation, the town may require written
agreements from a new provider or overbuilder to indemnify the incumbent for
any damages or outages the incumbent experiences arising from the
construction and maintenance if the overbuilder's or new licensee's
respective systems. The town may also require mutual indemnification from all
providers for any damage to facilities and services caused by construction or
maintenance of their respective cable systems.



   (E)   To the fullest extent permitted by law, licensee shall defend,
indemnify and hold harmless the town, its agents, officers, officials and
employees from and against all tort claims, damages, losses and expenses
(including but not limited to attorney fees, court costs, and the cost of
appellate proceedings), relating to, arising out of, or alleged to have
resulted either wholly or in part from the acts, errors, mistakes, omissions,
work or services of the licensee, its agents, employees, contractors or
subcontractors in the performance of this agreement, and regardless of
whether or not such claim, damages, loss or expenses are caused in part by
the town. By law, the town and its employees may not be indemnified and held
harmless in cases where the town or its employees cause willful damage or
loss to a system, and may also be responsible for such claims, damages and
losses, should they occur.



   (F)   Licensee's duty to defend, hold harmless and indemnify the
town, its agents, officers, officials and employees shall arise in connection
with any tort claims, damages, losses or expenses that are attributable to
bodily injury, sickness, disease, death, or injury to, impairment, or
destruction of property including loss of use resulting there from, caused
either wholly or in part by licensee's acts, errors, mistakes, omissions,
work or services in the performance of this agreement including any employee
of the licensee or any other person for whose acts, errors, mistakes,
omissions, work or services the licensee may be legally liable, and
regardless of whether or not such claim, damages, losses or expenses are
caused in part by the town.



   (G)   The amount and type of insurance coverage requirements set
forth herein will in no way be construed as limiting the scope of the
indemnity in this division.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. V, § 18-309)  (Ord. 343-04, passed 6-21-2004;
Ord. 366-05, passed 3-7-2005)



§ 118.27  MINIMUM FACILITIES AND SERVICES.



   (A)   The following minimum requirements for facilities and services
apply to all licenses:



      (1)   A cable system must have a minimum capacity of 90 video
channels available for immediate or potential use.



      (2)   “EG” channels or educational and government
channels: A cable system must dedicate or set aside capacity, equipment and
operation of access channels for programming, content and use by government
and educational institutions as required by federal law. The licensee must
provide information on all access channels in its annual report under §
118.29(A).



         (a)   A cable system must provide up to two access
channels, which will be individually designated by the town for educational
or governmental access. The town may require the licensee to make a
reasonable contribution to capital costs for access studios and related
equipment and facilities if the standard channels and equipment are already
in place or need to be upgraded. All licensees are to provide, at no charge
to the town, modulators, processors, and all necessary transmission equipment
for these channels and agree to design the system to accommodate the desired
connections from the town hall to all headends throughout the town systems to
all customers.



         (b)   Licensees shall also provide, at no charge, prompt
and regular maintenance and replacement of any cables, amplifiers and other
distribution equipment used for the educational and governmental channels,
except for if the town or educational institution desires relocation of the
primary points of origin, the town or educational institution shall bear the
cost of such relocation. Licensees shall also provide programming and
studio/production training or consulting support at no cost to either entity
once the channels become operational.



         (c)   Capital grant provisions: Licensees shall provide
funding to the town and educational institution to:



            1.   Purchase or otherwise furnish all necessary
equipment not otherwise furnished in the above section in an amount not to
exceed $7,500 lump sum per entity; and



            2.   Provide a capital investment fee of $.50 per
customer, per month for the maintenance, support, upgrade and equipment lease
payments necessary of the educational and government channels; and



            3.   Provide the ability to lease (at cost) or
purchase from licensee any other equipment the town or educational
institution deems necessary to establish and operate such access throughout
the community.



         (d)   Service to all public buildings owned and operated
by the town and the Florence Unified School District. Licensee will provide
all service drops without charge to the town and details (including locations
of such facilities) are to be set forth in the license agreement.



      (3)   Emergency notification system: A licensee must design
its system to allow the town to interrupt cable service in an emergency to
deliver necessary information to subscribers in accordance with FCC rules.
The system shall be installed and operated with an emergency alert system in
compliance with the rules of the Federal Communications Commission and the
state “Emergency Alert System Operation Plan” (“state plan”), as
amended from time to time, provided, however, that, notwithstanding any such
FCC or state rules, the system shall be configured such that, in the event of
a local emergency as reasonably determined by the town, the town shall be
able to interrupt, to the extent not prohibited by FCC regulations or the
state plan, audio and video signals distributed over the system for the
delivery of appropriate signals necessitated by such emergency. The emergency
override system will be operated in accordance with the license agreement,
and rules and regulations issued by the town as permitted by applicable law
and as amended from time to time.



      (4)   Interconnection: A cable system must be able to permit
competitor interconnect and sharing in the capacity and/or transmission of
“EG” channels and the emergency notification system requiring minimal
system compatibility and limited interoperability. Unless otherwise expressly
set forth otherwise in a license agreement, a licensee shall cooperate with
other grantees in making available their signal distribution capabilities if
one operator should so request. The expense of labor and material to
effectuate such a juncture shall be the responsibility of the licensee
requiring such services, who shall also indemnify and hold harmless the
furnishing licensee from all damages and liabilities whatsoever stemming from
the requesting grantee's use thereof. Further, unless otherwise expressly
exempted in a license agreement, a licensee shall interconnect its system
with any or all other systems located in the town upon the request of the
town, provided that the town shall not require a licensee to interconnect
with other systems if the town and the licensee reasonably determine that
such interconnect is technically and economically infeasible. Upon receiving
the request of the town to interconnect, a licensee shall immediately
initiate negotiations with the other affected system or systems in order that
technical details are resolved and that costs may be shared on an equitable
basis.



      (5)   Co-location and joint trenching: see construction
standards in § 118.33.



   (B)   The town may require that a license exceed the minimum
requirements set forth in division (A) if so designated in the license.



   (C)   The town may waive minimum requirements set forth in division
(A) where the applicant demonstrates that a waiver is in the public interest
or is unduly burdensome to the operation of their system.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. V, § 18-310)  (Ord. 343-04, passed 6-21-2004;
Ord. 366-05, passed 3-7-2005)



§ 118.28  LICENSE APPLICATION AND PROCESSING FEES.



   (A)   Application fee: Each application for a license to be granted
under the authority of this chapter shall be accompanied by a non-refundable
filing fee in the amount specified below, by a certified or cashier's check
made payable to the town. Nonrefundable filing fees for initial license,
transfer or change of ownership, license and modification (see the Town of
Florence Schedule of Fees).



   (B)   A licensee, fee: The licensee shall pay the town no less than
5% of the licensee's gross revenues from all sources attributable to
operations of the licensee within its license area during the period of its
license. A licensee must pay the license fee due to the town for the
preceding quarter within 30 days of the end of that quarter.



   (C)   Processing fee: As stated in § 118.25(J), to recover the
town's expense in reviewing license applications, every license application
is subject to a license processing fee in an amount not to exceed the town's
reasonable costs, less the amount of the application filing fee. The
processing fee is the cost associated with reviewing and processing the
application and license request. Within 30 days of the date the grant of the
license is approved by the Council, the town must notify the approved
applicant of the amount of the license acceptance fee and its methods of
calculation.



   (D)   Any payment of license fees to adjust for a shortfall in the
quarterly payments for the preceding year must be made no later than the
filing date for the annual financial statements as specified in division (D)
of this section. An adjustment for any overpayment will be credited in one or
more subsequent quarterly payments as determined appropriate by the Finance
Director.



   (E)   Unless a license agreement provides otherwise, a licensee must
file with the town within 30 days of the end of each calendar quarter, a
comprehensive report including a current financial statement showing the
gross revenues received by the licensee during the preceding quarter and the
number of subscribers.



   (F)   A licensee must file within 45 days of the end of its fiscal
year, the licensee's or the licensee parent's annual financial statements for
the preceding year audited by a certified public accountant. The licensee
will bear the cost of the preparation of all financial statements.



   (G)   The town may inspect and audit any books and records relevant
to the calculation of gross revenues, and recompute any amounts determined to
be payable under the license. The reasonable cost of the audit, up to the
amount determined to be due to the town, will be borne by the licensee if the
annual payment to the town for the preceding year is increased by more than
5% as a result of the audit.



   (H)   In the event that a license payment is not received by the
town on or before the due date, the payment shall be deemed delinquent, and
subject to a late fee. The licensee will pay a late charge of 5% of the
amount of the payment, and interest will be charged from the due date at the
annual interest rate then charged for unpaid federal income taxes. Interest
and late charges will not be imposed for any payment necessary as a result of
the yearly adjustment provided for in division (B) of this section, if the
payment to correct for a shortfall does not exceed 10% of the total payments
made during the year. In the event such payment exceeds 10% of the total
payments made during the year, the licensee will be liable for interest and
late charges for the entire amount due. Licensee shall be responsible for
payment or reimbursement of audit expenses.



   (I)   When a license terminates for any reason, the licensee must
file with the town within 90 days of the date the license operations stop an
audited financial statement showing the gross revenues received by the
licensee since the end of the previous fiscal year. Adjustments must be made
at that time for license fees due to the date that the licensee's operations
ceased.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. V, § 18-311)  (Ord. 343-04, passed 6-21-2004;
Ord. 366-05, passed 3-7-2005)



§ 118.29  QUARTERLY AND FINANCIAL RECORDS.



   (A)   All notices and communications from a licensee to the Town
Council pursuant to this chapter or a license agreement shall be sent to the
Town Manager unless the licensee is otherwise directed. All legal filings
shall be sent to the Town Clerk, or as required by law.



   (B)   Within 45 days of the close of its fiscal year, a licensee
must file with the town an annual report that includes the information
required in the license agreement.



   (C)   A licensee must maintain a complete set of books and records,
relevant to its obligations under the license, available for inspection by
the town during normal business hours.



   (D)   The Town Manager, as the authorized signator, or designee, may
request information of a proprietary nature from the licensee as permitted in
Section 631 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 551) and such information must be
submitted to the town under this chapter. Public access to such information
or inspection or the town's ability to withhold such information is subject
to Arizona Revised Statutes.



   (E)   Quarterly reports: Unless this requirement is waived, in
writing, in whole or in part, by the town, no later than ten business days of
the close of each calendar quarter, the licensee shall submit a written
report to the town, in the form directed by the town which shall include:



      (1)   A summary of the previous quarter's activities in the
development of the cable system, including, but not limited to the
descriptions of services begun or dropped, the number of subscribers gained
or lost for each category of service, the number of pay units sold, the
number of subscribers using converters, the amount collected monthly
includable in gross revenues, and the character and extent of the services
rendered to users, including leased access channel users, new channels and
changes to service;



      (2)   A summary of complaints, identifying both the number and
nature of the complaints received and an explanation of their dispositions,
as such records are kept by the licensee. Where complaints involve recurrent
problems, the nature of each problem and the corrective actions taken shall
be identified;



      (3)   A summary illustrating the number of service calls
received by type during the prior quarter, and the percentage of service
calls compared to the subscriber base by type of complainant;



      (4)   A summary illustrating the number of outages and service
'malfunctions' (major and minor) for the prior month, and identifying
separately, each planned outage, the time it occurred, its duration and the
estimated service area and number of subscribers affected; each unplanned
outage, the time it occurred, its duration and the estimated service area and
number of subscribers affected; and the total hours of outages and service
degradations as a percentage of total hours of the cable system operation;



      (5)   A current list of officers and members of the board of
directors or similar controlling body of the licensee and any affiliates;



      (6)   An organizational chart illustrating all corporations,
partnerships and or other persons with more than a 5% ownership interest in
the licensee, stating the nature of the ownership interests;



      (7)   Copies of detailed current maps in the format requested
from the town, depicting the location of all cable plant, nodes, trunk lines,
transmission lines and all changes from the most recent prior update;



      (8)   A current emergency contact and notification list within
30 effective days of the report; and



      (9)   An update concerning emerging issues affecting or
involving services and service delivery including; and



      (10)   Other information that the town may require.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. V, § 18-312)  (Ord. 343-04, passed 6-21-2004;
Ord. 366-05, passed 3-7-2005)



§ 118.30  CUSTOMER SERVICE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   A licensee must maintain a conveniently located business
office open during normal business hours with a listed local telephone number
and a sufficient number of telephone lines to allow reasonable access by
subscribers and members of the public. When the business office is closed,
the licensee must have an answering machine or service to take complaints and
inquiries.



   (B)   A licensee must have personnel and equipment available at all
times to locate and correct major system malfunctions. Major system
malfunctions must be corrected without delay. Corrective action for all other
malfunctions must be initiated as provided in the license agreement but not
later than the next business day after the subscriber service call is
received. Corrective action must be completed as promptly as possible.



   (C)   A license agreement must include procedures to investigate and
resolve all complaints, including those regarding the quality of service and
equipment malfunction.



   (D)   A licensee must provide each subscriber, at the time cable
service is installed, written instructions for placing a service call, filing
a complaint, or requesting an adjustment. These instructions must include the
licensee's name, address, and telephone number and the name, address, and
telephone number of the designated recipient of complaints at town hall. Each
subscriber must also be provided with a schedule of the subscriber's rates
and charges, a copy of the service contract, delinquent subscriber disconnect
and reconnect procedures, and a description of any other relevant licensee
subscriber policies. The town shall receive all forms describing customer
service policies and procedures when they are distributed to subscribers. All
forms must be conspicuously posted in the licensee's local business office.



   (E)   A licensee may interrupt service on the cable system only for
good cause and, except in emergency situations, only after prior notice to
subscribers and the town of any significant anticipated service interruption.
Any interruption must be for the shortest time possible.



   (F)   A licensee must maintain a complete record of service
complaints received and action taken. These records must be open to the town
for inspection during normal business hours, subject to applicable law,
including privacy laws. A quarterly summary of such records must be submitted
to the town, and more frequently at the town's request by all licensees. A
licensee must maintain a complaint records for three years from the date of
the complaint.



      (1)   A licensee must promptly remove all its facilities and
equipment from the subscriber's premises if service is terminated and the
subscriber requests removal.



      (2)   Notwithstanding subsection (1), a licensee may
disconnect and abandon facilities and equipment where removal is impractical,
such as with buried cable or internal wiring.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. V, § 18-313)  (Ord. 343-04, passed 6-21-2004;
Ord. 366-05, passed 3-7-2005)



§ 118.31  SERVICE DISCRIMINATION AND EXCLUSIVE PROGRAMMING AGREEMENTS
PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Unless approved by the town and to the extent consistent with
federal law, a licensee must not, in its rates or charges, or in the
availability of the services or facilities of its system, or in any other
respect, grant undue preferences or advantages to any subscriber or potential
subscriber, or to any user or potential user, nor subject any of these
persons to any undue prejudice or any disadvantage.



   (B)   A licensee must have a uniform rate structure for its services
throughout the license area as required by the Cable Act and FCC rules. If
the town is certified to regulate local cable TV rates with the FCC (see Form
328 entitled “Certification of Franchising Authority to Regulate Basic
Cable Service Rates and Initial Finding of Lack of Effective Competition”),
any adjustments or proposed adjustments to cable TV rates as part of a
package or bundled service offering, including discounted cable TV rates,
shall be approved by the Town Council.



   (C)   A licensee must not deny, delay, or otherwise burden service
or discriminate against subscribers or users on the basis of age, race,
religion, color, sex, sexual orientation, handicap, national origin, martial
status, or geographic location, except for discounts for the elderly and
handicapped.



   (D)   A licensee shall not deny cable service to any potential
subscriber because of the income of the residents of the area in which the
subscriber resides.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. V, § 18-314)  (Ord. 343-04, passed 6-21-2004;
Ord. 366-05, passed 3-7-2005)



§ 118.32  SUBSCRIBER PRIVACY AND UNAUTHORIZED RECEPTION.



   (A)   A licensee must protect the privacy of all subscribers under
Section 631 of the Cable Act. A licensee must not condition subscriber
service on the subscriber's grant of permission to disclose information,
which, cannot be disclosed without the subscriber's explicit consent under
federal law.



   (B)   A person must not make any unauthorized connection, whether
physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, or attach
any unauthorized device to any cable, wire, microwave or other component of a
licensed cable television system, to intercept, receive or use any video,
voice or data signal transmissions over a cable television system, unless
such connection, interception, reception or use is authorized by the licensee
or other person having the lawful right to authorize the connection,
interception, reception or use. A violation of this division is a class 2
misdemeanor offense and is also punishable pursuant to A.R.S. § 13-3709(A).



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. V, § 18-315)  (Ord. 343-04, passed 6-21-2004;
Ord. 366-05, passed 3-7-2005)



§ 118.33  CONSTRUCTION AND USE OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   (A)   It is the policy of the town to require construction of cable
systems designed to serve subscribers in an area licensed by the town as
rapidly and expeditiously as possible. The licensee shall diligently pursue
and obtain all necessary permits from the appropriate governmental agencies,
utility companies, and others as necessary to comply with the provisions of
this chapter and other federal, state and town laws, codes, ordinances and
resolutions.



   (B)   A cable system shall be constructed pursuant to a construction
timetable specified in the license agreement.



   (C)   The town may require licensee to report on construction
progress and provide information showing how the construction schedule is
being met.



   (D)   Prior to commencement of construction of the system, the
licensee shall provide the technical specifications, in adequate detail, to
be utilized in the construction of the proposed cable system. At such time
that the licensee applies for a permit to construct a portion of the system,
the licensee shall submit to the Public Works Department, a detailed site
plan or map showing the proposed location of that portion of the system and
the relationship of that portion of the system to all existing roadway
systems, with sufficient information for the Public Works Department to issue
the right-of-way permit, and to inspect the work being performed in the
public easements and public rights-of-way. Upon completion, the applicant
shall file “as-built” plans with the town in both hard copy and, if
requested by the town, electronic mapping format compatible with the town's
current electronic mapping format, to the extent that the provider has such
capability, showing the detailed location of all underground cable plant and
active electronics, including but not limited to, all transmitting and
receiving pickup locations, the fiber and coaxial plant, and coaxial
amplifiers and pedestal locations.



   (E)   A licensee must use, with the owner's permission, existing
poles, conduits or other facilities whenever possible. Copies of agreements
for use of poles, conduits or other facilities must be filed with the town as
required by the license agreement.



   (F)   All transmission lines, equipment and structures, including
poles, shall be installed and located to cause minimum interference with the
rights and reasonable convenience of property owners.



   (G)   Suitable safety devices and practices as required by local,
town, state and federal laws, regulations, and permits must be used during
construction, maintenance, and repair of a cable system.



   (H)   A licensee must remove, replace, or modify at its own expense,
any of its facilities in a public right-of-way when the town requires it to
do so, to allow the town to change, maintain, repair or improve a public
thoroughfare as long as such requirement also applies to all other utilities
including telephone electric and gas.



   (I)   The licensee must put the cable underground at its expense on
streets and roads where both electrical and telephone utility wiring are
underground, and must move the cable underground after initial installation
when electrical and telephone utility wiring are moved underground. The
licensee must put the cable underground between a street or road and a
subscriber's residence if both electrical and telephone utility wiring are
underground. A licensee may install aerial cables if either electric or
telephone utility underground installation is unavailable and licensee agrees
to pay any additional costs for licensees permits for such aerial
installation.



   (J)   A licensee must obtain any required permits before starting
construction work on public and private property and must restore the public
and private property to their former condition after construction is
completed. The town, or private property owner may, after prior written
notice to the licensee, repair any damage done by the licensee at the
licensee's expense if restoration is not satisfactorily performed within a
reasonable time.



   (K)   Subject to the supervision and direction of the town, a
licensee may trim trees within public rights-of-way at its own expense as
necessary to protect its wires and facilities. A licensee may trim trees on
private property with the consent of the property owner.



   (L)   At the request of any person holding a valid building moving
permit and upon sufficient notice, the licensee must temporarily raise, lower
or cut its wires as necessary to facilitate a move. The direct expense of
these temporary changes, including standby time, must be paid by the permit
holder. The licensee may require payment in advance.



   (M)   Co-location and joint trenching:



      (1)   Licensee shall cooperate with other communications
providers in making available its signal distribution capabilities if another
operator or the town should so request. The expense of labor and material to
effectuate such juncture shall be the responsibility of the party requiring
such services, who shall indemnify and hold harmless the furnishing licensee
from all damages and liabilities whatsoever stemming from the requesting
licensee's use thereof.



      (2)   Licensee shall cooperate with the town and all other
persons with authority from the town to occupy and use the public
rights-of-way in the coordination and construction activities and
joint-trenching projects, and shall provide the town with a proposed
construction schedule in, around or that may affect the public rights-of-way.
The Town Engineer shall coordinate all construction locations, activities,
and schedules to minimize public inconvenience, disruption, or damage to the
public rights-of-way of the town.



      (3)   A licensee shall utilize, after obtaining the owner's
permission, existing poles, conduits or such other facilities whenever
feasible and shall make its own facilities available for other licensees or
other users of the streets on reasonable terms. Nothing in this section,
however, shall be interpreted as to grant the right to use any existing
easement or to utilize any poles, conduits, easements, or other facilities
without the owner's permission. Underground streets, sidewalk and driveway
crossings not using existing conduits shall be bored unless specific town
approval is received. A copy of written authorization for any licensee to use
facilities other than their own shall be made available for review with the
town within five business days after the request. The licensee may install
its own poles only when approved by the town and then subject to whatever
reasonable terms and conditions the town requires.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. V, § 18-316)  (Ord. 343-04, passed 6-21-2004;
Ord. 366-05, passed 3-7-2005)



§ 118.34  TECHNICAL STANDARDS.



   (A)   Guidelines for system facilities, equipment, and services. The
following performance guidelines shall serve as the initial minimum
guidelines for the design, installation, maintenance and operation of the
system:



      (1)   Compliance with FCC rules.



         (a)   The system shall meet FCC requirements as set
forth in (but not limited to) 47 C.F.R. Part 76 or as amended. If federal law
is subsequently amended or minimum technical specifications are no longer
mandated by the FCC, the technical specifications in effect at the time of
adoption of the license agreement shall govern.



         (b)   Should the FCC promulgate amended technical
requirements which exceed the performance guidelines set forth within this
license agreement, licensee shall operate its system in compliance with such
FCC requirements.



         (c)   All maintenance performed on the cable system by
the licensee shall be in accordance with FCC regulations governing technical
performance and operating standards, currently in effect or hereinafter
amended.



      (2)   Continuous 24-hour operation. The system shall operate
continuously for 24 hours daily without severe material degradation or
malfunction of signal except immediately following extraordinary storms which
adversely affect utility services or which damage major system components to
the extent technically feasible under the circumstances.



      (3)   Scheduled testing. For any scheduled testing of the
system which causes any substantial interruption to subscriber's service, the
licensee must make reasonable efforts to notify subscribers within 30 days
prior to such testing and possible interruption. This notification includes
but is not limited to notification by character generator on the cable
system, or neighborhood flyers in the areas to be tested. Insofar as
feasible, licensee shall voluntarily interrupt the provision of cable service
only with good cause and for the shortest time possible during periods of
minimum cable system use.



      (4)   Testing for compliance with FCC standards. Following
construction of the system, tests shall be conducted on this system which
shall meet FCC Cable Television System Technical Performance Standards of 47
C.F.R. § 76.601 through and including § 76.630. On request of the licensing
authority, the licensee shall provide copies of test results and
documentation of any required repairs determined to be needed by the required
tests.



      (5)   Maintenance of the system in good working order. Until
the termination of this agreement and the satisfaction in full by the
licensee of its obligations under this agreement and this chapter, in
consideration of the license, the licensee agrees that it will maintain all
of the material properties, assets and equipment of the system, and all such
items added in connection with any upgrade, in good repair and proper working
order and condition throughout the term of this agreement.



      (6)   Compliance with zoning and construction codes. Licensee
shall comply with the terms of all applicable and lawful zoning, building and
other ordinances, regulations, codes, guidelines and laws controlling the
location or construction of towers, poles, cables, amplifiers, conduits and
other facilities owned, leased and otherwise used by licensee for the cable
system. This includes requirements to obtain applicable permits and to pay
applicable and lawful plan review, permit and inspection fees. No
construction will take place in public easements or public rights-of-way
prior to any required permitting by and approval of the County Public Works
Department, which shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed.



      (7)   Emergency override. The system shall be installed and
operated with an emergency alert system in compliance with the rules of the
Federal Communications Commission and the state “Emergency Alert System
Operation Plan (“state plan”),” as amended from time to time, provided,
however, that, notwithstanding any such FCC or state rules, the system shall
be configured such that, in the event of a local emergency as reasonably
determined by the town, the town shall be able to interrupt, to the extent
not prohibited by FCC regulations or the state plan, audio and video signals
distributed over the system for the delivery of appropriate signals
necessitated by such emergency. The emergency override system will be
operated in accordance with the license agreement, and rules and regulations
issued by the town as permitted by applicable law and as amended from time to
time.



   (B)   Specifications of the system.



      (1)   General requirements. Within 90 days after the effective
date of the agreement, licensee shall provide to the licensing authority a
plan for construction of the system indicating, at least, a general overview
of the construction schedule.



      (2)   General description. Local cable communications systems
shall operate as a 750 MHZ system, or shall meet the interoperability
requirements of this chapter. It shall be two-way active and shall have a
return capacity of five to 40 MHZ. Whenever two or more systems (or proposed
systems) operate on separate frequencies, such systems shall be made
compatible and interoperable insofar that the operations of the EG channels
and emergency notification capabilities are not negatively or adversely
impacted, and the conditions and requirements of this chapter are achieved.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. V, § 18-317)  (Ord. 343-04, passed 6-21-2004;
Ord. 366-05, passed 3-7-2005)



§ 118.35  SECURITY DEPOSIT.



   (A)   The license must post with the town a security deposit,
performance bond, or irrevocable letter of credit in the amount specified in
the license agreement before the license is effective. The town must hold the
security deposit as security for:



      (1)   Faithful performance of all applicable provisions of law
and the license agreement;



      (2)   Compliance with all orders, permits, and directions of
the town; and



      (3)   Payment by the licensee of any claims, liens, or taxes
due to the town because of the construction, operation or maintenance of the
system.



   (B)   The town shall place any such security deposit in an interest
bearing account such as those in which the town general funds are located.
The interest will accrue to the benefit of the licensee but may not be
withdrawn. All interest is added to and becomes part of the original security
deposit during the term of the license.



   (C)   The town may immediately withdraw an appropriate amount,
including interest and penalties, from the security deposit if:



      (1)   After ten days notice the licensee fails to pay to the
town any fees or taxes due and unpaid, damages, or costs or expenses that the
town is compelled to pay by reason of any act or default of the licensee in
connection with this license, unless licensee contests the matter within the
ten-day notice period; or



      (2)   After 30 days notice to the licensee, the licensee fails
to comply with any provision of the license that the town reasonably
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of the security deposit. The
town must promptly notify the licensee of the amount and date of any
withdrawal.



   (D)   No automatic replenishment. If the amount is contested then
there needs to be a resolution of that issue first. The parties shall agree
to negotiate in good faith about any replenishment should the initial
security fund be depleted.



   (E)   The town must return the security deposit to the licensee
after the license is terminated if there is no outstanding default or unpaid
amounts owed to the town by the licensee.



   (F)   The rights reserved to the town with respect to the security
deposit are in addition to all other rights of the town under this chapter or
other law. An action, proceeding, or exercise of a right with respect to the
security deposit does not affect any other right the town may have.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. V, § 18-318)  (Ord. 343-04, passed 6-21-2004;
Ord. 366-05, passed 3-7-2005)



§ 118.36  ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.



   (A)   Notice of violation. The town shall provide licensee with a
detailed written notice of any license violation upon which it proposes to
take action, and a ten business day period within which licensee may:



      (1)   Demonstrate that a violation does not exist or to cure
an alleged violation; or



      (2)   If the nature of the violation prevents correction of
the violation within ten business days, to initiate a reasonable plan of
action to correct such violation (including a projected date by which it will
be completed) and notify the town of such plan of action.



   (B)   Default. If licensee fails to disprove or correct the
violation within ten business days following the date of notice of violation
or, in the case of a violation which cannot be corrected in ten business days
and licensee has failed to notify the town of the licensee's reasonable plan
of corrective action and to correct the violation within the specified time
frame, then the town may declare the licensee in default, which declaration
must be in writing. In the event that the town declares licensee in default,
the town shall have the right to institute legal proceedings to collect
damages from the date of declaration of default, or to exercise any other
rights and remedies afforded to the town in law or equity, provided, however,
that the town may institute revocation proceedings against licensee only
after declaration of default, pursuant to division (F) and only on the
grounds set forth therein.



   (C)   Hearing available to licensee. Within 15 days after receipt of
a written declaration of default from the town, licensee may request, in
writing, a hearing before the town or its agent, in a full public proceeding
affording due process. The hearing shall be held within 30 days of the
receipt of the request therefore and a decision rendered within ten days
after the conclusion of the hearing. Any decision shall be in writing and
shall be based upon written findings of fact.



   (D)   Appeal of default. Licensee may appeal a declaration of
default to arbitration.



   (E)   Procedures applicable to arbitration. Any arbitration held
pursuant to this chapter or the license shall be conducted as follows:



      (1)   Licensee and the town each shall, within 15 days of the
decision to proceed to arbitration, appoint one arbitrator experienced in the
cable television business, which arbitrators shall mutually select a third
arbitrator of similar qualifications.



      (2)   Within 30 days after appointment of all arbitrators and
upon 15 days written notice to the parties to the arbitration, the
arbitrators shall commence a hearing on the dispute.



      (3)   The hearing shall be recorded and may be transcribed at
the request of either the town or licensee.



      (4)   At the close of the hearings and within 30 days, the
arbitrators shall prepare written findings and serve such decision upon the
town and licensee.



      (5)   The decision of a majority of the arbitrators shall be
binding upon the parties to the arbitration.



      (6)   Either party may seek judicial relief to the
arbitrators' decision under the following circumstances:



         (a)   Either party fails to select an arbitrator;



         (b)   The arbitrators fail to select a third arbitrator;



         (c)   One or more arbitrator is unqualified;



         (d)   Designated time limits have been exceeded;



         (e)   The arbitrators have not proceeded expeditiously;
or



         (f)   Based upon the record, the arbitrators' decision
is arbitrary, capricious, unsupported by substantial evidence, an abuse of
discretion, or based upon a mistake of law.



         (g)   All costs of arbitration shall be borne equally by
the parties to the arbitration unless otherwise ordered by the arbitrators.



   (F)   Revocation. The town may revoke the license only after
declaration of default and only for defaults by licensee arising from the
following circumstances:



      (1)   Material misrepresentation by licensee to the town in
information required to be provided under the license.



      (2)   Licensee willfully or persistently violates any material
orders or rulings of any regulatory body having jurisdiction over the license.



      (3)   Licensee willfully fails to acquire the insurance
required by this chapter.



   (G)   Procedures governing revocation.



      (1)   The town shall give written notice to the licensee of
its intent to revoke the license and the lawful grounds therefore. Licensee
shall have 30 days from such notice to object, in writing, and to state its
reasons for such objection. In the event the town has not received a response
satisfactory to it, it may then proceed to place its request for termination
of the license at a Council meeting. The town shall cause to be served upon
the licensee, at least ten days prior to the time and place of such meeting,
a written notice of this intent to request such termination, and the time and
place of the meeting, notice of which shall be published by the town at least
once, ten days before such meeting in a newspaper of general circulation
within the town.



      (2)   In addition to the licensee's right to appeal any
declaration of default to arbitration under this section, if the town orders
the termination of the license, the licensee shall have the right to appeal
the determination of the town within 30 days to any agency or court of
competent jurisdiction for de novo review. The town's determination to
terminate the license shall not be effective pending final resolution of all
appeals under this section.



      (3)   The Council may, at its sole discretion, take any other
lawful action which it deems appropriate to enforce the town's rights under
the license in lieu of revocation of the license.



   (H)   Jurisdiction and venue. Any legal action, whether in law or
equity, and including any arbitration or other alternative dispute
resolution, commenced by either party to the license, shall be commenced in
the Superior Court of the state in the State of Arizona, Pinal County.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. V, § 18-319)  (Ord. 343-04, passed 6-21-2004;
Ord. 366-05, passed 3-7-2005)



§ 118.37  PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS.



   (A)   The town may hold a minimum of three performance evaluations
in public hearing settings during the term of each license. The Town Manager
may determine the times for the hearings and the issues that the licensee
must address in the hearings.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the Town Manager from
conducting other performance evaluations and audits in non-public hearing
settings as deemed necessary.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. V, § 18-320)  (Ord. 343-04, passed 6-21-2004;
Ord. 366-05, passed 3-7-2005)



§ 118.38  RENEWAL OF LICENSE.



   (A)   If a licensee initiates a formal license renewal process under
Section 626(a)—(g) of the Cable Act, the licensee must notify the town, at
least 30 months and no more than 36 months before the license expiration
date. When the town receives a notice from the licensee, or at any time at
the town's own initiative, the town shall take the following actions:



      (1)   The town shall review and evaluate the future
cable-related community needs and interests and the licensee's past
performance. The review and evaluation shall include opportunity for public
comment.



      (2)   On completion of the review and evaluation, the town
shall notify the licensee that it may file a renewal application. The notice
shall specify the information to be included in the renewal application and
the deadline for filing the application. The filing deadline shall not be
earlier than 30 days after the date of the notice. If the licensee does not
submit a renewal application by the specified date, the license may not be
renewed under this subsection.



      (3)   The town shall hold one or more public hearings on the
renewal application when the application is received or provide some other
procedure for public comment on the application.



      (4)   After the public hearing or comment period, the Town
Manager shall recommend to the council that it either:



         (a)   Renew the license, subject to the negotiation of a
license agreement satisfactory to the town and the licensee; or



         (b)   Issue a preliminary decision that the license
should not be renewed.



      (5)   The Council's action under division (A)(4) must be taken
within four months of the date of the renewal application notice to the
licensee under division (A)(2).



   (B)   In considering a renewal application, the town must consider
whether:



      (1)   The cable operator has substantially complied with the
material terms of the existing license and with applicable law;



      (2)   The quality of the cable operator's service, including
signal quality, response to consumer complaints, and billing practices has
been reasonable in light of community needs (but without regard to the mix or
quality, of cable services or other services provided over the system);



      (3)   The cable operator has the financial, legal, and
technical ability to provide the services, facilities, and equipment in its
proposal; and



      (4)   The cable operator's proposal is reasonable to meet the
future cable-related community needs and interests, taking into account the
cost of meeting the needs and interests.



   (C)   If a preliminary decision is made that a license should not be
renewed, at the request of the licensee or on its own initiative, the town
must commence an administrative proceeding under Section 626(c) of the Cable
Act parties to the hearing and the public must have 30 days after the
recommended decision is issued to comment. The Town Manager must recommend
that the Council grant of deny an application within 30 calendar days after
the deadline for receipt of comments.



   (D)   The Council must hold a public hearing on a renewal
application. After the public hearing, the Council must consider all of the
evidence, either grant or deny the renewal application by resolution, and
give the reasons for its determination in the resolution.



   (E)   The Council must hold a public hearing on any negotiated
license agreement prior to final Council action on the license. This may be
done in conjunction with the public hearing held under division (D).



   (F)   Notwithstanding divisions (A) through (C) in this section, a
licensee may submit a proposal for renewal of a license under Section 626(h)
of the Cable Act. The town must hold one or more public hearings or provide
some other procedure for public comment on the proposal. After the public
hearing or comment period, the Town Manager must recommend that the Council
grant or deny the license renewal and the terms and conditions of any
recommended renewal. A denial under this division shall not affect licensee's
renewal rights under Sections 626(a)—(g) of the Cable Act.



   (G)   The renewal of a license is not effective until the licensee
has followed the renewal process and paid the renewal fee. The town shall
notify the licensee of the amount of the renewal fee and procedures for
renewal.



   (H)   If the town denies the renewal of a license, the town may, on
the recommendation of the Town Manager and with the approval of the Council,
acquire ownership of the cable system or transfer ownership of the system to
another person. Any acquisition or transfer under this division must be at
fair market value, determined on the basis of the cable system valued as a
going concern.



   (I)   If the town does not renew a license, the town has the option
of:



      (1)   Purchasing the cable system;



      (2)   Requiring the license or surety to remove the facilities
and equipment at the licensee or surety's expense; or



      (3)   Beginning condemnation proceedings and permit the
facilities to remain until ownership has been determined or bond/ surety
collected.



   (J)   If the components of the cable system in, on or above the
town's rights-of-way are not removed within one year, the cable system will
be considered abandoned and becomes the property of the town.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. V, § 18-321)  (Ord. 343-04, passed 6-21-2004;
Ord. 366-05, passed 3-7-2005)



§ 118.39  TRANSFERS.



   (A)   The rights granted under the license may not be transferred,
assigned, sublet or subdivided in any way or through any mechanism, including
a sale or lease of the cable system or a sale or change in the control of the
licensee without the express prior permission of the town, except as
otherwise provided under federal law.



   (B)   The word “transfer” as used herein means a transaction in
which control of the licensee is transferred from one person or group of
persons acting in concert with another person or another group of persons
acting in concert. “Control” for purposes of this section shall mean
majority voting control of the licensee; provided that, any financing
arrangement, including but not limited to a mortgage or pledge, shall not be
deemed a “transfer”.



   (C)   An entity which seeks approval of a proposed transfer shall
file an application for approval of that transfer no later than 120 days
prior to the proposed effective date of the transfer. In making a
determination to approve or disprove the application, the town shall consider
the legal, financial, technical or other qualifications of the proposed
transferee to operate the cable system in the same manner required by the
town for a renewal or new license.



   (D)   The town shall have 120 days following the submission of the
application for transfer to render a decision. At the discretion of the Town
Manager, the town shall conduct a public hearing (if necessary) and if the
town does not render a decision within 120 days, the transfer shall be deemed
approved.



   (E)   Approval by the town of a transfer of a license does not
constitute a waiver or release of any of the rights of the town under this
chapter or the license agreement.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. V, § 18-322)  (Ord. 343-04, passed 6-21-2004;
Ord. 366-05, passed 3-7-2005)



§ 118.40  REVOCATION OR TERMINATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   A license may be revoked by the town on the recommendation of
the Town Manager and with the approval of the Council, for failure to
construct, operate, or maintain the cable system as required by this chapter
or the license agreement, or for some other material breach of this chapter
or the license agreement. If the town has issued a license specifically
conditioned upon the completion of construction or other specific obligations
by a specified date under § 118.35(C), failure of the licensee to complete
construction or comply with other specific obligations as required will
result in the automatic forfeiture of the license without further action by
the town. However, the town, at its discretion and for good cause shown by
the licensee, may grant an extension of time. The town must give a licensee
written notice that it is in material breach of this chapter or the license
agreement. If the licensee does not correct the breach within 30 days of the
notice, or corrective action is not being actively and expeditiously pursued,
the town may give written notice to the licensee of its intent to revoke the
license. The town must give the licensee written notice of the basis for a
revocation, stating its reasons.



   (B)   The Council must hold a public hearing, and then determine by
written resolution whether or not to revoke the license based the
recommendations of the Town Manager, information presented at the public
hearing, and other evidence in the record. The resolution must include
reasons for the Council's decision.



   (C)   The town may revoke any license 120 days after an assignment
for the benefit of creditors or the appointment of a receiver or trustee to
take over the business of the licensee, whether in a receivership,
reorganization, bankruptcy assignment for the benefit of creditors, or other
action or proceeding. The town must hold a public hearing before revoking a
license under this division. The town may not revoke a license under this
division if, during the 120-day period:



      (1)   The assignment, receivership, or trusteeship is vacated;
or



      (2)   The assignee, receiver, or trustee has fully complied
with the terms and conditions of this chapter and the license agreement and
has executed an agreement, approved by the court having jurisdiction,
assuming and agreeing to be bound by the terms, and conditions of the license.



   (D)   The town may revoke the license if there is a foreclosure or
other judicial sale of any of the facilities, equipment or property of a
licensee, by serving notice on the licensee and the successful bidder at the
sale. The license and all rights and privileges of the license will be
revoked 30 days after the town serves notice under this division unless:



      (1)   The town has approved a transfer of the license; and by
the terms and conditions of the license.



      (2)   The successful bidder has agreed with the town to assume
and be bound by the terms and conditions of the license.



   (E)   If the town revokes a license, or if for any other reason a
licensee abandons, terminates, or fails to operate or maintain service to its
subscribers, the town may:



      (1)   Require the former licensee to remove its facilities and
equipment at the licensee's or surety's expense, or at the expense of both,
after determining that the cable system cannot be economically maintained and
operated;



      (2)   Acquire ownership of the cable system at an equitable
market price on the recommendation of the Town Manager and with the approval
of the Council;



      (3)   After a public hearing, sell, assign, or transfer all or
part of the assets of a cable system abandoned by a licensee for the best
price offer obtainable. However, the legal, character, financial, technical,
and other qualifications of the purchaser must meet town approval. The town
must pay any consideration received in excess of the town's costs, and after
other creditors and subscriber claims have been satisfied, to the original
licensee.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. V, § 18-323)  (Ord. 343-04, passed 6-21-2004;
Ord. 366-05, passed 3-7-2005)



§ 118.41  CONTINUITY OF SERVICE MANDATORY.



   (A)   It is the right of all subscribers to receive all available
services from the licensee if their financial and other obligations to the
licensee are satisfied.



   (B)   If the license is terminated, the licensee must do everything
in its power to ensure that all subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted
service. The licensee must cooperate with the town to operate the system for
a transition period following termination as necessary to maintain continuity
of service to all subscribers. The transition period must not exceed 12
months without the licensee's written consent. During the transition period,
the cable system must be operated under terms and conditions to which the
town and the licensee agree, or on such other terms and conditions that will
continue, to the extent possible, the same level of service to subscribers
and that will provide reasonable compensation to the cable operator.



   (C)   If the licensee discontinues service to its subscribers
without town approval, the license may be terminated immediately, and the
town may take possession of all facilities and property, real and personal,
related to the cable system for the purpose of operating the system. The town
may undertake such operation itself or authorize operation by a contractor.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. V, § 18-324)  (Ord. 343-04, passed 6-21-2004;
Ord. 366-05, passed 3-7-2005)



§ 118.42  UNLAWFUL SOLICITATION OR ACCEPTANCE OF GIFTS.



   It is unlawful for any person to solicit, accept, or offer any gift,
favor, loan, service, promise, employment, or anything of value to a town
official or employee, or for a town official or employee to solicit or accept
anything of value, for the purpose of influencing the grant, modification,
renewal, transfer, or any other matter affecting a license or the
administration or enforcement of this chapter.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. V, § 18-325)  (Ord. 343-04, passed 6-21-2004;
Ord. 366-05, passed 3-7-2005)



§ 118.43  LIQUIDATED DAMAGES.



   (A)   It is within the authority of the town to impose liquidated
damages for a failure by licensee to comply with this chapter. A licensee who
fails to comply with this chapter or its license agreement shall result in
injuries to the town and the residents, businesses and institutions of the
town, the compensation for which will be difficult to ascertain and to prove,
and that the liquidated damages amounts the town may impose pursuant to this
chapter or a license agreement are not a penalty or forfeiture.



   (B)   In accordance with this chapter, the town may impose such
liquidated damages as follows:  Agreement shall result in injuries to the
town and the residents, businesses and institutions of the town, the
compensation for which will be difficult to ascertain and to prove, and that
the liquidated damages amounts the town may impose pursuant to this article
or a license agreement are not a penalty or forfeiture.



   (C)   In accordance with this chapter, the town may impose such
liquidated damages as follows:  Failure to comply with all sections within
this chapter shall be no more than $300 per day, for each day that such
failure continues, unless otherwise specified herein or within a license
agreement.



(Prior Code, Ch. 18, Art. V, § 18-326)  (Ord. 343-04, passed 6-21-2004;
Ord. 366-05, passed 3-7-2005)



CHAPTER 119: LICENSING OF MEDICAL MARIJUANA-RELATED FACILITIES



Section



   119.01   Purpose and intent



   119.02   Definitions



   119.03   License requirements



   119.04   Employee license



   119.05   Issuance and renewal of license



   119.06   Fees



   119.07   Inspection



   119.08   Expiration of license



   119.09   Suspension



   119.10   Revocation



   119.11   Transfer of license



   119.12   Injunction



§ 119.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to regulate medical
marijuana-related facilities in order to promote the health, safety, morals,
and general welfare of the citizens of the Town of Florence and to establish
reasonable and uniform regulations to reduce or eliminate the adverse
secondary effects from such medical marijuana-related facilities. Similarly,
it is not the intent nor the effect of this chapter to restrict or deny
access to medical marijuana-related facilities or to deny access by the
distributors of medical marijuana to their intended market.



(Ord. 556-11, passed 3-21-2011)



§ 119.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words
not defined may be located in the Arizona Revised Statues relating to medical
marijuana-related facilities.



   EMPLOYEE.  A person who performs any service on the premises of a
medical marijuana-related facility on a full-time, part-time, volunteer or
contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated as employee,
independent contractor, agent or otherwise and whether or not said person is
paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of the business.
EMPLOYEE does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or
maintenance of the premises or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery
of non medical marijuana-related goods to the premises.



   LICENSEE.  A person in whose name a license to operate a medical
marijuana-related facility has been issued, as well as the individual listed
as an applicant on the application for a license; and in the case of an
employee, a person in whose name a license has been issued authorizing
employment in a medical marijuana-related facility.



   MEDICAL MARIJUANA.  All parts of the genus cannabis whether growing or
not, and the seed of such plants that may be administered to treat or
alleviate a qualifying patient’s debilitating medical condition or symptoms
associated with the patient’s debilitating medical condition.



   MEDICAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION.  The process by which a person grows a
marijuana plant. A facility shall mean a building, structure or premises used
for the cultivation or storage of medical marijuana that is physically
separate and off-site from a medical marijuana dispensary or a medical
marijuana manufacturing facility.



   MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY.  A non-profit entity as defined in
Arizona Revised Statutes, that sells, distributes, transmits, gives,
dispenses, or otherwise provide medical marijuana to qualifying patients.



   MEDICAL MARIJUANA-RELATED FACILITY.  Includes any building, structure
or premises used for the cultivation, storage, or dispersal of medical
marijuana. A MEDICAL MARIJUANA-RELATED FACILITY shall include a medical
marijuana cultivation facility, a medical marijuana dispensary and a medical
marijuana manufacturing facility.



   MEDICAL MARIJUANA MANUFACTURING FACILITY.  A facility that produces
medical marijuana (cannabis) by the means of cooking, blending, or
incorporation into consumable goods.



   MEDICAL MARIJUANA QUALIFYING PATIENT.  A person who has been diagnosed
by a qualifying medical practitioner as having a debilitating medical
condition as defined in A.R.S. § 36-28.1.



   PERSON.  An individual, proprietorship, corporation, association or
other legal entity.



   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY.  Any of the offenses listed in A.R.S. §
36-28.1 as an “excluded felony offense.”



   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL.  Of a medical marijuana-related
facility, means and includes any of the following: the sale, lease, or
sublease of the business; the transfer of securities which constitute a
controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar
means; or the establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device
which transfers ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by
bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the
ownership or control.



(Ord. 556-11, passed 3-21-2011)



§ 119.03  LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   It is unlawful:



      (1)   For any person to operate a medical marijuana-related
facility without a valid medical marijuana-related facility business license
issued by the town pursuant to this chapter;



      (2)   For any person who operates a medical marijuana-related
facility to employ a person to work for the medical marijuana-related
facility who is not licensed as a medical marijuana-related facility’s
employee by the town pursuant to this chapter; and



      (3)   For any person to obtain employment with a medical
marijuana-related facility without having secured a medical marijuana-related
facility employee license pursuant to this chapter.



   (B)   An application for a license must be made on a form provided
by the town.



   (C)   All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions
of this chapter prior to issuance of a medical marijuana-related facility
business license. The application may request and the applicant shall provide
such information as to enable the town to determine whether the applicant
meets the qualifications established in this chapter.



   (D)   If a person who wishes to operate a medical marijuana-related
facility is an individual, the person must sign the application for a license
as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a medical marijuana-related
facility is other than an individual, each individual who has a 20% or
greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license as
applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under this chapter and each
applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted.



   (E)   The completed application for a medical marijuana-related
facility license shall contain the following information and shall be
accompanied by the following documents:



      (1)   If the applicant is:



         (a)   An individual, the individual shall state his or
her legal name and any aliases and submit proof that he or she is 21 years of
age;



         (b)   A partnership, the partnership shall state its
complete name, and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is
general or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if any;



         (c)   A corporation, the corporation shall state its
complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation
is in good standing under the laws of its state of incorporation, the names
and capacity of all officers, directors and principal stockholders, and the
name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered
office for service of process; or



         (d)   A limited liability company shall state the
company name and the names of all members who own a 20% or greater interest
in the capital or profits of the limited liability company. If the management
of the limited liability company is vested in a manager or managers, the
company shall also state the name of each person who is a manager of the
limited liability company;



      (2)   If the applicant intends to operate the medical
marijuana-related facility under a name other than that of the applicant, he
or she must state the medical marijuana-related facility’s name and submit
the required registration documents;



      (3)   Whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified
criminal activity as defined in this chapter, and, if so, the specified
criminal activity involved, the date, place, and jurisdiction of each;



      (4)   Whether the applicant has had a previous license under
this chapter or other similar medical marijuana-related facility ordinances
from another city or county denied, suspended or revoked, including the name
and location of the medical marijuana-related facility for which the permit
was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial,
suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant has been a partner in a
partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation
that is licensed under this chapter whose license has previously been denied,
suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the medical
marijuana-related facility for which the permit was denied, suspended or
revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation;



      (5)   Whether the applicant holds any other licenses under
this chapter or other similar medical marijuana-related facility ordinance
from another city or county and, if so, the names and locations of such other
licensed businesses;



      (6)   The location of the proposed medical marijuana-related
facility, including a legal description of the property, street address, and
telephone number(s), if any;



      (7)   The applicant’s mailing address and residential
address;



      (8)   The applicant’s driver’s license number, social
security number, and/or his or her state or federally issued tax
identification number;



      (9)   A copy of all documentation provided to the state as a
requirement for state licensing;



      (10)   Evidence that all conditions of approval as required by
a conditional use permit issued by the town have been met and are in
compliance; and



      (11)   A copy of the Arizona Transaction Privilege Tax (TPT)
identification number.



(Ord. 556-11, passed 3-21-2011)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.04  EMPLOYEE LICENSE.



   (A)   Before any applicant may be issued a medical marijuana-related
facility employee license, the applicant shall submit on a form to be
provided by the town the following information:



      (1)   The applicant’s name or any other name or aliases used
by the individual;



      (2)   Age, date and place of birth;



      (3)   Height, weight, hair and eye color;



      (4)   Present residence address and telephone number;



      (5)   Present business address and telephone number;



      (6)   Date, issuing state and number of driver’s permit or
other identification card information;



      (7)   Social security number; and



      (8)   Proof that the individual is at least 21 years of age.



   (B)   Attached to the application form for a medical
marijuana-related facility employee license as provided above, shall be the
following:



      (1)   A statement detailing the license history of the
applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of
the application, including whether such applicant previously operated or is
seeking to operate, in this or any other county, town, state or country or
has ever had a license, permit or authorization to do business denied,
revoked or suspended, or had any professional or vocational license or permit
denied, revoked or suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation or
suspension, state the name, the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction,
and describe in full the reason for the denial, revocation or suspension. A
copy of any order of denial, revocation or suspension shall be attached to
the application; and



      (2)   A statement whether the applicant has been convicted of
a specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter and, if so, the
specified criminal activity involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of
each.



   (C)   Upon the filing of an application for a medical
marijuana-related facility employee license, the application shall be
referred to the appropriate town departments for an investigation to be made
on such information as is contained on the application. The application
process shall be completed within 60 working days from the date the completed
application is filed. After the investigation, the town shall issue a
license, unless it is determined that one or more of the following findings
is true:



      (1)   The applicant has failed to provide information
reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form;



      (2)   The applicant is under the age of 21 years;



      (3)   The applicant has been convicted of a “specified
criminal activity” as defined in this chapter;



      (4)   The applicant has an open warrant for their arrest;



      (5)   The medical marijuana-related facility employee license
is to be used for employment in a business prohibited by local or state law,
statute, rule or regulation, or prohibited by a particular provision of this
chapter;



      (6)   The applicant has been denied a license by the town to
operate or work in a medical marijuana-related facility within the preceding
12 months or has had a medical marijuana-related facility operating license
revoked by the town; or



      (7)   The applicant has had a medical marijuana-related
facility employee license revoked by the town within two years of the date of
the current application. Denial, suspension or revocation of a license issued
pursuant to this section shall be subject to appeal as set forth herein.



(Ord. 556-11, passed 3-21-2011)



§ 119.05  ISSUANCE AND RENEWAL OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Within 60 working days after receipt of a completed medical
marijuana-related facility business application, the town shall approve or
deny the issuance of a license to an applicant. The town shall approve the
issuance of a license to an applicant unless it is determined that one or
more of the following findings is true:



      (1)   An applicant is under 21 years of age;



      (2)   An applicant is overdue in payment to the town of taxes,
fees, fines or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him or her in
relation to any business;



      (3)   An applicant has failed to provide information
reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form;



      (4)   An applicant has been denied a license by the town to
operate a medical marijuana-related facility within the preceding 12 months
or whose license to operate a medical marijuana-related facility has been
revoked within the preceding 12 months;



      (5)   An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal
activity defined in this chapter;



      (6)   The license fee required by this chapter has not been
paid;



      (7)   An applicant of the proposed establishment is in
violation of or is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this
chapter; or



      (8)   The applicant has an open warrant for their arrest.



   (B)   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of
the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the
address of the medical marijuana-related facility. All licenses shall be
posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the medical
marijuana-related facility so that they may be easily read at any time.



   (C)   A license granted pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to
annual renewal upon the written application of the applicant. Failure to meet
any criteria required by federal, state or local requirements shall be
grounds to deny the initial license application or any license renewals. The
renewal of the license shall be subject to the payment of the fee as set
forth herein.



(Ord. 556-11, passed 3-21-2011)



§ 119.06  FEES.



   (A)   Every application for a medical marijuana-related facility
(whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be
accompanied by an annual application and investigation fee per the Town of
Florence Fee Schedule.



   (B)   In addition to the application and investigation fee required
above, every medical marijuana-related facility that is granted a license
(new or renewal) shall pay to the town an annual non-refundable business
license fee per the Town of Florence Fee Schedule within 30 days of license
issuance or renewal.



   (C)   Every application for a medical marijuana-related facility
employee license (whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing
license) shall be accompanied by an annual non-refundable application,
investigation and license fee per the Town of Florence Fee Schedule.



(Ord. 556-11, passed 3-21-2011)



§ 119.07  INSPECTION.



   (A)   An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the
Police Department, Health Department, Fire Department, Zoning Department, or
other town departments or agencies to inspect the premises of a medical
marijuana-related facility for the purpose of insuring compliance with the
law, at any time it is occupied or open for business.



   (B)   A person who operates a medical marijuana-related facility or
his agent or employee commits a criminal offense punishable as provided in §
10.99 of the town code, if he or she refuses to permit such lawful inspection
of the premises at any time it is open for business.



(Ord. 556-11, passed 3-21-2011)



§ 119.08  EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Each license shall expire at the end of each calendar year and
may be renewed only by making application as provided herein. Application for
renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration date.



   (B)   If the town denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall
not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent
to denial, the town finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license
has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at
least 90 days have elapsed since the date the denial became final.



(Ord. 556-11, passed 3-21-2011)



§ 119.09  SUSPENSION.



   The town shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if
it determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has committed any
of the following:



   (A)   Violated or is not in compliance with any provision of this
chapter; or



   (B)   Refused to allow an inspection of the medical
marijuana-related facility as authorized by this chapter.



(Ord. 556-11, passed 3-21-2011)



§ 119.10  REVOCATION.



   (A)   The town shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension
occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months.



   (B)   The town shall revoke a license if it determines any of the
following:



      (1)   A licensee gave false or misleading information in the
material submitted during the application process;



      (2)   A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale
of an illicit controlled substance on the premises;



      (3)   A licensee knowingly operated the medical
marijuana-related facility during a period of time when the licensee’s
license was suspended; or



      (4)   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the town for any
privilege taxes or license fees past due.



   (C)   If the town revokes a license, the revocation shall continue
for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a medical marijuana-related
facility license for one year from the date the revocation became effective.
If, subsequent to revocation, the town finds that the basis for the
revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a
license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became
effective.



   (D)   After denial of an application, denial of a renewal of an
application, or suspension or revocation of any license, the applicant or
licensee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action in any
court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 556-11, passed 3-21-2011)



§ 119.11  TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall
a licensee operate a medical marijuana-related facility under the authority
of a license at any place other than the address designated in the
application.



(Ord. 556-11, passed 3-21-2011)



§ 119.12  INJUNCTION.



   A person who operates or causes to be operated a medical
marijuana-related facility without a valid license or in violation of any
part of this chapter is subject to suit for injunction as well as prosecution
for a criminal offense punishable as provided in § 10.99 of the town code.
Each day a medical marijuana-related facility operates in violation of any
part of this chapter is a separate offense or violation.



(Ord. 556-11, passed 3-21-2011)



CHAPTER 120:  SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES



Section



   120.01   Purpose and intent



   120.02   Definitions



   120.03   License required



   120.04   Small wireless facilities in the public right-of-way



   120.05   Application



   120.06   Rates and fees



§ 120.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The intent and purpose of this chapter is to facilitate the development
and installation of small wireless facilities in the Town of Florence to
supplement existing wireless communications networks and to increase capacity
in high demand areas, while simultaneously promoting and preserving the
health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the town and
protecting and preserving the aesthetic qualities of the natural and built
environment of the town. Through this chapter, the town seeks to balance the
need for increased wireless communications capacity with the need for
reasonable standards to preserve the aesthetic values of the town and to
ensure safe placement of small wireless facilities within the town
rights-of-way.



(Ord. 663-18, passed 8-20-2018)



§ 120.02  DEFINITIONS.



   The definitions contained in A.R.S. § 9-591 are incorporated by
reference and shall apply to this chapter as if fully set forth herein.



(Ord. 663-18, passed 8-20-2018)



§ 120.03  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No wireless provider shall install, maintain, construct, or
operate wireless facilities in any public highway or public right-of-way in
the town unless a license to use the right-of-way for wireless services has
first been granted to the provider by the Town Council under this chapter.



   (B)   A wireless provider desiring a license to occupy the
rights-of-way and other highways of the town to provide wireless services
shall file a proposal with the Town Manager in the form prescribed by the
town's Small Wireless Facilities Terms and Conditions and shall pay a fee
determined by resolution of the Mayor and Town Council pursuant to § 120.06
of this chapter.



(Ord. 663-18, passed 8-20-2018)



§ 120.04  SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   This section permits the installation of small wireless facilities in
the rights-of-way subject to A.R.S. §§ 9-591 et seq., and applicable
federal law, as follows.



   (A)   No monopoles, utility poles associated with small wireless
facilities, or small wireless facilities shall be collocated, installed,
modified, or replaced in the public right-of-way unless the following
requirements are met:



      (1)   An application is submitted to and approved by the town
pursuant to § 120.05;



      (2)   All town requirements as set forth in this chapter are
met;



      (3)   All other applicable codes and requirements are met;



      (4)   The town's Small Wireless Facilities Terms and
Conditions are met and a Wireless Facility License Agreement is signed; and



      (5)   A wireless facility permit is issued by the town.



   (B)   The installation and maintenance of monopoles in the public
right-of-way and small wireless facilities on utility poles in the public
right-of-way shall be subject to and comply with reasonable requirements,
including the Small Wireless Facilities Terms and Conditions, and any
site-specific requirements developed based upon consultation with the town
through the site review and permitting process.



   (C)   The installation and maintenance of monopoles in the public
right-of-way and small wireless facilities on utility poles or monopoles in
the public right-of-way shall be subject to rates and fees pursuant to §
120.06 of this chapter.



   (D)   In addition to the above requirements, the installation,
replacement, and/or modification of monopoles in the public right-of-way
shall be subject to the requirements of §§ 150.180et seq. of this code.



   (E)   In addition to the above requirements, the installation,
replacement, and/or modification of utility poles that exceed the greater of
either of the following, shall be subject to the requirements of §§
150.180et seq.



      (1)   Ten feet in height above the tallest existing utility
pole (excluding utility poles supporting only wireless facilities), that is
located within 500 feet of the proposed site for the new, replacement, or
modified pole within the same right-of-way if that existing pole was in place
on August 9, 2017, but the new or modified pole cannot be more than 50 feet
above ground level; or



      (2)   Forty feet above ground level.



   (F)   In addition to the above requirements, collocations of new
small wireless facilities that exceed ten feet above the utility pole or
wireless support structure (including existing monopoles in the right-of-way)
and exceed 50 feet above ground level shall be subject to the requirements of
§§ 150.180et seq. Small wireless facility collocations that do not exceed
the above dimensional requirements are exempt from zoning review.



(Ord. 663-18, passed 8-20-2018)



§ 120.05  APPLICATION.



   (A)   Prior to the collocation, installation, modification, or
replacement of any monopole, utility pole associated with wireless
facilities, or small wireless facility in the public right-of-way, the
wireless provider must complete and submit an application to the town.



   (B)   The town shall prescribe and provide a regular form of
application for use by applicants for permits required by this section. The
application shall include such information and details as the department
deems necessary to establish the exact location, nature, dimensions,
duration, and purpose of the proposed small wireless facility. If requested,
the applicant shall include maps, sketches, diagrams, or similar exhibits.
The applicant shall include proof of liability insurance. The town shall
process and review the application in compliance with the following:



      (1)   Within 20 days of receiving an application, the town
shall notify if the application is incomplete and identify the missing
information.



      (2)   Within 75 days of receiving a complete application, the
town must approve or deny the application (or the application is
automatically approved).



      (3)   With respect to a denied application, the town must:



         (a)   Document the basis for the denial;



         (b)   Accept a resubmitted application within 30 days of
denial (at no additional cost); and



         (c)   Approve or deny the resubmitted application within
30 days of receiving the revised application.



      (4)   A resubmitted application cannot be denied for a
deficiency not identified in the original denial from the town.



   (C)   The town shall determine if the application establishes that
the utility poles associated with wireless facilities, monopoles, and/or
small wireless facilities that are the subject of the application comply with
the following:



      (1)   Town design standards and guidelines;



      (2)   Town code provisions, ordinances, regulations,
requirements, policies, and guidelines regarding engineering and structural
design;



      (3)   Town code provisions, ordinances, regulations,
requirements, policies, and guidelines regarding undergrounding;



      (4)   Town code provisions, ordinances, regulations,
requirements, policies, and guidelines regarding public safety;



      (5)   Town code provisions, ordinances, regulations,
requirements, policies, and guidelines regarding spacing new utility poles;
and



      (6)   All other applicable town code provisions, ordinances,
regulations, requirements, policies, and guidelines to which the town is
authorized by law to subject small wireless facilities.



   (D)   If it is determined that the application does not establish
compliance with requirements of this section, then the application must be
denied.



(Ord. 663-18, passed 8-20-2018)



§ 120.06  RATES AND FEES.



   (A)   The Town Council shall, by ordinance or resolution, set and
amend any rate, rate component, charge, or fee authorized by state law for
the use of the public right-of-way and town utility poles in connection with
small wireless facilities including:



      (1)   Fees for conditional use permit applications;



      (2)   Fees for collocation applications;



      (3)   Fees for the use of the right-of-way;



      (4)   Rates for the use of the town's utility poles;



      (5)   Fees to recover legal costs resulting from enforcement
to any noncompliance including, but not limited to, administrative expenses,
investigation, testing, legal proceedings and filings, and continued
monitoring; and



      (6)   Other fees as the town may determine necessary to carry
out the requirements contained herein.



   (B)   All rates and fees set or amended pursuant to this chapter
shall be reasonable and shall not exceed the amounts permitted by state law.



   (C)   The town shall publish and make available its schedule of
rates and fees.



   (D)   These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this
chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable
by the town.



(Ord. 663-18, passed 8-20-2018)



TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      131.   OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC SAFETY



      132.   OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER



      133.   SALE OF PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCTS



      134.   GRAFFITI ENFORCEMENT AND REMOVAL



CHAPTER 130: GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   130.01   Searchlights



§ 130.01  SEARCHLIGHTS.



   It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to operate within
the municipality, any incandescent or arc type searchlight, beacon light or
similar lighting device designed to and capable of projecting a beam of light
into the sky for a distance in excess of one-half mile unless permission is
obtained from the Council. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
emergency searchlights or beacons operated pursuant to public authority.



(Prior Code, Ch. 11, Art. I, § 11-2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC SAFETY



Section




General Provisions




   131.01   Dangerous constructions



   131.02   Maintenance of wells, excavations and the like; restricted




Weapons




   131.15   Possession, firing or discharge of weapons prohibited



   131.16   Reckless handling



   131.17   Carrying of weapon at public event



 



   131.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 131.01  DANGEROUS CONSTRUCTIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or allow any signs,
billboards, awnings and other similar structures over or near streets,
sidewalks, public grounds or places frequented by the public, so situated or
constructed as to endanger the public safety.



(Prior Code, Ch. 11, Art. II, § 11-26)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.02 MAINTENANCE OF WELLS, EXCAVATIONS AND THE LIKE; RESTRICTED.



   Any person who shall maintain a well, cellar, pit or other excavation
of more than two feet in depth on any unenclosed lot, without substantial
curbing, covering or protection, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, Ch. 11, Art. II, § 11-27)




WEAPONS




§ 131.15  POSSESSION, FIRING OR DISCHARGE OF WEAPONS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to possess a weapon within any government
building or public recreation facility within the limits of the town. It
shall also be unlawful to fire or discharge any weapon, explosive or
incendiary device, air rifle or pistol, fire works, dart gun or sling shot
within the entire limits of the town except:



      (1)   As allowed pursuant to the provisions of A.R.S. Title
13, Chapter 4, §§ 13-401 et seq.;



      (2)   On a properly supervised range operated by a club
affiliated with the National Rifle Association, the Amateur Trapshooting
Association, the National Skeet Association or any other nationally
recognized shooting organization, any agency of the federal government,
state, county or town, or any public or private school, and in the case of
air or carbon dioxide gas operated guns, the guns may be fired on ranges set
up on private property and with adult supervision;



      (3)   In an area recommended as a hunting area by the State
Game and Fish Department, approved, posted and used as required by the Chief
of Police, but any such area may be closed when deemed unsafe by the Chief of
Police or the Director of the Game and Fish Department;



      (4)   For the control of nuisance wildlife by permit from the
State Game and Fish Department or the United States Fish and Wildlife Service;



      (5)   By special permit of the Chief of Police of the
municipality;



      (6)   As required by an animal control officer in the
performance of duties as specified in A.R.S. § 9-499.04; and



      (7)   A certified federal, state, county or municipal law
enforcement officer at all times or a federal, state or private corrections
or security officer while on or in performance of his or her duty as
prescribed by federal or state law.



   (B)   WEAPON means any device or substance designed for use to cause
or capable of causing death or serious physical injury, including all
FIREARMS as defined in A.R.S. § 13-3101(1) and (4), knives with a blade in
excess of three inches, EXPLOSIVES, as defined in A.R.S. § 13-3101(3) or
anything designed or intended to be used to create an explosion including
PROHIBITED WEAPONS as defined in A.R.S. § 13-3101(7).



   (C)   GOVERNMENT BUILDINGS shall include any structure owned or
leased by the town, the town unified school district, the county, the state
or the federal government.



   (D)   PUBLIC RECREATIONAL FACILITIES shall include all parks, play
grounds and community swimming pools, golf courses and club houses, whether
owned by a governmental or private entity.



(Prior Code, Ch. 11, Art. II, § 11-36)  (Ord. 289-00, passed 2-15-2000) 
Penalty, see § 131.99



Statutory reference:



   Discharge of firearm, see A.R.S. § 13-3107



§ 131.16  RECKLESS HANDLING.



   It is a misdemeanor for any person to recklessly or carelessly handle a
weapon.



(Prior Code, Ch. 11, Art. II, § 11-37)



§ 131.17  CARRYING OF WEAPON AT PUBLIC EVENT.



   Any person other than a peace officer on duty carrying a weapon, upon
entering any public place or attending a public event, may be required by the
operator of the establishment or the sponsor of the event, to remove his or
her weapon and place it in the custody of the operator of the establishment
or the sponsor of the event.



(Prior Code, Ch. 11, Art. II, § 11-38)



§ 131.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Every person convicted of a violation of § 131.15 shall
forfeit the weapon or other device or substance to the town and in addition
shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor, which carries a maximum sentence of
a fine of $2,500 and six months in jail.



(Prior Code, Ch. 11, Art. II, § 11-36)  (Ord. 289-00, passed 2-15-2000)



CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER



Section



   132.01   Curfew for minors



   132.02   Noise



   132.03   Offensive business



   132.04   Offensive premises



   132.05   Alcohol and drug incapacitation



   132.06   Public urination and defecation prohibited



 



   132.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Nuisances, see Chapter 93



§ 132.01  CURFEW FOR MINORS.



   (A)   Curfew established.  It shall be unlawful for any juvenile(s)
under the age of 18 years to idle or loiter upon the streets or public places
of the town between the following hours unless the child is accompanied by a
parent(s), guardian(s) or some person(s) of lawful age having custody of the
child:



      (1)   Between 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. on Sunday through
Thursday; and



      (2)   Between 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. on Friday, Saturday,
holidays and school intercession breaks.



   (B)   Parent(s)’ and guardian(s)’ responsibility.  It is
unlawful for the parent(s), guardian(s) or other adult person(s) having the
care, custody or supervision of a juvenile(s) to permit the juvenile(s) to
be, remain or loiter in, about or upon any place in the town away from the
dwelling house or usual place of abode of the juvenile(s). The provisions of
this section do not apply in the following situations:



      (1)   When the juvenile(s) is an emancipated minor;



      (2)   When the juvenile(s) is accompanied by the parent(s),
guardian(s) or other adult person(s) having the care, custody or supervision
of a juvenile(s);



      (3)   When the juvenile(s) is on reasonable legitimate and
specific family business or while participating in an organized and bona fide
school or community activity directed or permitted by the parent(s),
guardian(s) or other adult person(s) having the care, custody or supervision
of a juvenile(s); and



      (4)   When the juvenile(s) is involved in an emergency.



   (C)   Ignorance not a defense.  It shall not constitute a defense
that the parent(s), guardian(s) or other adult person(s) having the care,
custody or supervision of a juvenile(s) did not have actual knowledge of the
presence of the juvenile(s) in, about or upon any place in the town away from
the dwelling house or usual place of abode of the juvenile(s), if the
parent(s), guardian(s) or other adult person(s) having the care, custody or
supervision of a juvenile(s), in the exercise of reasonable care and
diligence, should have known of the aforementioned unlawful acts of the
juvenile(s).



   (D)   Parent(s)’ or guardian(s)’ duties upon demand for
custody.  In addition to any other powers he or she may have, any law
enforcement officer who arrests a juvenile(s) for violating any of the
provisions of this section is also empowered to demand of the parent(s),
guardian(s) or other adult person(s) having the care, custody or supervision
of a juvenile(s), that the parent(s), guardian(s) or other adult person(s)
having the care, custody or supervision of a juvenile(s) take the juvenile(s)
into their custody. If the parent(s), guardian(s) or other adult person(s)
having the care, custody or supervision of a juvenile(s) fails to respond and
take custody or is unavailable, the officer shall then be empowered to take
the juvenile home; provided, however, it shall be unlawful for any parent(s),
guardian(s) or other adult person(s) having the care, custody or supervision
of a juvenile(s) to willfully fail or refuse to take the juvenile(s) into
custody after the demand is made upon the person(s).



   (E)   Violation, penalty.



      (1)   Any juvenile who shall violate the provisions of this
section shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor, shall be subject to the
fine provided in § 10.99 and the proceedings shall be taken in accordance
with and pursuant to the juvenile code as contained in the A.R.S. §§ 8-201
et seq.



      (2)   Any parent(s), guardian(s) or other adult person(s)
having the care, custody or supervision of a juvenile(s) who shall violate
the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a Class 3
misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties provided in § 10.99.



(Prior Code, Ch. 11, Art. III, § 11-61)  (Ord. 196-95, passed 7-6-1995;
Ord. 231-97, passed 2-8-1997)  Penalty, see § 132.99



Statutory reference:



   Penalty for violation of curfew ordinances by juveniles, see A.R.S. §
8-323(F)



§ 132.02  NOISE.



   (A)   Purpose.  It is hereby declared to be the policy of the town
to prohibit excessive, unnecessary and annoying noises from all sources
subject to its police power. At and above certain levels, noises are
detrimental to the health and welfare of the citizens of the town and it is
in the best interest that the noises be systematically eliminated.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context indicates or required a different
meaning.



      EMERGENCY VEHICLE.  Vehicles of the fire, police and legally
authorized ambulances and emergency vehicles of state departments or any
political subdivisions thereof, and vehicles of public service corporations.



      EMERGENCY WORK.  Any work performed to prevent or alleviate
physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency which
has, or may result in, a disruption of service and which is necessary to
protect the health, safety and welfare of persons or property.



      MOTOR VEHICLE.  Any self-propelled vehicle operated within the
town, including but not limited to licensed or unlicensed vehicles,
automobiles, mini-bikes, go-carts and motorcycles.



   (C)   Excessive, unnecessary or offensive noise prohibited.  It
shall be unlawful for any person to make or continue, or cause or permit to
be made or continued, any excessive, unnecessary or offensive noise which
disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or
annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitivity residing in the area.



   (D)   Exemptions from noise level regulations.  The following uses
and activities shall be exempt from the provisions contained in this section:



      (1)   Heating and cooling equipment when it is functioning in
accordance with manufacturer's specifications and is in proper operating
condition provided that no unit may create an excessive, unnecessary or
offensive noise causing annoyance or discomfort to a reasonable person of
normal sensitivity within any sleeping or living area inside any dwelling
unit;



      (2)   Landscape maintenance equipment when it is functioning
in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications and with all mufflers
and noise reducing equipment in use and in proper operating condition;



      (3)   Non-amplified crowd noises resulting from activities
such as those planned by school, governmental or community groups, or
organized sports;



      (4)   Noises of safety signals, warning devices and emergency
pressure relief valves;



      (5)   Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle
when responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency;



      (6)   Noises resulting from emergency work as defined in
division (B) above;



      (7)   Noises from the normal operation of railroad trains;



      (8)   Noises from church chimes;



      (9)   Power plant equipment during normal operation;



      (10)   Noise created by a town vehicle, equipment or facility
while being operated for official use;



      (11)   Operation of agricultural equipment in connection with
farming operations; and



      (12)   Any aircraft operated in conformity with, or pursuant
to, federal law, federal air regulations or air traffic control instructions
issued pursuant to or within duly adopted federal air regulation, together
with any noise created by aircraft operated under, or pursuant to,
declaration of an emergency under federal air regulations.



   (E)   Loud radios, sound sets and the like.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a radio
receiving set, phonograph or sound producing or sound reproducing mechanism
within the town, at any time in such a manner as to create an excessive,
unnecessary or offensive noise such that a reasonable person of normal
sensitivity in the area is caused discomfort or annoyance.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit
to be operated any radio receiving set, phonograph or sound producing or
sound reproducing mechanism within the town in such a manner that the sound
from the radio set, phonograph, sound producing or sound reproducing
mechanism may be heard off of the premises upon which it is operated in such
a manner as to create an excessive, unnecessary or offensive noise such that
a reasonable person of normal sensitivity residing in the area is caused
discomfort or annoyance.



   (F)   Vehicular noise.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person within any
residential area of the town to repair, rebuild or test any motor vehicle in
such a manner as to create an excessive, unnecessary or offensive noise such
that a reasonable person of normal sensitivity residing in the area is caused
discomfort or annoyance.



      (2)   No person shall operate or cause to operate any motor
vehicle unless the exhaust system of the vehicle:



         (a)   Is free from defects which may cause sound level
magnification;



         (b)   Is equipped with a muffler; and



         (c)   Has not been modified in such a manner which will
amplify or increase the sound level emitted by the motor of any vehicle above
that emitted by a muffler originally installed on the vehicle as manufactured
for initial sale.



      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor
vehicle on any street or highway within the Town of Florence using or
operating with the assistance of exhaust brakes, jake brakes or similar
devices. It is rebuttal presumption that the use of engine braking, jake
brakes or similar devices in a residential area is a public nuisance in
violation of § 132.99.



   (G)   Construction of buildings and other projects.



      (1)   Noise limitations.  Subject to the provisions of
division (C) above, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate equipment
or perform any outside construction or repair work on buildings, structures
or projects, or to operate any pile driver, power shovel, pneumatic hammer,
derrick, power hoist or any other construction type device except within the
time periods specified below, unless an appropriate permit has been obtained
beforehand from the town.



      (2)   Construction start and stop times.



         (a)   Concrete work.  From April 15 to October 15,
inclusive, concrete may be poured each day between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and
7:00 p.m. or at the other times as authorized by permit. From October 16 to
April 14, inclusive, concrete may be poured each day between the hours of
6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. or at the times as authorized by permit.



         (b)   Other type construction (residential zones). 
From April 15 to October 15, inclusive, all other construction or repair work
shall not begin prior to 6:00 a.m. and must stop by 7:00 p.m. in, or within
500 feet of a residential zone or at the other times as authorized by permit.
From October 16 to April 14, inclusive, all other construction or repair work
shall not begin prior to 7:00 a.m. and must be stopped by 7:00 p.m. each day
in, or within 500 feet of a residential zone or at the other times as
authorized by permit.



         (c)   Other type of construction (commercial and
industrial zones).  Construction and repair work in commercial and
industrial zones, not within 500 feet of a residential zone, shall not begin
prior to 5:00 a.m. and must stop by 7:00 p.m. or at the other times as
authorized by permit.



         (d)   Weekends and holidays excluded.  Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary herein, construction or repair work shall not begin
prior to 7:00 a.m. and must stop by 7:00 p.m. and concrete pouring should not
begin prior to 6:00 a.m. and must stop by 7:00 p.m. on any Saturday, Sunday
or state or federal holiday, unless the other times as are authorized by
permit.



      (3)   Permits. Construction and repair work may be conducted
at different times and at higher noise levels than otherwise permitted, if
upon written application, a permit is obtained beforehand from the Town
Manager or designee. The permit shall be kept on the work site and shown to
town officials on request. In granting the permit, the Town Manager or
designee shall consider if construction noise in the vicinity of the proposed
work site could be less objectionable at night than during the daytime
because of different population levels or different neighboring activities,
if obstruction and interference with traffic, particularly on streets of
major importance, would be less objectionable at night than during the
daytime, if the kind of work to be performed emits noise at such a low level
as to not cause significant disturbance in the vicinity of the work site, if
the neighborhood of the proposed work site is of such a character wherein
sleep could be disturbed, if great economic hardship would occur if the work
was spread over a longer time, if the work will abate or prevent hazards to
life or property, if proposed early morning or night work is in the general
public interest and, he or she shall prescribe the conditions, working times,
types of construction equipment to be used and permissible noise emissions as
he or she deems to be required in the public interest. No permit shall be
required to perform emergency work as defined in division (B) above.



      (4)   Revocation of permits.  The Town Manager, or his or her
designee, may revoke any permit granted hereunder upon complaint based upon
substantial evidence that the construction activity caused significant
disturbance in the vicinity of the work site.



(Prior Code, Ch. 11, Art. III, § 11-62)  (Ord. 199-95, passed 8-8-1995;
Ord. 440-06, passed 8-21-2006)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.03  OFFENSIVE BUSINESS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to establish or maintain any
slaughterhouse or make a practice of slaughtering cattle, hogs, sheep or any
other kind of animal, or establish or maintain any soap factory, render
tallow or pursue, maintain or carry on any other business or occupation
offensive to the senses or prejudicial to the public health within the limits
of the municipality.



(Prior Code, Ch. 11, Art. III, § 11-63)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.04  OFFENSIVE PREMISES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to suffer, or permit any premises
belonging to or occupied by him or her, or any cellar, privy, vault, pool,
sewer or private drain therein to become nauseous, foul or offensive to the
senses or prejudicial to the public health or comfort.



(Prior Code, Ch. 11, Art. III, § 11-64)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.05  ALCOHOL AND DRUG INCAPACITATION.



   (A)   No person shall be in a public place under the influence of
alcohol, toxic vapors, poisons, narcotics or other drugs not therapeutically
administered, when it reasonably appears that he or she may endanger himself
or herself, or other persons or property.



   (B)   A person who violates this section is guilty of a Class1
misdemeanor.



(Ord. 578-12, passed 5-21-2012)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.06  PUBLIC URINATION AND DEFECATION PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in
any public place, roadway, right-of-way, alley, sidewalk, public park or any
place exposed to public view, except by proper use of a toilet or other
suitable facility provided for this purpose.



   (B)   A person who violates this section is guilty of a Class 1
misdemeanor.



(Ord. 577-12, passed 5-21-2012)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   A violation for any provision of § 132.02 shall be deemed and
is declared to be a public nuisance and any person who violates any of the
provisions of § 132.02 shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor, and shall
be subject to up to 30 days in jail and/or a fine of up to $500. Each day a
violation continues or exists shall be a separate offense subject to
punishment as a separate misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, Ch. 11, Art. III, § 11-62)  (Ord. 199-95, passed 8-8-1995;
Ord. 440-06, passed 8-21-2006)



CHAPTER 133: SALE OF PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCTS



Section



   133.01   Definitions



   133.02   Security of pseudoephedrine products



   133.03   Quantity that may be sold



   133.04   Purchaser identification requirements



   133.99   Penalty



§ 133.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCT.  Any product containing ephedrine or
pseudoephedrine and includes any compound, mixture or preparation that
contains any detectable quantity of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine,
norpseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine or their salts, optical isomers or
salts of optical isomers. Products packaging that lists ephedrine,
pseudoephedrine, norpseudoephedrine or phenylpropanolamine as an active
ingredient shall constitute prima facie evidence that the product is a
pseudoephedrine product and any such product packaging shall be admissible in
evidence at trial or other hearing pertaining to a violation of this chapter
without further foundation.



   RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT.  Any place of business that offers any
pseudoephedrine product for sale at retail.



   RETAILER.  The owner, operator or employee of a retail establishment,
and includes a licensed pharmacist or licensed pharmacy technician working as
an independent contractor to the retail establishment.



(Prior Code, Ch. 11, Art. IV, § 11-65)  (Ord. 418-06, passed 3-6-2006)



§ 133.02  SECURITY OF PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCTS.



   A retailer shall keep all pseudoephedrine products within the retail
establishment behind a store counter or otherwise in a manner that is
inaccessible to customers without the assistance of the retailer. The
pseudoephedrine products shall be monitored by the retailer to prevent theft,
unauthorized access or unauthorized purchases.



(Prior Code, Ch. 11, Art. IV, § 11-66)  (Ord. 418-06, passed 3-6-2006)



§ 133.03  QUANTITY THAT MAY BE SOLD.



   It shall be unlawful for a retailer to sell more than nine grams of
pseudoephedrine products to a person within a ten day period. Provided,
however, that this limit shall not apply to any quantity of pseudoephedrine
products sold to a person pursuant to a valid prescription issued to the
person.



(Prior Code, Ch. 11, Art. IV, § 11-67)  (Ord. 418-06, passed 3-6-2006) 
Penalty, see § 133.99



§ 133.04  PURCHASER IDENTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   A retailer shall require any person requesting to purchase
pseudoephedrine products to present a government issued photo-bearing
identification prior to the purchase. The retailer shall record the
purchaser's name, birth date, transaction date and quantity of
pseudoephedrine products purchased. The information obtained pursuant to this
section may be destroyed after 120 days. The information shall be disclosed
by the retailer to a representative of any state or local law enforcement
agency upon presentation of valid agency identification at the time of the
request. A retailer shall not be held civilly liable for the disclosure of
information to a law enforcement agency in accordance with this section.



(Prior Code, Ch. 11, Art. IV, § 11-68)  (Ord. 418-06, passed 3-6-2006)



§ 133.99  PENALTY.



   Notwithstanding the provisions of § 10.99, any violation of this
chapter is punishable as a Class 1 misdemeanor, including a fine in the
amount of $2,500 or 180 days in jail, or both.



(Prior Code, Ch. 11, Art. IV, § 11-69)  (Ord. 418-06, passed 3-6-2006)



CHAPTER 134:  GRAFFITI ENFORCEMENT AND REMOVAL



Section



   134.01   Purpose and intent



   134.02   Scope



   134.03   Definitions



   134.04   Graffiti; unlawful conduct



   134.05   Vandalism/defacement prohibited



   134.06   Graffiti as a nuisance



   134.07   Removal of graffiti by property owner, responsible party or
town



   134.08   Discriminatory/obscene graffiti; fast track removal



   134.09   Enforcement



   134.99   Penalty



§ 134.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide a program for
enforcement and abatement of graffiti from public and private property, to
reduce blight and deterioration within the town, protect public safety and to
expedite removal of graffiti from structures on both public and private
property.



   (B)   The Town Council finds and determines as follows:



      (1)   The increase of graffiti, on both public and private
property is creating a condition within the town which results in blight and
deterioration of property values and of the enjoyment of life and property
for adjacent and surrounding residents and owners, and contributes to the
overall detriment of the town.



      (2)   Graffiti constitutes a public nuisance and a threat to
public safety which must be abated to alleviate the detrimental impact of
graffiti on the town, and to prevent the further spread of graffiti.



      (3)   Certain categories of graffiti which incite violence are
especially harmful and must be removed as quickly as possible to avoid or
minimize harm to persons and the whole community.



      (4)   Perpetrators of graffiti are criminals and should be
punished in accordance with the law.



(Ord. 483-08, passed 6-2-2008)



§ 134.02  SCOPE.



   This chapter shall apply to all property, real or personal, with
surface(s) viewable by the public, within the town without regard to use,
date of construction or alteration, or zoning status.



(Ord. 483-08, passed 6-2-2008)



§ 134.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context indicates or required a different meaning.



   AEROSOL PAINT CONTAINER.  Any aerosol container that is adapted or
made for the purpose of applying spray paint or other substances capable of
defacing property.



   BROAD-TIPPED MARKER.  Any felt tip indelible marker or similar
implement with a flat or angled writing surface that, at its broadest width,
is greater than one-fourth of an inch, containing ink or other pigmented
liquid that is not water soluble.



   ETCHING EQUIPMENT.  Any tool, device or substance that can be used to
make permanent marks on any natural or manmade surface.



   GRAFFITI.  Any unauthorized inscription, work, figure, painting or
other defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn,
painted or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or
private property by any graffiti implement, to the extent that the graffiti
was not authorized in advance by the owner or occupant of the property or,
despite advance authorization, is otherwise deemed a public nuisance by the
Town Council.



   GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT.  An aerosol paint container, a broad-tipped
marker, gum label, paint stick or graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush,
paintball gun or any other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible
mark on any natural or manmade surface.



   OWNER.  A person or legal entity listed as the current owner of record
in the official records of the County Recorder's office.



   PAINT STICK or GRAFFITI STICK.  Any device containing a solid form of
paint, chalk, wax, epoxy or other similar substance capable of being applied
to a surface by pressure and leaving a mark of at least one-eighth of an inch
in width.



   PROPERTY MANAGEMENT FIRM.  Any corporation, partnership or limited
liability company licensed pursuant to A.R.S. § 32-2125(a), or a designated
broker that by written agreement manages rental property or properties for
compensation.



(A.R.S. § 32-2171(1))



   PROPERTY.  Any building, wall, bridge, street sign, fence,
streetlight, sidewalk, street, curbing, sewer or water drains, or any other
structure whether public or privately owned.



   RESPONSIBLE PARTY.  An owner, managing agent, lessee, co-tenant or
occupant of all real property including buildings, grounds, lots or premises,
but shall not include any federal, state or local government or agency or
political subdivision thereof.



   VANDALISM.  Any unnecessary act of damaging or defacing property by
any means, including, without limitation, by act of affixing, fastening,
etching, inscribing, painting, writing or applying any material or other
substance to the surface of property without permission from the owner or
responsible party.



(Ord. 483-08, passed 6-2-2008)



§ 134.04  GRAFFITI; UNLAWFUL CONDUCT.



   (A)   Unlawful.  The following are unlawful:



      (1)   For any person to apply graffiti to any natural or
manmade surface on any public property or on private property without the
permission of the owner or responsible party.



      (2)   For any person under the age of 18 years to possess any
graffiti implement while on any school property, grounds, facilities,
buildings or structures, or in areas immediately adjacent to those specific
locations upon public property or upon private property without the prior
written consent of the owner or responsible party of such private property.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to the possession of
broad-tipped markers by a minor attending or traveling to or from a school at
which the minor is enrolled, if the minor is participating in a class at the
school that formally requires the possession of broad-tipped marker(s). The
burden of proof in any prosecution for violation of this section shall be
upon the minor student to establish the need to possess a broad-tipped marker.



      (3)   For any person to possess any graffiti implement while
in or upon any public facility, park, playground, swimming pool, recreational
facility or other public building or structure owned or operated by the town
or other political subdivision.



   (B)   Furnishing graffiti implements to minors prohibited. It shall
be unlawful for any person to sell, exchange, give, loan or otherwise
furnish, or cause or permit to be exchanged, given, loaned or otherwise
furnished, any aerosol paint container, broad-tipped marker or paint stick to
any person under the age of 18 years without the written consent of the
parents or guardian of the minor. Age shall be verified before the
transaction is completed by confirming the person's age with any form of
government issued identification with photo.



   (C)   Retail display and storage of graffiti implements.



      (1)   Every person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a
retail commercial establishment selling aerosol paint containers, paint
sticks or broad-tipped markers shall store the containers, sticks or markers
in an area continuously observable, through direct visual observation or
surveillance equipment, by employees of the retail establishment during the
regular course of business.



      (2)   In the event that a commercial retail establishment is
unable to store the aerosol paint containers, paint sticks or broad tipped
markers in an area as provided above the establishment shall store the
containers, sticks and markers in an area not accessible to the public in the
regular course of business without employee assistance.



   (D)   Signage required.



      (1)   Every person who operates a retail commercial
establishment selling graffiti implements shall:



         (a)   Place a sign in clear public view at or near the
display of such products stating: “Graffiti is against the law. Any person
who defaces real or personal property with paint or any other graffiti
implement is guilty of a misdemeanor crime punishable by jail of up to 30
days and/or a fine of up to $500 plus surcharges.”



         (b)   Place a sign in the direct view of such persons
responsible for accepting customer payment for graffiti implements stating:
“Selling spray paint, paintball guns, paint sticks or broad tipped markers
to persons under 18 years of age is against the law and punishable by a fine
of $500 plus surcharges and/or up to 30 days of jail time.”



      (2)   The town shall provide the signage to merchants at no
cost; for posting.



(Ord. 483-08, passed 6-2-2008)  Penalty, see § 134.99



§ 134.05  VANDALISM/DEFACEMENT PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any person to commit an act of vandalism or attempt
to commit an act of vandalism or defacement of property that damages or
defaces public or private property.



(Ord. 483-08, passed 6-2-2008)  Penalty, see § 134.99



§ 134.06  GRAFFITI AS A NUISANCE.



   (A)   The existence of graffiti on public or private property in
violation of this chapter is expressly declared to be a public nuisance and,
therefore, is subject to the removal and abatement provisions in this chapter.



   (B)   It is the duty of both the owner of the property to which the
graffiti has been applied and/or the responsible parties to at all times keep
the property clear of graffiti.



(Ord. 483-08, passed 6-2-2008)



§ 134.07  REMOVAL OF GRAFFITI BY PROPERTY OWNER, RESPONSIBLE PARTY OR TOWN.



   (A)   Property owner responsibility. It is unlawful for any person
who is the owner or who has primary responsibility for the control of
property or for repair or maintenance of property in the town, to permit
property that is defaced with graffiti to remain defaced for a period of ten
days after service by first class mail (return receipt requested) of notice
of the defacement or five days after personal service is effected. The notice
shall contain the following information:



      (1)   The street address and legal description of the property
sufficient for identification of the property.



      (2)   A statement that the property is a graffiti nuisance
property with a concise description of the conditions leading to the finding.



      (3)   A statement that the graffiti must be removed within ten
days after receipt of the notice or within five days if personal service is
effected, and that if the graffiti is not abated within that time, the town
will declare the property to be a public nuisance.



      (4)   If personal service or service by mail cannot be
effected on the owner or responsible party, the notice shall then be posted
on the property by the entrance or in a conspicuous location for ten days
before the town will enter the property to effect removal/remediation.



      (5)   Violations of Ch. 134 of the town code are a Class 3
misdemeanor offense and punishable by a fine of up to $500 plus 80%
surcharges and by up to 30 days in jail.



   (B)   Exceptions of property owner responsibility. The removal
requirements of division (A) shall not apply if the property owner or
responsible party can demonstrate that:



      (1)   The property owner or responsible party lacks the
financial ability to remove the defacing graffiti; or



      (2)   The property owner or responsible party has an active
program for the removal of graffiti and has scheduled the removal of the
graffiti as part of that program, in which case it shall be unlawful to
permit the property to remain defaced with graffiti for a period of ten days
after service by first class mail of notice of the defacement or five days if
personal service was effected.



   (C)   Right of town to remove.



      (1)   Use of public funds. Whenever the town becomes aware or
is notified and determines that graffiti is located on publicly- or
privately-owned property viewable from a public or quasi-public place, the
town shall be authorized to use public funds for the removal of the graffiti,
or for painting or repairing of the graffiti, but shall not authorize or
undertake to provide for the painting or repair of any more extensive area
than where the graffiti is located, unless the Town Manager, or the designee
of the Town Manager, determines in writing that a more extensive area is
required to be repainted or repaired in order to avoid an aesthetic
disfigurement to the neighborhood or community, or unless the property owner
or responsible party agrees to pay for the costs of repainting or remediating
the more extensive area. Any work that would be valued at more than $250 in
materials and labor shall be performed by a handyman, licensed contractor or
by the owner.



      (2)   Right of entry on private property. Prior to entering
upon private property, or property owned by a public entity other than the
town for the purpose of graffiti removal, the town shall attempt to secure
the consent of the property owner or responsible party and a release of the
town from liability for property damage or personal injury. If the property
owner or responsible party fails to remove the offending graffiti within the
time specified by this chapter, or if the town has requested consent to
remove or paint over the offending graffiti and the property owner or
responsible party has refused consent for entry on terms acceptable to the
town and consistent with the terms of this section, the town shall commence
abatement and cost recovery proceedings for the graffiti removal according to
the provisions specified in the town code.



   (D)   Due process/order to show cause hearings.



      (1)   The Town Attorney may file a petition in the Municipal
Court to compel the removal of graffiti by the property owner and/or
responsible party. Upon filing the petition, the court shall set a hearing
within seven days to determine if the defacement is graffiti, determine if it
is a nuisance and order its removal by the property owner and/or responsible
party within 72 hours. The property owner and/or responsible party shall be
entitled to present evidence and argue that the property does not constitute
a public nuisance. Notice shall be served by mailing a copy of the petition
and a summons to the property owner at the address where the graffiti is
located or at the address to which the most recent tax bill has been mailed,
if different. If the property owner of record or the responsible party cannot
be found after a diligent search, the notice shall be posted on the property
by an entrance or conspicuous place for ten days. The Town Magistrate, upon
determining graffiti exists and is a nuisance, shall issue an order for the
remediation of the graffiti and, within ten days of the order, the town will
enter the property and abate the graffiti.



      (2)   The judgment entered after the hearing may be appealed
to the Superior Court in the same manner as established for the appeal of
other Municipal Court judgments.



(Ord. 483-08, passed 6-2-2008)  Penalty, see § 134.99



§ 134.08  DISCRIMINATORY/OBSCENE GRAFFITI; FAST TRACK REMOVAL.



   (A)   Graffiti that is offensive to community standards under an
objective, of the standard of a reasonable person, that consists of verbiage
or symbols that demean or denigrate racial groups, ethnic groups, cultural
groups or depict obscene images, shall be removed/abated within 72 hours of
notice to the property owner or responsible party. Town personnel may assist
with materials and supplies to remove or repair the defacement as part of a
graffiti abatement program funded by the town. Failure to remove graffiti by
the property owner and/or responsible party is a criminal violation pursuant
to § 134.07.



   (B)   The Town Attorney may file a “fast track” petition for the
removal of obscene or discriminatory graffiti in the Municipal Court. The
Court shall set the petition for hearing within 72 hours after the date of
filing indicated on the petition. The Town Attorney may request that
enforcement personnel be directed by the Court to personally serve the
property owner or responsible party with the summons giving notice of the
date and time of the hearing. The Magistrate shall conduct a hearing to
determine if the graffiti is obscene or discriminatory and, if so, shall
order its removal by the property owner or responsible party within 72 hours.
The order shall state that if the owner or responsible party fails to remove
the graffiti as ordered by the Court, the town will abate the graffiti after
72 hours.



(Ord. 483-08, passed 6-2-2008)



§ 134.09  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Police Chief or his or her designee is authorized to enforce this
chapter.



(Ord. 483-08, passed 6-2-2008)



§ 134.99  PENALTY.



   Penalties for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter are as
follows:



   (A)   Any violation(s) of this chapter are a Class 3 misdemeanor
punishable by a fine of up to $500 plus 80% surcharges and by up to 30 days
in jail.



   (B)   The Town Magistrate, as part of an offender's judgment and
sentencing, may order the offender to perform community service to clean up
the community or perform graffiti abatement services for up to 40 hours for a
first offense conviction and by up to 200 hours for each subsequent
conviction.



   (C)   Adults shall be sentenced to a minimum of one day in jail for
a first offense conviction and shall pay jail costs as part of their sentence
in addition to any fines or other penalties allowed under law.



   (D)   No property owner or responsible party that is a victim of
graffiti on their property will be criminally charged for failing to
remediate/remove the graffiti in a timely manner but may be ordered to appear
for a due process hearing and order to show cause proceeding to effect
remediation by abatement.



   (E)   Juveniles that are convicted of violations of this chapter
shall be sentenced by the Town Magistrate in accordance with A.R.S. § 8-323,
including a fine of up to $500 plus surcharges; up to 30 hours of community
service to clean up the community and eliminate graffiti; a recognized
counseling or educational program approved by the Presiding Judge of the
Juvenile Court or Supreme Court, and may order the juvenile's driver's
license suspended for up to 180 days.



   (F)   Parent(s) or guardian(s) of juveniles convicted of any
violation of the anti-graffiti provisions of this chapter are liable for the
costs of the damage, restoration and repair expenses to the property owner
and/or town up to $10,000 as per A.R.S. § 12-661 et. seq.



(Ord. 483-08, passed 6-2-2008)



Florence, AZ Code of Ordinances


TITLE XV: LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   DEVELOPMENT CODE



      151.   FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS



      152.   MEDICAL MARIJUANA



CHAPTER 150: DEVELOPMENT CODE



Section




Administration and Procedures




   150.001   Title



   150.002   Purpose



   150.003   Effective date, repeal and severability



   150.004   Enforcement, interpretation and conflict



   150.005   Compliance



   150.006   Injunction



   150.007   Planning and Zoning Commission



   150.008   Board of Adjustment; appeals



   150.009   Variances



   150.010   Administrative staff



   150.011   Technical Advisory Committee



   150.012   Site plan: Application, content and review



   150.013   Design review



   150.014   Zone changes; amendments



   150.015   Conditional Use Permits



   150.016   Exceptions and modifications



   150.017   Applications and fees



   150.018   Building permits and Certificates of Occupancy



   150.019   Citizen review process




Definitions




   150.030   Terms and words



   150.031   Defined words




Zoning Districts




   150.045   Districts



   150.046   District boundaries



   150.047   District use regulations tables



   150.048   Rural Agricultural (RA-10)



   150.049   Rural Agricultural (RA-4)



   150.050   Single-Residential Ranchette (R1-R)



   150.051   Rural Residential Equestrian Subdivision (RRES)



   150.052   Single-Family Residential (R1-18)



   150.053   Single-Family Residential (R1-6)



   150.054   Neighborhood Multi-Family (R-2)



   150.055   Multiple-Family Residential (MFR)



   150.056   Manufactured Home Subdivision (MHS)



   150.057   Neighborhood Business (B-1)



   150.058   Neighborhood Office (NO)



   150.059   Downtown Commercial (DC)



   150.060   Highway Business Commercial (B-2)



   150.061   Tourist Commercial (TRC)



   150.062   Professional Office (PO)



   150.063   Public/Institutional (P/I)



   150.064   Light Industrial (LI)



   150.065   Heavy Industrial (HI)



   150.066   Overlay Districts; Historic District



   150.067   Parking Overlay District (P-1)



   150.068   Recreational Vehicle Parks and/or Subdivisions



   150.069   Planned Unit Development (PUD)



   150.070   Territory Square (TS)




Regulations





Part 1.  General Provisions




   150.080   Nonconforming use



   150.081   Enlargement of building or land; destruction



   150.082   Abandoned or junked vehicles




Part 2.  Outdoor Lighting Control




   150.083   Intent



   150.084   Conformance with applicable codes



   150.085   Approved material and methods of installation



   150.086   Permanent exemptions; nonconforming fixtures



   150.087   Request for temporary exemptions



   150.088   Appeal for temporary exemption



   150.089   Procedures for code compliance



   150.090   General requirements



   150.091   Prohibitions




Part 3.  Sign Regulations




   150.092   Purpose



   150.093   Intent



   150.094   General applicability



   150.095   Definitions



   150.096   Location



   150.097   Maintenance



   150.098   Source of illumination; supports



   150.099   Planned Unit Development



   150.100   Compliance



   150.101   Sign area



   150.102   Sign height



   150.103   Permitted permanent signs



   150.104   Total signage



   150.105   Reader panel signs



   150.106   Commercial districts



   150.107   Wall signage



   150.108   Freestanding monument signage



   150.109   Directional signs



   150.110   Directory signs



   150.111   Drive-through restaurant menu boards



   150.112   Window signage



   150.113   Awning signs



   150.114   Shingle signs and projecting signs



   150.115   Parapet signs



   150.116   Total signage



   150.117   Reader panel signs



   150.118   Industrial districts



   150.119   Temporary signs



   150.120   Subdivision signs



   150.121   Planned Unit Development directional signs



   150.122   Submittal and permit requirements



   150.123   Exceptions; permits not required



   150.124   Excepted signage



   150.125   Prohibited signs



   150.126   Legal nonconforming signs



   150.127   Signs rendered nonconforming



   150.128   Signs for a legal nonconforming use



   150.129   Signs rendered discontinued



   150.130   Unsafe signs




Part 4.  Landscape Standards




   150.131   Standards



   150.132   General applicability



   150.133   Building and occupancy permits



   150.134   Appropriate use of landscaping



   150.135   Maintenance



   150.136   Compliance



   150.137   Maintenance by Town



   150.138   Landscape plan and design standards



   150.139   Design criteria pertaining to specific districts or uses



   150.140   Planting specifications



   150.141   Approval by Planning Director



   150.142   Landscaped areas



   150.143   Enforcement



   150.144   Alternate materials



   150.145   Inspection and approval



   150.146   Residential landscape design standards




Part 5.  Walls and Fences




   150.147   General applicability



   150.148   Placement regulations



   150.149   Design, construction, maintenance and development standards



   150.150   Barbed wire and electric fences




Part 6.  Swimming Pools




   150.151   General applicability



   150.152   Location



   150.153   Enclosures and gates



   150.154   Exceptions



   150.155   Permit, inspection and maintenance




Part 7.  Parking; Loading and Unloading




   150.156   Parking areas



   150.157   Parking standards pertaining to all districts



   150.158   General requirements for all spaces



   150.159   Parking standards for nonresidential or mixed-uses



   150.160   Parking standards for residential uses



   150.161   Parking standards; calculations



   150.162   Alternative design standards



   150.163   Parking space allocation requirements



   150.164   Off-site loading



   150.165   Standards for off-street loading facilities



   150.166   Improvement standards



   150.167   Compliance




Part 8.  Additional Height and Area Regulations and Expectations




   150.168   Height



   150.169   Sight triangle



   150.170   Exception to height restrictions



   150.171   Structures near airplane runway or landing strip



   150.172   Exception to minimum property size, lot size and lot width
requirements



   150.173   Adjustment of front yard requirements in all zoning
districts



   150.174   Accessory buildings



   150.175   Projections into required yards



   150.176   Access



   150.177   Maintenance of common areas



   150.178   Required screening



   150.179   Special uses




Part 9.  Wireless Communications Facilities




   150.180   Purpose



   150.181   Administrative review and approval



   150.182   Required information



   150.183   Design criteria



   150.184   Replacement and/or rebuilding of wireless communications
towers




Subdivisions





Part 1.  General Provisions




   150.200   Purpose



   150.201   Intent



   150.202   Compliance



   150.203   Modifications




Part 2.  Platting Procedures




   150.204   Subdivision application procedures



   150.205   Outline of procedures




Stage I.  Pre-application




   150.206   Pre-application conference



   150.207   Actions by developer



   150.208   Actions by the Site Plan Review Committee



   150.209   Notice to proceed



   150.210   Reservation of certain areas




Stage II.  Preliminary Plat




   150.211   Application



   150.212   Procedures and requirements



   150.213   Information required



   150.214   Submittal



   150.215   Guidance for corner lots



   150.216   Easements



   150.217   Basic design requirements



   150.218   Review



   150.219   Approval



   150.220   Significance of preliminary approval




Stage III.  Technical Review




   150.222   Submittal



   150.223   Approval



   150.224   Engineering plan and specification submission




Stage IV.  Final Plat




   150.225   Scope



   150.226   Preparation



   150.227   Information required



   150.228   Certification



   150.229   Zoning



   150.230   Easements



   150.231   Submittal



   150.232   Review



   150.233   Approval



   150.234   Performance contract



   150.235   Land survey minimum standards



   150.236   Map requirements




Part 3.  Design Standards




   150.237   Generally



   150.238   Street location and arrangement



   150.239   Adoption of public works standards, specifications and
regulations



   150.240   Block design



   150.241   Lot planning



   150.242   Easement planning



   150.243   Hillside subdivisions



   150.244   Special preliminary plat requirements



   150.245   Plat processing time



   150.246   Landscaping




Part 4.  Required Improvements




   150.248   Purpose



   150.249   Improvement districts



   150.250   Engineering plans



   150.251   Construction and inspection



   150.252   Storm drainage



   150.253   Sanitary sewage disposal



   150.254   Water facilities requirements



   150.255   Garbage disposal



   150.256   Fire hydrants



   150.257   Monuments



   150.258   Lot corner



   150.259   Street lights



   150.260   Utilities, electric and telephone



   150.261   Traffic control signs



   150.262   Street naming



   150.263   As-built drawings



   150.264   Planned Unit Developments



   150.265   Lot splits not requiring a subdivision



   150.266   Minor subdivision



   150.267   Special submission conditions for minor subdivisions




Development Impact Fees




   150.280   Development impact fees




Technical Codes




   150.300   Codes adopted



   150.301   Board of Appeals



 



   150.999   Penalty




ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES




§ 150.001  TITLE.



   These regulations shall be known and cited as “The Development Code
of the Town of Florence” (hereinafter known as the “Development Code”).



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. I, § 4-1)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.002  PURPOSE.



   This Development Code of the Town of Florence, Arizona, (hereinafter
“town”) is hereby adopted for the following purposes:



   (A)   (1)   To promote and protect the health, safety and welfare
of the residents of the town and to establish land use classifications,
dividing the town into districts, imposing regulations, prohibitions and
restrictions for the promotion of health, safety, convenience, aesthetics and
welfare, governing the use of land for residential and nonresidential
purposes, regulating and limiting the height and bulk of buildings and other
structures, limiting lot occupancy and the size of yards and other open
spaces, establishing standards of performance and design, adopting a map of
the districts, prescribing penalties for violations of the Code and repealing
all codes in conflict therewith.



      (2)   Furthermore, these regulations are deemed necessary to
ensure orderly growth and harmonious development of the municipality to
ensure adequate traffic circulation through coordinated street systems with
relation to major thoroughfares, adjoining subdivisions and public
facilities, achieve individual property lots of reasonable utility and
livability, secure adequate provisions for water supply, drainage, sanitary
sewerage and other health requirements, ensure consideration for adequate
sites for schools, recreation areas and other public facilities, promote the
conveyance of land by accurate legal description and to provide logical
procedures for the achievement of this purpose. In its interpretation and
application, the provisions of this Development Code are intended to provide
a common ground of understanding and equitable working relationship between
public and private interests to the end that both independent and mutual
objectives can be achieved in the subdivision of land.



   (B)   This Development Code shall be considered the minimum
requirements necessary for the promotion of the general plan as amended from
time to time, for the protection of the citizens of the town.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. I, § 4-2)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.003  EFFECTIVE DATE, REPEAL AND SEVERABILITY.



   This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after July 19,
2006.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. I, § 4-3)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.004  ENFORCEMENT, INTERPRETATION AND CONFLICT.



   (A)   Enforcement.  The Office of Planning Director shall have the
responsibility for enforcement of this Development Code.



   (B)   Interpretation.  When the provisions of this Development Code
are interpreted or applied, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements
for the promotion of the pubic safety, health and general welfare.



   (C)   Conflict.  The provisions of this Development Code are not
intended to interfere with,  abrogate or annul any code, rule, regulation or
permit previously adopted or issued, and not in conflict with any provision
of this Development Code, or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law
relating to the use of building or Code not in conflict with this Development
Code; nor is it intended by this Development Code to interfere with, abrogate
or annul any easement, covenant or other agreement between parties, except
when this Development Code imposes a greater restriction, this Development
Code shall control.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. I, § 4-4)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.005  COMPLIANCE.



   No building or land shall be devoted to any use other than a use
permitted in the zoning district in which the building or land shall be
located, with the exception of the following:



   (A)   Uses lawfully established as of the effective date of this
comprehensive amendment;



   (B)   Analogous uses;



   (C)   Accessory uses customarily incidental to the permitted uses;
and



   (D)   Temporary buildings that are used in conjunction with
construction work only may be permitted in any district during the period
that the building is being constructed, but the temporary buildings shall be
removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. I, § 4-5(b))  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.006  INJUNCTION.



   (A)   Injunction.  If any building or maintained structure is
constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or any building,
structure or land is used in violation of this Development Code, the town,
any owner or tenant of real property affected by the building or structure in
question, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action
or proceedings:



      (1)   To prevent the unlawful construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use;



      (2)   To prevent the illegal act, conduct, business or use in
or about the premises;



      (3)   To prevent occupancy of the building, structure or land
whether improved or otherwise; and



      (4)   To restrain, correct or abate the violation.



   (B)   When any action is instituted by an owner or tenant, notice of
the action shall be served upon the municipality at the time suit is begun by
serving a copy of the complaint on the Manager or designee thereof.



   (C)   In any action or proceeding, the court with jurisdiction
thereof has the power and in its discretion may issue a restraining order, or
a preliminary injunction, as well as a permanent injunction, upon the terms
and under the conditions as will do justice and enforce the purpose of this
Development Code.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. I, § 4-6)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.007  PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.



   See §§ 32.105 and 32.106.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. I, § 4-7)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.008  BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT; APPEALS.



   (A)   Creation.  There is hereby created a Board of Adjustment, the
membership of which shall consist of the Mayor and Town Council of the town
and, the word BOARD when used in this Development Code, shall mean the Mayor
and Council when sitting as the Board of Adjustment.



   (B)   Meetings, oaths and witnesses.  All meetings of the Board
shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at the other times as the
Board may determine. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public.
The Chairperson, or in the Chairperson's absence, the acting Chairperson may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses in accordance with
the laws of the state.



   (C)   Procedure.  The Board shall make and publish rules and
regulations to govern its proceedings. The presence of four members shall
constitute a quorum. The concurring vote of a majority of the Board shall be
necessary to reverse an order or decision of an administrative official, or
to effect any variations from the terms and conditions of this Development
Code. The minutes and records of all Board proceedings shall be kept and
filed as public record in the office of the Town Clerk. The Board may call on
the administrative staff of the municipality for assistance in the
performance of its duties, and it shall be the duty of the departments to
render the assistance to the Board as may be reasonably required.



   (D)   Powers and duties.  The Board of Adjustment shall have the
power and jurisdiction to hear those matters set forth in this Development
Code.



   (E)   Appeals of administrative decisions.



      (1)   Appeals may be taken to the Board of Adjustment by
persons aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the
municipality affected by a decision of an administrative official within 30
days by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the
Town Clerk, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer
from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board all
papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.



      (2)   An appeal shall stay all proceedings in the matter
appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certified to
the Board that, by reason of the fact stated in the certificate, the stay
would in the officer's opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In
such case, proceedings shall not be stayed, except by a restraining order
granted by the Board or by a court of record on application and notice to the
officer from whom the appeal is taken. The Board shall fix a reasonable time
for hearing the appeal and give notice thereof to the parties in interest and
the public.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. I, § 4-8)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



Cross-reference:



   For other town boards and commissions, see Ch. 32



§ 150.009  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Application. Application for a variance to property
development standards shall be made to the Board of Adjustment in the form of
a written application. The application shall be filed with the Town Clerk
upon a form provided by the Town Clerk, and shall be accompanied by:



      (1)   Plans.  Plans and description sufficient to indicate
the nature of the project involved and the proposed use with ground plans and
elevation of all proposed buildings, together with an estimate of cost.



      (2)   Period of approval.  Evidence satisfactory to the Board
of Adjustment of the ability and intention of the applicant to proceed with
actual construction work in accordance with the plans within six months after
issuance of the variance.



   (B)   Fee.  A filing fee pursuant to the town fee schedule shall
accompany each application. If the Board of Adjustment finds that it has no
jurisdiction to hear the matter, the filing fee shall not be refunded to the
applicant. From the time of filing the application until the time of the
hearing, the application and all maps, plans and other accompanying data
shall be available for public inspection during office hours at the office of
the Town Clerk.



   (C)   Hearing and notice. Upon receipt in proper form of any
application, the Board of Adjustment shall proceed to hold a public hearing
upon the application within 45 days after the filing at which time all
persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The Board of Adjustment
shall cause one notice of the hearing to be published in a newspaper of
general circulation in the area of the municipality and shall cause to be
posted three notices of hearing, one of which shall be on the subject
property and the other two within 300 feet thereof, giving at least
ten-days’ notice of the hearing, and the time and place where the hearing
will be held. The notice, both as published and posted, shall also show the
nature of the variance or exception requested and state that anyone wanting
to be heard may appear in person or by writing.



   (D)   Findings.  A variance from the provisions of this Development
Code shall not be authorized unless the Board shall find upon sufficient
evidence:



      (1)   There are special circumstances or conditions applying
to the land, building or use referred to in the application which do not
apply to other properties in the district;



      (2)   The special circumstances were not created by the owner
or applicant;



      (3)   The condition or situation of the specific piece of
property for which the variance is sought is not of so typical or recurrent a
nature as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of a general
regulation for the conditions or situations (if, in the Board's opinion, the
formulation of a general regulation is more appropriate than a variance, the
Board shall table its consideration of the application and communicate to the
Council its recommendation for a general regulation; should the Council not
act upon the recommendation within 30 days, the Board shall reconsider the
application);



      (4)   The authorizing of the variance is necessary for the
preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights; and



      (5)   The authorizing of the application will not be
materially detrimental to persons residing or working in the vicinity, to
adjacent property, the neighborhood or the public welfare in general.



   (E)   Action.  The Board shall prescribe in connection with any
variance the conditions, as the Board may deem necessary in order to fully
carry out the provisions and intent of this Development Code. The conditions
may include, among other things, a limitation of the time for which the
variance shall be valid. Violation of any condition shall be a violation of
this Development Code, and the violation shall render the variance null and
void.



   (F)   Review.  Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Board may,
within 30 days after the decision of the Board, and not thereafter, petition
the Superior Court to review the Board's decision pursuant to A.R.S. §
9-462.06, as amended, and the Superior Court Rules for Special Actions.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. I, § 4-9)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.010  ADMINISTRATIVE STAFF.



   (A)   Creation.  There is hereby created the position of Planning
Director who shall be hired by the town. The Planning Director shall be
responsible with enforcement of this Development Code. As used in this
Development Code, PLANNING DIRECTOR shall include staff authorized by the
Planning Director.



   (B)   Powers and duties.  The Planning Director shall perform the
following functions:



      (1)   Enforce this Development Code by ensuring that all
activities, construction and development within the town are in conformance
with the town zoning regulations;



      (2)   Accomplish all administrative tasks required by this
Development Code including informing and processing applications for all
persons requesting a re-zoning, use permit, plan review, variance, appeal or
other action of the Planning and Zoning Commission, Board of Adjustment or
Town Council; and



      (3)   Subject to the policies of the Planning and Zoning
Commission and Town Council, interpret this Development Code to members of
the public, town departments and other branches of government. Serve as
planning staff to the Town Council and Planning and Zoning Commission, and,
as necessary, attend meetings of these and other organizations and agencies.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. I, § 4-10)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.011  TECHNICAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE.



   (A)   Creation and composition.  The Technical Advisory Committee
(hereinafter “Committee”) is created which shall consist of a maximum of
nine members, which may include the Town Manager, Planning Director, Building
Official, Town Engineer, Senior Planner, Economic Development Director, Fire
Chief, Police Chief and the Public Works Director or designees.



   (B)   Conflict.  When any Committee member has direct pecuniary or
proprietary interest in any matter before the Committee, the member shall be
excused and refrain from participating in voting on any matters over which
the conflict occurs while being considered by the Committee.



   (C)   Meetings.  Meetings shall be at the call of the Planning
Director, or designee, or on an as-needed basis. Minutes showing the actions
of the Committee shall be compiled, distributed to Committee members and a
copy shall be kept in the Planning and Zoning Department. The Planning
Director, or designee, shall serve as Chairperson to the Committee and a
person designated by the Planning Director shall serve as Secretary.



   (D)   Intent.  The Committee review of development plans and
proposals is intended to provide guidance and direction to a prospective
developer or builder in order to achieve site development that conforms with
the town's general plan, Town Code and regulations and its goals for quality
development in the community. Technical review is intended to promote safe,
attractive, harmonious and compatible development within the town and is,
therefore, considered to be in the interest of the public health, safety and
general welfare. Complete submittal requirements for technical review are
outlined in § 150.015(B).



   (E)   Powers, duties and jurisdiction.  The Committee shall have
power to recommend, conditionally recommend or deny any application, not in
compliance with this Development Code. The applicant shall be responsible for
proving that the intent and purpose of this Development Code and other
applicable provisions of the Town Code will be satisfied.



      (1)   The Committee, upon hearing an application, may impose
reasonable conditions to carry out the intent of this Development Code.
Violation of any of these conditions shall be considered a violation of this
Development Code, and shall render any permit null and void.



      (2)   Prior to development, construction, remodel, change or
alteration of any project subject to technical review, the property owner or
designated agent shall secure written approval from the Planning Director or
designee. Technical review is required for multi-family projects,
manufactured home subdivisions, recreational vehicle parks, commercial and
industrial developments, public facilities, public and private utilities and
other uses identified in zoning districts as required by this Development
Code.



   (F)   Review. The Committee shall review and comment on all
residential, commercial or industrial developments which contain four or more
dwelling units, businesses or buildings but which do not constitute a
subdivision.



   (G)   Planning Commission review.  Subsequent to the review by the
Committee, and prior to submission to the Town Council, all projects
requiring technical review shall appear before and present their case to the
Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall forward the case (with its
recommendation for approval or denial) and any suggested stipulations and/or
changes to the submission to the Town Council for its review.



   (H)   Town Council review. Where required by the provisions of this
Development Code, or as stipulated to by a Council action on a zoning
amendment or otherwise, applications for technical review shall also be
submitted to the Town Council for consideration following the required review
by the Committee. When Council review and approval is required of the
applications, the action of the Committee on the project shall constitute
only a recommendation. If the Council finds that a site plan does not meet
the intent of this Development Code or the review criteria, the Council may
disapprove the site plan.



   (I)   Period of approval.  An approved plan shall be valid for a
period of 180 days from the date of approval and shall become invalid if a
building permit has not been issued in that time. Up to an additional 180
days may be granted by the Planning Director or designee, upon written
request of the applicant or Council, when Council review and approval is
required.



   (J)   Appeal procedure.  An applicant may appeal the decision of
the Committee to the Town Council if that appeal is made in writing and filed
with the Town Clerk within 60 days of the Committee's written decision. The
appeal shall give the reasons for that appeal and the relief requested. The
Town Council may affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the Committee.
Appeals from a Town Council decision shall be heard by a state court of
competent jurisdiction.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. I, § 4-11)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.012  SITE PLAN: APPLICATION, CONTENT AND REVIEW.



   (A)   Application.  The Town Planning Department shall prescribe
the form and content of applications and necessary accompanying data.
Application shall be filed with the Planning Director or designee.
Applications shall be made by the owner of the property or an agent
authorized by a letter from all owners of the property.



   (B)   Content.  A site plan shall include the following information:



      (1)   Technical review.  An accurate site plan on a minimum
18-inch by 24-inch sheet (or other as determined by the Planning Director)
drawn at an appropriate scale showing the boundaries and dimensions of the
site, acreage of the site, a north arrow, existing zoning of the site and
contiguous property, dimensions and center-lines of all streets, dimensions
of all alleys and easements bounding or touching the site, dimensions from
all street center lines to existing curb, gutter, sidewalk, water lines,
sewer lines and irrigation lines, location, dimensions, direction and bearing
of any major physical features such as railroads or drainage ways and
existing topographic contours at intervals of not more than two feet.



      (2)   Development information.  Proposed grading of the site,
proposed public dedications, if any, within the site, proposed location,
proposed grade, dimensions and use of all buildings, structures and signs to
be located on the site.



      (3)   Provisions of services.  Location, quantity and typical
stall dimensions of off-street parking and loading facilities, points of
ingress to and egress from the site, including width of curb cuts, water,
sewer, electric, gas and other public and private utility line sizes and
locations, internal circulation, refuse collection areas, fire lanes and fire
hydrants, off-site improvements and street lighting.



      (4)   Provision of amenities.  Proposed location of open
space and recreational facilities on the site, location and type of
landscaping, location and height of screen walls and, location and
specifications for any other proposed features of development contributing to
the use of the site and to the compatibility of the proposed development with
the surrounding area.



      (5)   Calculations.  As applicable to the proposed
development, calculations shall be tabulated on the map for storm water
retention, parking spaces, number of dwelling units, compute density of
dwelling units as provided in the town general plan, area of open space,
building floor area by category of use and percentage and area of coverage of
the site.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. I, § 4-12)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.013  DESIGN REVIEW.



   (A)   The purpose of design review is to:



      (1)   Promote development consistent with the town’s codes,
policies, guidelines, zoning regulations and overall goals and vision per the
town’s general plan;



      (2)   Ensure that development is compatible and in character
with the surrounding area;



      (3)   Provide an opportunity to address site plan,
architectural, engineering and other development issues at a preliminary
level to facilitate the subsequent preparation of construction plans, and to
assist in expediting permitting and development activities; and



      (4)   Allow an opportunity to review the aesthetic and
functional aspects of a proposed development or project.



   (B)   Projects within planned unit developments, including
single-family homes; multiple-family developments, including condominiums and
townhomes; office; commercial; mixed-use; institutional; and industrial
projects, are subject to the design review process if any one of the
following requirements is met:



      (1)   Project or development includes new or modified vertical
(above grade) development or construction components, including permanent
signs, that require a building permit, except as noted in divisions (C) and
(D) below; and/or



      (2)   Project includes new or modified horizontal project
components, such as parking areas, driveways, circulation areas, landscape
areas, outdoor storage areas, retention basins, parks and/or similar site
elements, except as noted in divisions (C) and (D) below.



   (C)   Grading plans, civil improvement plans, underground utility
installations and similar projects, as may be determined by the Planning
Director, are exempt from the design review process.



   (D)   Interior remodels or tenant improvements that do not alter the
exterior dimensions or physical appearance of a structure and/or the
historical integrity of a structure within the town’s historic district,
are exempt from the design review process.



   (E)   Applications for design review shall be submitted to the
Planning Department and shall contain, where applicable:



      (1)   Completed design review application forms and fee;



      (2)   Site plan showing all existing and proposed
improvements; rights-of-way; and easements;



      (3)   Parcel data, including parcel number and/or legal
description; lot dimensions; setbacks; floor area ratio; building heights;
lot coverage; and other relevant data;



      (4)   Building elevations;



      (5)   Conceptual landscape plan;



      (6)   Preliminary grading and drainage plan for site and
development context;



      (7)   Materials and colors exhibits;



      (8)   Signage plan;



      (9)   Applicable utility information; and



      (10)   Other ancillary documentation required to complete the
review as supported by applicable town code and guidelines.



   (F)   Town staff shall review the design review application for the
following:



      (1)   The proposed development complies with all provisions of
this Development Code and all other ordinances, master plans, general plans,
guidelines, goals, objectives and standards of the town;



      (2)   Building heights, building locations, access points and
parking areas of the proposed development will not negatively impact adjacent
properties or the surrounding neighborhood;



      (3)   The proposed development promotes a functional
relationship of structures to one another, to open spaces and to topography,
both on the site and in the surrounding neighborhood;



      (4)   The height, location, materials, color, texture, area,
setbacks and mass, as well as parts of any structure (buildings, walls, signs
and lighting) and landscaping is appropriate to the development, the
neighborhood and the community;



      (5)   Ingress, egress, internal and external traffic
circulation, off-street parking facilities, loading and service areas, and
pedestrian ways are designed as to promote safety and convenience;



      (6)   The architectural character of the proposed structure is
in harmony with, and compatible to, structures in the neighboring environment
and the architectural character desired for the town; avoiding excessive
variety or monotonous repetition; and



      (7)   All mechanical equipment, appurtenances and utility
lines are concealed from view and integral to the building and site design.



   (G)   Town staff will review the design review application materials
and will determine whether the design review application shall be reviewed by
town staff or forwarded to the Planning and Zoning Commission.



   (H)   Design review applications reviewed by town staff shall
include applications for:



      (1)   Attached signs, except where required by the planned
unit development or comprehensive sign plan or within the historic district;



      (2)   Landscaping, parks and recreational fields, except for
commercial recreational facilities; and/or



      (3)   Projects on less than one acre and/or involving less
than 10,000 square feet of floor/building area, except for projects within
the historic district.



   (I)   Design review applications can be approved, approved with
conditions, or denied. Design review decisions rendered by town staff can be
appealed within 15 days to the Planning and Zoning Commission.



   (J)   Design review applications that are ineligible for staff
review or staff reviewed design review decisions subject to appeal shall be
forwarded for consideration and recommendation to the Planning and Zoning
Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hear the application at
a scheduled meeting, shall review the findings of staff, and shall either:



      (1)   Approve the application;



      (2)   Deny the application; or



      (3)   Approve the application with conditions.



   (K)   If the application is found to be lacking, or in noncompliance
with any of the items of this Development Code, and adequate resolution
cannot be ensured by the applicant, the application shall be denied, and the
applicant shall be provided a written response by the Planning Department,
stating the reasons for denial. The applicant may appeal the Planning
Commission’s decision to the Council within 15 days of the decision. The
appeal letter shall describe the unresolved issues and describe what design
solutions are proposed by the applicant. The applicant shall be notified of
the date of the Town Council meeting to consider the appeal a minimum of 15
days prior to the public meeting. The decision of the Town Council shall be
final.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-461)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006; Ord.
605-13, passed 2-3-2014)



§ 150.014  ZONE CHANGES; AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   Intent.  Regulations set forth in this Development Code and
boundaries of zoning districts established by the town may be amended,
supplemented, changed, modified or repealed when deemed necessary to best
serve the public interest, health, comfort, convenience, safety and general
welfare of the citizens of the town.



   (B)   Review.  Upon receipt of an application for an amendment,
including requests for use permits and special use permits, the Planning
Director or designee, shall review the application for completeness and
applicability to this Development Code and the general plan, comment on the
proposal and shall adhere to the posting and publication requirements
required by state law, including compliance with the citizen review process
provided in § 150.019, prior to the public hearing before the Planning
Commission. Requests for amendments shall be considered by the Planning
Commission for the purpose of making a written recommendation, which shall,
after holding a public hearing at which parties of interest and citizens have
been heard, include the reasons for the recommendations to the Mayor and
Council.



      (1)   The Town Council may adopt the recommendation of the
Commission without holding a second public hearing if there is no objection,
request for public hearing or other protest.



      (2)   The Town Council shall hold a public hearing if
requested in writing by the applicant, or by any person appearing in
opposition at the Commission hearing, or by any person who has filed a
written protest, in accordance with state law.



      (3)   If an application for amendment is denied by Council, or
the application is withdrawn after Commission hearing, the Commission shall
not consider an application for the same amendment within one year from the
date of the original hearing.



   (C)   Adoption.  Adoption of an amendment may be subject to the
conditions as the Council deems applicable to enforce this Development Code.
If one condition is a schedule for development of specific uses for which
zoning is requested, and at expiration of that period the property has not
been developed according to the schedule, it may be reverted to its former
zoning classification by the Town Council.



   (D)   Application.  An application for an amendment shall be filed
and signed by:



      (1)   The owner of the property;



      (2)   One or more of several joint owners of property whose
ownership constitutes a majority interest in the property;



      (3)   Seventy-five percent or more of the owners of property
in the area to be affected, when the application affects more than one
property; or



      (4)   An agent of any property owner(s) authorized to sign as
above, when the authority of the agent is in writing and filed with the
application.



   (E)   Protests.  If the owners of 20% or more of either the area of
the lots included in a proposed ordinance or zoning map change, or those
immediately adjacent in the rear or any side extending 150 feet therefrom, or
those directly opposite extending 150 feet from the street frontage of
opposite lots, file a protest in writing against a proposed ordinance
amendment, the amendment shall not become effective except by favorable vote
of three-fourths of the Council. If any member of the Council is unable to
vote because of a conflict of interest, then the required number of votes
shall be three-fourths of the remaining Council members (provided that
required number of votes shall not be less than a majority of the full
Council).



   (F)   Annexation.  Areas, when annexed to the town, shall, until
officially zoned by the Council, be considered to be zoned to densities and
uses no greater than those permitted by the county immediately prior to the
annexation.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. I, § 4-13)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.015  CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.



   (A)   Purpose.  Because there are some uses, which may be
beneficial to have within certain zones, and because these uses may not be
completely compatible with adjoining or nearby permitted uses if not
specifically controlled, this division permits these uses after certain
conditions have been met. The process outlined here will allow the Planning
and Zoning Commission and Council to review and approve or disapprove
applications for these uses. It will also allow for the modification of an
application, if desired, to make it more harmonious and compatible with
adjoining and/or nearby uses.



   (B)   Permitted uses.  Only those uses listed in the conditional
use section of each zone shall be permitted under the process provided for by
this division.



   (C)   Application.  Application for a conditional use permit shall
be made by a property owner or authorized agent upon forms provided by the
municipality. All information requested on the application form must be
completed before the application will be processed.



   (D)   Public hearing.  After receipt of a completed application
form under this division, including filing fee and list of property owners
within 300 feet of the property, items shall be placed on the Planning and
Zoning Commission's agenda for public hearing within 60 days after receipt of
the application.



   (E)   Notice.  Notice of the public hearing before the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall be given in the manner established in § 150.014. In
proceedings that are not initiated by the property owner, notice of the
public hearing shall also be mailed to the owners of property within 300 feet
of the subject property. This mailing shall occur at least 15 days prior to
the public hearing.



   (F)   Action by Commission.  Within 35 days of the public hearing
under this division, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall recommend
approval, approval with conditions or disapproval of the application. Notice
of the recommendation shall be sent to the Council and the applicant.



   (G)   Review.  In reviewing an application for a conditional use
permit, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider:



      (1)   The site of the proposed use and the surrounding land
uses;



      (2)   Access to the site; and



      (3)   The impact on adjoining and surrounding property if the
application is approved.



   (H)   Conditions.  In making its recommendation, the Planning and
Zoning Commission may include conditions which are deemed necessary to
protect the public health, safety and general welfare. These conditions may
include, but are not limited to:



      (1)   Regulation of use;



      (2)   Special yard requirements;



      (3)   Special buffers, fences or walls;



      (4)   Special parking areas;



      (5)   Street dedications and/or improvements or appropriate
bonds;



      (6)   Regulation of access points;



      (7)   Sign restrictions;



      (8)   Required maintenance of yard;



      (9)   Regulations of odors, noise, light or other special
environmental factors;



      (10)   Restrictions of hours of activity;



      (11)   Duration of use;



      (12)   Completion of development; and



      (13)   Other conditions which will make the proposed use more
compatible and harmonious with the surrounding land uses. In no case,
however, shall these conditions be less restrictive than those found in the
existing zoning classification.



   (I)   General requirements.  In addition to any of the above
special conditions, the Planning and Zoning Commission and Council shall
impose the following general requirements on every conditional use permit
which is granted:



      (1)   No conditional use approval shall be final until all
conditions imposed have been met;



      (2)   All of the special conditions shall constitute
restrictions which run with the land and which shall be binding upon the
owner of the land, successors or assigns;



      (3)   The special conditions imposed by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and/or Council shall be consented to in writing by the
applicant prior to issuance of a conditional use permit; and



      (4)   The resolution of the Council granting the application
together with all consent forms shall be recorded by the Recorder of the
county.



   (J)   Action by Council.  Upon receipt of a recommendation under
this division from the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Council shall
approve, approve with conditions or deny the application. Before acting on
the application, the Council may hold a public hearing on the application. If
it does, notice of the hearing will be in compliance with § 150.014. If it
does or does not hold a public hearing, the Council will approve, approve
with conditions or disapprove the application within 30 days of receiving a
recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission.



   (K)   Protests.  If written protests are received to an application
filed under this Development Code, the regulations of § 150.014(E) shall
apply.



   (L)   Revocation.  The Council, acting on the recommendation of the
Planning and Zoning Commission or on its own, may revoke any conditional use
permit for noncompliance with any of the conditions set forth in the
resolution granting the permit. This revocation shall occur by resolution of
the Council after a public hearing, notice for which shall be in accordance
with § 150.014. Written notice of the possibility of revocation shall be
mailed to the applicant or successor not less than 30 days prior to the
Council meeting at which the issue will be discussed. The revocation of a
conditional use permit shall have the effect of denying all rights and
privileges granted by the approval of the conditional use permit.



   (M)   Time limit.  If an established time limit for development
expires or if a time limit for the duration of the carrying on of the
conditional use has been established as a of the condition of approval, the
permission for the use shall be considered to be revoked upon the date of
expiration without any notification to the applicant or successor.



   (N)   Alteration of structures. Any proposed changes, either
additions, enlargements or modifications of the structures approved in any
conditional use permit or any proposed extension of the uses into areas
approved in any permit shall follow the same process as outlined in this
division. No building permit for any change shall be issued unless the
Council has approved the change.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. I, § 4-14)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.016  EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS.



   Regulations specified in this Development Code shall be subject to the
following exceptions, modifications and interpretations:



   (A)   Extension of time.  Under special conditions, the Council may
grant extensions of time unless otherwise set forth in this Development Code.



   (B)   Use of existing lots of record.  In any district where
dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling may be located on any lot
or plot of official record that existed on the effective date of this
Development Code, which does not meet area and/or width requirements of this
Development Code.



   (C)   Structures permitted above the height limit.  Building height
limitations of this Development Code may be modified as follows: public,
semi-public or public service buildings, sanitariums, schools, churches and
temples, when permitted in a district, may have the applicable height limit
waived by the Town Council, provided that each setback is increased one foot
for each foot of additional building height above the height limit otherwise
provided in that district.



   (D)   Area requirements.  In any residential district where neither
the public water supply nor public sanitary sewer is accessible, lot area and
frontage requirements shall be consistent with county or state health
requirements and meet the minimum requirements of the zone district in which
it is located.



   (E)   Other exceptions to yard requirements. Every part of a
required yard shall be open to the sky, unobstructed by any structure, except
for permitted accessory buildings, and except for ordinary projections of
sills, bay windows, cornices and other features permitted elsewhere in this
Development Code.



   (F)   Mixed-use yard requirements.  When buildings are erected
containing two or more uses housed vertically, required side yards for the
first floor use shall control.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. I, § 4-15)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.017  APPLICATIONS AND FEES.



   (A)   Applications.  Applications for use permits, appeals,
variances, amendments and design review shall be made in the Office of the
Planning Director on forms provided. Applications shall contain the following
information supplied by the applicant:



      (1)   Vicinity ownership map.  Drawn to scale, at least eight
and one-half inches by 11 inches, showing all parcels adjacent to and
surrounding the property within a radius of 150 feet from exterior boundaries.



      (2)   Ownership lists.  Typed in the form of mailing labels,
containing complete names and mailing addresses of owners and parcel
designations within a radius of 300 feet of the boundaries of the property.



      (3)   Plot plan.  Drawn to scale, at least eight and one-half
inches by 11 inches by 17 inches, or as otherwise required by this
Development Code, showing dimensions of the property, name and width of the
internal and abutting streets, roads or alleys and existing buildings, fences
and easements (with distances to property lines).



      (4)   Legal description of property.  Either lot or tract of
a recorded subdivision, or metes and bounds description prepared by a
registered Engineer and licensed land surveyor and map of the same.



      (5)   Letter of explanation.  Explaining the nature and
intent of the proposed development, reasons justifying the request and
expected effects upon surrounding neighborhoods and the town at- large.



      (6)   Additional materials.  Development plans, elevations,
maps and other materials may be required (in accordance with other
stipulations of this Development Code).



   (B)   Fees.  Fees for all matters pertinent to the administration
of this Development Code will be set from time to time by resolution of the
Town Council, including but not limited to the following:



      (1)   General plan amendment;



      (2)   Request for re-zoning or special use;



      (3)   Code text amendment;



      (4)   Design review;



      (5)   Appeal of site plan decision to Town Council;



      (6)   Amendment to an approved site plan;



      (7)   Use permit;



      (8)   Variance;



      (9)   Code interpretation;



      (10)   Extension of re-zoning, special use, use permit or
variance;



      (11)   Continuance of application hearing at applicant's
request;



      (12)   Landscape plans review;



      (13)   Landscape inspection fee;



      (14)   Right-of-way and easement abandonment fee; and



      (15)   Annexation initiated by land owner.



   (C)   Refunds.  Application fees shall not be refundable.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. I, § 4-16)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.018  BUILDING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY.



   Neither building permits nor certificates of occupancy may be issued
until the use of building(s) and land conforms with this Development Code and
all other applicable codes and ordinances.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. I, § 4-17)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.019  CITIZEN REVIEW PROCESS.



   (A)   Neighborhood meeting.  Prior to any public hearing, as
required under § 150.014, on any application for any zoning ordinance that
changes any property from one zoning district to another, a use or special
use permit application that imposes any regulation not previously imposed, or
that removes or modifies any regulation previously imposed, the Planning
Director or designee, shall require the applicant to conduct a neighborhood
meeting or an acceptable alternative prior to a public hearing to consider
the proposal. A written notice of the application shall be mailed to all
adjacent landowners of the property that is subject to a re-zoning, use or
special use permit application and to the other persons as the Planning
Director or designee reasonably determines to be other potentially affected
citizens. In determining the number of potentially affected citizens, the
Planning Director or designee, shall review the density and intensity of
residential development in the general vicinity, the existing street system
and other factors that may be related to the zoning or use permit's impact on
the character of the neighborhood.



   (B)   Written notice.  The written notice shall also include a
general explanation of the substance of the proposed re-zoning, use permit or
special use permit application and shall state the date, time and place
scheduled for a neighborhood meeting, at which any adjacent landowner(s) or
those other potentially affected citizens, will be provided a reasonable
opportunity to express any issues or concerns that the landowner or citizen
may have with the proposed zoning or use permit application.



   (C)   Publication.  At the discretion of the Planning Director,
written notice shall be given at least 15 days before the neighborhood
meeting in at least one of the following methods:



      (1)   The notice shall be published once in a newspaper of
general circulation published or circulated in the town.



      (2)   The notice shall be posted upon the sign required in §
150.014 unless waived by the Planning Director or designee.



      (3)   The notice shall be mailed in accordance with the same
procedures, and delivered in accordance with the provisions of § 150.014.



   (D)   Time, date and location.  The Planning Director, upon
consultation with the applicant, shall establish a time, date and place for
the neighborhood meeting that provides a reasonable opportunity for the
applicant, adjacent landowners and those other potentially affected citizens
to discuss and express their respective views concerning the application and
any issues or concerns that they may have with the zoning or re-zoning
ordinance and use permit proposed by the application. The Planning Director
or designee shall attend the meeting, but is not required to conduct the
meeting. The Planning Director or designee shall report the results of the
neighborhood meeting to the Planning and Zoning Commission and Mayor and Town
Council at the time as they take action on the application.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. I, § 4-18)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)




DEFINITIONS




§ 150.030  TERMS AND WORDS.



   (A)   For this Development Code, certain terms and words are herein
defined.



   (B)   Present tense shall include future tense, singular number
shall include plural, and plural shall include singular; SHALL is mandatory
and MAY is permissive; PERSONS include individuals, partnerships,
corporations, clubs or associations; reference to one gender shall include
the other.



   (C)   The following terms may be used interchangeably: LOT, PARCEL,
PLOT or PREMISES; USED, ARRANGED, OCCUPIED or MAINTAINED; BUILDING or
STRUCTURE; SOLD or DISPENSED; ZONE or DISTRICT.



   (D)   TOWN shall mean the Town of Florence; BOARD shall mean the
Board of Adjustment; COMMISSION shall mean the Planning and Zoning
Commission; COUNCIL shall mean the Town Council and COMMITTEE shall mean the
Committee.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. II, § 4-36)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.031  DEFINED WORDS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABUT and/or ABUTTING.  Two adjoining properties sharing a common
property line; also where two or more adjoin only at a corner, but not
including cases where adjoining lots are separated by a street or alley.



Abutting and/or Adjacent and/or Adjoining







 



   ACCESS or ACCESS WAY.  The place, means or way by which pedestrians
and vehicles shall have safe, adequate and usable ingress and egress to a
property or use as required by this Development Code.



   ACCESS STREET.  A street or road which is parallel to and adjacent to
an arterial street and provides a means of direct ingress and egress to
abutting property.



   ACCESSORY BUILDING.  A subordinate building, the use of which is
customarily incidental to that of the dominant use of the main building or
premises including bona fide servant quarters.



   ACCESSORY USE.  A use customarily incidental, related, appropriate and
clearly subordinate to the main use of the lot or building, which accessory
use does not alter the principal use of the subject lot or building or
adversely affect other properties in the district.



   ACRE.  An area of land containing 43,560 square feet.



   ADJACENT.  The condition of being near to (e.g., properties separated
by a street or alley) or abutting.



   AGRICULTURE.  The tilling of the soil, the raising of crops,
horticulture, animal husbandry and uses customarily incidental thereto, but
not including commercial slaughterhouses, stockyards, meat packing plants,
fertilizer yards, bone yards or plants for the reduction of animal matter.



   AIRPORT.  Property used or intended primarily for taking off and
landing of aircraft, and appurtenant areas used or intended for airport
buildings or facilities (e.g., open spaces, taxiways and tie-down areas,
hangers and accessory buildings).



   ALLEY.  A public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of
vehicular access to abutting property and is not intended for general traffic
circulation.



   AMENDMENT.  A change in the wording, context or substance of this
Development Code, an addition or deletion, or a change in the district
boundaries or classifications upon the district map, which imposes any
regulation not heretofore imposed or removes or modifies any regulation
heretofore imposed.



   AMUSEMENT PARK.  An outdoor facility, which may include structures and
buildings, where there are various devices for entertainment, including
rides, booths for the conduct of games or sale of items, and buildings for
show and entertainment.



   ANALOGOUS USE.  Any use which is comparable to the permitted uses, is
similar in one or more important ways to the permitted uses or resembles the
permitted uses in one or more aspects. ANALOGOUS USE shall not be anymore
deleterious, obnoxious or harmful than the uses permitted.



   ANGSTROM and/or ANGSTROM UNIT.  One/10,000,000,000 of a meter
(.000000000328 feet).



   ANIMAL CLINIC or ANIMAL HOSPITAL.  A place where animals or pets are
given medical or surgical treatment in emergency cases and are cared for
during the time of the treatment. Use as kennel shall be limited to short
time boarding and shall be only incidental to the hospital use and shall be
enclosed in a soundproof structure.



   ANTENNA.  Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a
building or structure and used to transmit or receive communications that
radiates or captures electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals,
radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunication
signals, or other communication signals. This definition does not include a
personal use antenna or amateur antenna.



   APARTMENT.  See DWELLING, MULTIPLE.



   AUTOMOBILE (AUTO) REPAIR.  Refers to all aspects of repair of motor
vehicles including, but not limited to, lubrication, tune-up and preventive
maintenance.



   AUTOMOBILE SALES, NEW.  A franchised agency selling new motor vehicles
and providing services commonly associated with motor vehicle sales. New
automobile dealership may include sale of used motor vehicles.



   AUTOMOBILE SALES, USED.  An agency selling used motor vehicles not in
conjunction with or on same site as new motor vehicle franchise and providing
services commonly associated with motor vehicle sales.



   BAR or COCKTAIL LOUNGE.  A business establishment devoted primarily to
alcoholic beverage service to which food service is only incidental.



   BASEMENT.  That portion of a building between floor and ceiling, which
is partly below and partly above grade, but so located that the vertical
distance from grade to the floor below is less than the vertical distance
from grade to ceiling. (See STORY.)



   BLOCK.  A piece or parcel of land or a group of lots entirely
surrounded by public streets, streams, railroads or parks or a combination
thereof.



   BOARDINGHOUSE.  A building where, for compensation and by
prearrangement for definite periods, meals or lodging and meals are provided
for three or more persons, but not exceeding 20 persons.



   BUILDING.  Any structure for the shelter, housing or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. Each portion of a
building separated by a dividing wall or walls without openings may be deemed
a separate building for the purpose of issuing building permits. This does
not include doghouses, play-houses and the like.



   BUILDING, ACCESSORY.  A building or structure which is subordinate to,
and the use of which is customarily incidental to that of the main building,
structure or use on the same lot or parcel. (See ACCESSORY BUILDING.)



   BUILDING AREA.  The total area, taken on a horizontal plane at the
mean grade level, of the principal buildings and all accessory buildings,
exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces and steps.



   BUILDING HEIGHT.  The vertical distance from the grade to the highest
point of the coping of a flat roof, or to the highest point of a mansard
roof, or to the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof.



   BUILDING LINE.  A line between which it and the street right-of-way
line no building or structure, or portion thereof, shall be erected,
constructed or otherwise established, except as permitted herein.



   BUILDING PERMIT.  A permit required for the erection, construction,
modification, addition to or moving of any building, structure or use in the
incorporated area of the town.



   BUILDING, PRIMARY.  A building or buildings in which is conducted the
principal use of the lot on which it is situated. In any residential
district, any dwelling shall be deemed to be the primary building of the lot
on which the same is situated.



   BUILDING SETBACK.  The minimum distance as prescribed by this
Development Code between any property line and the closest point of the
foundation or any supporting post or pillar of any building or structure
related thereto. (See YARD, REQUIRED FRONT, REQUIRED SIDE and REQUIRED REAR)



   BUILDING SITE.  The ground area of a building or buildings together
with all open spaces adjacent thereto as required by this Development Code.



   CAMPGROUND.  Any lot, parcel or tract of land used, designed,
maintained and intended for rent of plots or sites to accommodate temporary
camping by the traveling public whether or not a charge is made for the use
of the park and its facilities.



   CARPORT.  An accessory building or portion of a main building with two
or more open sides designated or used for the parking of motor vehicles.
Enclosed storage facilities may be provided as part of a CARPORT.



   CELLAR.  That portion of a building between floor and ceiling which is
wholly or partly below grade and so located that the vertical distance from
grade to the floor below is equal to or greater than the vertical distance
from grade to ceiling. (See STORY)



   CEMETERY.  Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead
and dedicated for such purposes, including columbaria, crematoriums,
mausoleums and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the
boundaries of the premises.



   CHURCH.  A building or group of buildings used primarily as a place of
communion or worship. Includes convents, religious educational buildings and
parish houses, but not parochial schools.



   CLUB or LODGE.  A regularly constituted association of persons who are
bona fide members paying regular dues, primarily organized for some common
social purpose and which derives not more than one-half of its revenue or
income from the sale of goods and services to its members or others.



   COMMISSION.  The Planning and Zoning Commission of the town.



   COMMITTEE.  A committee established to review the subdivision and site
planning process.



   COMMON PUBLIC AREA.  Any property to be dedicated to the public for
recreational, leisure or aesthetic uses. COMMON PUBLIC AREA also includes any
private property which is to be used by the general population of a
subdivision or planned unit development (PUD) and which is to be maintained
by a homeowner's association or similar organization.



   CONDITIONAL APPROVAL.  Affirmative action by the Commission or the
Council indicating that approval will be forthcoming upon satisfaction of
certain specified stipulations.



   CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.  A permit which may be granted under the
provisions of this title and which, when granted, authorizes a particular use
to be made of a particular premises, subject to compliance with all the terms
and conditions contained in the permit.



   CONVENT.  A housing facility where the residents are limited to
members of a specific religious order.



   CORRECTIONAL FACILITY.  A facility for the detention, confinement,
treatment and/or rehabilitation of persons arrested or convicted for the
violation of civil or criminal law.  The facilities include an adult
detention center, juvenile delinquency center, pre-release center,
correctional community treatment center, jail and prison, but exclude a
municipal or county jail facility that is an accessory use to a police
station, sheriff’s office or other associated governmental facility.



   DAYCARE CENTER AND/OR NURSERY.  Any facility operated for the purpose
of providing care, protection and guidance to ten or more individuals during
only part of a 24-hour day. This term includes nursery schools, preschools,
daycare centers for individuals, and other similar uses but excludes public
and private educational facilities or any facility offering care to
individuals for a full 24-hour period.



   DEPARTMENT.  The Engineering and/or Planning Department of the
municipality.



   DEVELOPMENT MASTER PLAN (DMP).  A preliminary master plan for the
development of a large or complicated land area, the platting of which is
expected in progressive stages. A development master plan may be designed by
the subdivider or by the Department and shall be subject to Commission
approval.



   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY.  A building, or portion thereof, designed
for occupancy by three or more families.



   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY.  A building designed for occupancy by two
families.



   DWELLING UNIT.  One or more rooms in a dwelling designed for occupancy
by one family for living purposes and having its own cooking and sanitary
facilities.



   EASEMENT.  A grant by the owner of the use of a strip of land by the
public, a corporation or persons for specific uses and purposes and so
designated.



   EFFICIENCY APARTMENT.  A dwelling unit which has only one living and
sleeping room; the dwelling unit, however, may also have a separate room
containing only kitchen facilities and also a separate room containing only
sanitary facilities.



   ENGINEERING PLANS.  Plans, profiles, cross sections and other required
details for the construction of public improvements, prepared by a civil
engineer registered in the state in accordance with the approved preliminary
plat and in compliance with Uniform Standard Details and Specifications for
Public Works Construction as published and amended by the Maricopa
Association of Governments and approved by the Council.



   EXCEPTION.  Any parcel of land which is within the boundaries of the
subdivision which is not owned by the subdivider or which is not to be a part
of the subdivision if owned by the subdivider.



   FACTORY BUILT BUILDING (MODULAR).  A structure fabricated in a factory
and delivered to the building site in one or more sections except that it
does not include a MOBILE HOME or MANUFACTURED HOME as defined in this
Development Code. The structure shall be designed only for installation on a
site-built permanent foundation and not intended to be moved once installed
on the foundation. The unit shall include all the plumbing, heating, cooling,
gas and electrical systems of the building and shall bear the state insignia
of approval pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-2195. A modular home shall be considered
the same as a building and/or a dwelling unit and, building permits for these
structures may be issued only in those residential zones which allow
conventional construction of homes as a permitted use.



   FAMILY.  One or more persons occupying a premises and living as a
single housekeeping unit as distinguished from a group occupying a
BOARDINGHOUSE, LODGING HOUSE or HOTEL as herein defined.



   FARM.  An area of four or more contiguous acres that is used for the
production of farm crops such as vegetables, fruit trees, cotton, grain and
other crops and their storage on the area, as well as raising thereon of farm
animals, such as poultry, horses, cattle or swine. FARMS  may not include
commercial feedlots, slaughterhouses, packing plants, dairies or swine
operations.



   FINAL APPROVAL.  Unconditional approval of the final plat by the
Council as evidenced by certification on the plat by the Mayor of the
municipality and which constitutes authorization for the Town Clerk to record
the plat.



   FRONTAGE.  All property on one side of a street between two
intersecting streets (crossing or terminating) measured along the line of the
street, or, if the street is a dead end, then all of the property abutting on
one side between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street
including property fronting on a cul-de-sac.



   GARAGE, PRIVATE.  An accessory building or portion of the main
building, designed or used for the shelter or storage of self-propelled
vehicles owned or operated by the occupants of the main building, provided
that no private garage may be used or rented for the storage of commercial
trucks having a capacity in excess of one ton.



   GARAGE, PUBLIC.  Premises, except those herein defined as a private
garage, used for the storage or care of self-propelled vehicles, or where the
vehicles are equipped for operations or repaired, or kept for hire or sale.



   GENERAL PLAN.  A comprehensive plan, or parts thereof, meeting the
requirements of A.R.S. § 9-461.05 and providing generally for the future
growth and improvement of the municipality, and for the general location and
coordination of streets and highways, schools and recreation areas, public
building sites and other physical developments.



   GOLF COURSE.



      (1)   MINIATURE GOLF COURSE.  Any course where there is an
average of not more than 100 feet between the tee and hole.



      (2)   PAR-3 GOLF COURSE.  Any course which does not fall
within the definitions of REGULATION orminiature golf course as defined
herein.



      (3)   REGULATION GOLF COURSE. Any course where there is an
average of 300 yards or more between the tee and green of each hole and there
are not less than nine holes.



   GRADE.  Elevations for purposes of height limitations shall be
measured from the natural grade. NATURAL GRADE shall be the natural and
original ground level. It shall be determined from an original topography or,
in case grading or filling has been performed, from the level of adjoining
streets or sidewalks. Wherever a building or wall is constructed adjoining a
street, the grade shall be measured from the back of the sidewalk or, in case
there is no sidewalk, then either from the center of the paving or the street.



   GROSS LAND AREA AND/OR GROSS SITE AREA.  The total area of a parcel
and one-half of all the abutting dedicated streets, alleys, road easements,
and/or alley easements. In cases of partial dedications or easements, the
gross land area shall extend to what would be the dedication or easement
centerline if a full dedication or easement existed.



   GUESTHOUSE.  An attached or detached accessory building used to house
guests of the occupants of the principal building, and which is never rented
or offered for rent.



   GUEST ROOM.  A room which is designed to be occupied by one or more
guests for sleeping purposes, and having no kitchen facilities and not
including dormitories for sleeping.



   HALFWAY HOUSE.  A facility for the housing, rehabilitation, and
training of persons on probation, parole, or early release from correctional
institutions, or other persons found guilty of criminal offenses.



   HILLSIDE SUBDIVISION.  Any subdivision or that portion of a
subdivision located in terrain having a cross-slope exceeding 10%.



   HOME OCCUPATION.  Any occupation or profession carried on by a member
of a family, residing on the premises, and which use is clearly incidental to
the use of the structure for dwelling purposes and which does not change the
exterior character of the premises in any way. There shall be no commodity
sold upon the premises, nor shall the use generate pedestrian or vehicular
traffic beyond that normal to the district in which it is located, and
further there shall be no signs, buildings or structures other than those
permitted in the district. A carport or garage may not be used for home
occupations. There shall be no use of material or mechanical equipment not
recognized as being part of normal household or hobby use. HOME OCCUPATION
shall include the use of premises by a physician, surgeon, dentist, lawyer,
clergyperson or other professional persons for consultation or emergency
treatment, but not for the general practice of the professions.



   HOSPITAL.  A place for treatment or other care of human ailments, and
shall include SANITARIUM, CLINIC and MATERNITY HOME, unless otherwise
specified.



   HOTEL.  A building in which lodging is provided and offered to the
public for compensation and which is open to transient guests, improvements,
the improvements of the increment may be required to connect to those of the
existing subdivision or increment.



   INCREMENT.



      (1)   A portion of a platted subdivision which is intended to
be built as a unit and for which all services will be provided prior to the
occupancy of any dwelling unit.



      (2)   If a subdivision increment is to be built adjacent to an
existing subdivision or increment with existing improvements, the
improvements may be required to connect to those of the existing subdivision
or increment.



   INSTITUTION.  A building or buildings occupied by a nonprofit
corporation or a nonprofit establishment for public use.



   IRRIGATION FACILITIES.  Canals, laterals, ditches, conduits, gates,
pumps and allied equipment necessary for the supply, delivery and drainage of
irrigation water and the construction, operation and maintenance of such.



   KENNEL.  Any premises where four or more animals are bred, boarded
and/or trained for commercial purposes.



   KITCHEN.  Any room in a building which is used, intended or designed
to be used for cooking or preparation of food.



   LANDSCAPED AREA.  An area containing living plants and void of asphalt
or concrete pavement except that decorative fountains shall be allowed. A
maximum of 20% of the area may be covered with decorative rock or boulders.



   LOADING SPACE.  A permanently maintained space used for loading on the
same lot as the main building accessible to a street or alley.



   LODGING HOUSE.  A building where lodging only is provided for
compensation to three or more, but not exceeding 20 persons.



   LOT.  A piece or parcel of land separated from other pieces or parcels
by description, as in a subdivision or on a record of survey map or by metes
and bounds, for purposes of sale, lease or separate use.







 



   LOT, AREA.  The area of the lot, not including any area in a public
way.



   LOT, CORNER.  A lot adjoining two or more streets at their
intersections.



   LOT, DEPTH.  The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear
lot lines.



   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE.  A lot having a frontage on two non-intersecting
streets, as distinguished from a corner lot.



   LOT, KEY.  A lot adjacent to a corner lot having its side lot line in
common with the rear lot line of the corner lot and facing on the street
which forms the side boundary of the corner lot.



   LOT LINE.  The lines bounding a lot.



   LOT OF RECORD.  A lot which is a part of a subdivision, the plat of
which has been recorded in the office of the Town Clerk of the County
Recorder's office; or parcel of land, the deed of which is recorded in the
office of the County Recorder.







 



   LOT SPLIT. The division of improved or unimproved land whose area is
two and one-half acres or less into two or three tracts or parcels of land
for the purpose of sale or lease.



   LOT, THROUGH.  A lot abutting on two or more intersecting streets
where the interior angle of an intersection does not exceed 135 degrees. A
corner lot shall be considered to be in that block in which the lot fronts.



   LOT, WIDTH.  The width of a lot measured as follows: If the side
property lines are parallel, the shortest distance between these side lines.
If the side property lines are not parallel, the width of the lot shall be
the length of a line at right angles to the axis of the lot, at a distance
equal to the required front or rear building setback lines, whichever is the
lesser. The axis of a lot shall be a line generally perpendicular to the
fronting street which divides the lot into two equal parts.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A dwelling unit, manufactured after June 15, 1976
and built to HUD standards with a HUD seal affixed, that is transportable in
one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis, designed for use with or
without a permanent foundation and when installed will have the required
utilities.  Does not include MOBILE HOME or RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.



   MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION.  Any lot, tract or parcel of land used
or offered for use in whole or in part with or without charge for placement
or installation of one or more manufactured homes.



   MANUFACTURING.  An establishment engaged in the manufacture or
compounding process of raw materials.  These activities may include the
storage of large volumes of materials needed for the manufacturing process.



   MANUFACTURING, LIGHT.  A predominantly indoor establishment engaged in
the manufacture, predominantly from previously prepared materials of finished
products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment,
and packaging of such products, and incidental storage, sales and
distribution of the products.



   MOBILE HOME.  A transportable structure suitable for year round
single-family occupancy and utility connections similar to conventional
dwellings, which was constructed prior to June 15, 1976, and bears a state
insignia of approval pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-2195.  Does not include
MANUFACTURED HOME or RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.



   MODULAR BUILDING.  A building including a dwelling unit or habitable
room thereof that is either substantially or entirely manufactured at an
off-site location to be assembled on-site, and which complies with all the
applicable building codes adopted by the town.



   MONOPOLE.  A freestanding wireless support structure that is not more
than 40 inches in diameter at the ground level and that has all of the
wireless facilities mounted inside of the pole with the exception of the
antenna(s) and necessary concealed ground equipment. A monopole may also be
an alterative tower structure that is designed to replicate a tree or other
natural feature (also known as “stealth”).



   MOTEL.



      (1)   Any building or group of buildings containing guest
rooms or dwelling units, some or all of which have a separate entrance
leading directly from the outside of the building with garage or parking
space located on the lot and designed, used or intended wholly or in part for
the accommodation of automobile transients.



      (2)   Includes motor court, motor lodge and tourist court, but
not a manufactured home subdivision.



   MOTOR HOME.  A vehicular design unit built on or permanently attached
to a self-propelled vehicle chassis, van or chassis cab, which is an integral
part of the complete vehicle, to provide temporary or permanent living
quarters for recreation, camping or travel use.



   NEIGHBORHOOD PLAN.  A plan designed by the Department to guide the
platting of remaining vacant parcels in a partially built-up neighborhood so
as to make reasonable use of all land, correlate street patterns and achieve
the best possible land use relationships.



   NONCONFORMING BUILDING.  A building or portion thereof which was
lawful when established but which does not conform to a subsequently
established district or district regulation.



   NONCONFORMING LOT.  A parcel of land having less area, frontage or
dimensions than required in the district in which it is located.



   NONCONFORMING USE.  Any building or land lawfully occupied by a use at
the time of passage of this Development Code or amendment thereto which does
not conform after the passage of this Development Code or amendment thereto
with the use regulations of the district in which it is located.



   OPEN SPACE.  Space which can be enjoyed by people. This could include
landscaped plazas, grass, trees, shrubs, fountains, sitting areas, shade
structures for pedestrians and the like, and is meant to provide an open
garden atmosphere. OPEN SPACE does not include parking areas, vacant or
undeveloped lots or any other space which does not contribute to the quality
of the environment.



   OPEN SPACE, COMMON.  Any open space, other than private or frontage
open space, intended for use by all occupants of a development. This space
may include recreation oriented buildings and areas.



   OPEN SPACE FRONTAGE.  All the open space between the right-of-way line
of a dedicated public street and any perimeter structure(s) within the
development, except that this space may extend between structures or between
a structure and a side property line to a depth of not more than one-half the
width of the opening.



   OUTDOOR LIGHT FIXTURES.  Outdoor artificial illuminating devices,
outdoor fixtures, lamps and other devices, permanent or portable, used for
illumination or advertisement. The devices shall include, but are not limited
to, searchlight, spotlight or floodlights for:



      (1)   Buildings and structures;



      (2)   Recreational areas;



      (3)   Parking lot lighting;



      (4)   Landscape lighting;



      (5)   Billboards and other signage (advertising or other); and



      (6)   Street lighting.



   OWNER.  The person or persons holding title by deed to land, or
holding title as vendees under land contract, or holding any other title of
record.



   PARK MODEL.  A recreational vehicle that is designed for temporary,
seasonal or permanent residential use and does not exceed 400 square feet in
area, excluding accessory structures.



   PARKING LOT.  A parcel of land devoted to unenclosed parking spaces.



   PARKING SPACE.  A permanently surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed,
having an area of not less than 180 square feet which will accommodate a car,
minimum width nine feet. Parking as used in this Development Code is to mean
off-street parking with access from streets or secondary means or as approved
by subdivision plat.



   PEDESTRIAN WAY.  A public walk dedicated entirely through a block from
street to street or providing access to a school, park, recreation area or
shopping center.



   PERMITTED USES.  A use specifically permitted or a use analogous to
those specifically permitted.



   PLASMA DONATION CENTER.  A medical clinic that accepts blood product
donations, particularly plasma, and provides monetary payment for donations.



   PLAT.  A map of a subdivision.



   PLAT, FINAL.  A map of all or part of a subdivision providing
substantial conformance to an approved preliminary plat, prepared by a
registered professional Engineer or registered land surveyor in accordance
with the laws of the state and § 150.226.



   PLAT, PRELIMINARY.  A preliminary map, including supporting data,
indicating a proposed subdivision development, prepared in accordance with §
150.213(E).



   PLAT, RECORDED.  A final plat bearing all of the certificates of
approval required in § 150.227(D)(4) and duly recorded in the County
Recorder's Office.



   PRELIMINARY APPROVAL.  Approval of the preliminary plat by the
Commission as evidenced in its meeting minutes which constitutes
authorization to proceed with final engineering plans and final plat
preparation.



   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS.  Uniform Standard Details and
Specifications for Public Works Construction as published and amended by the
Maricopa Association of Governments and approved by the Council.



   RAILROAD.  The land used for general railroad purposes, including
mainline and switching trackage, repair shops, stations, communications
equipment, roundhouses and storage facilities; the term does not include
railroad equipment (miniature or otherwise) operated by its owner as a hobby
or as a part of the equipment of an amusement resort.



   RANCH.  An area of ten or more contiguous acres which is used for the
raising of livestock on a commercial basis; provided, however, that the ranch
does not include commercial pen feeding (feed lots). RANCH shall include
horse breeding and training but shall not include riding stables.



   RECREATION BUILDING.  An accessory building of one or more recreation
uses which will be used exclusively by the members of a designated club and
their guests. Recreational uses, and associated outdoor uses, permitted in
this building include, but are not limited to:



      (1)   Swimming, exercise, sauna and Jacuzzi;



      (2)   Licensed massage facilities;



      (3)   Tennis;



      (4)   Card playing;



      (5)   Arts and crafts;



      (6)   Billiards and bingo; and



      (7)   Dancing.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.  A vehicle designed to be self propelled or
permanently towable that is designed for residential use for recreational,
camping, travel, temporary or seasonal purposes, including PARK MODELS.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.  Covered carports, porches,
recreational vehicle awnings, heating and cooling units, detached storage
buildings and Arizona rooms.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE AWNINGS.  A lightweight overhead structure used
in conjunction with a recreational vehicle for the purpose of shading or
weather protection of areas such as carports, patios, porches and windows.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK.  An approved parcel or subdivision together
with certain accessory buildings and uses providing for the enjoyment and
benefit of the patrons of the park, in which individual spaces are provided
for parking or placement of a recreational vehicle for temporary or permanent
housing, whether or not a charge is made for the accommodation, excluding a
manufactured home subdivision.



   REFINERY.  A permanent facility for the purpose of refining,
processing, storing, and/or delivery of fossil fuels byproducts including,
but not limited to, gasoline, diesel fuel and motor oil.  Uses include those
that store products such as liquefied natural gas (LNG), compressed natural
gas (CNG), butane, and propane.



   RESORT.  A group or groups of buildings containing more than five
dwelling units and/or guest rooms and providing outdoor recreational
activities which may include golf, horseback riding, swimming, shuffleboard,
tennis and similar activities. A RESORT may furnish service customarily
furnished by a hotel, including a restaurant, cocktail lounge and convention
facilities.



   RETAIL.  The sale of commodities or goods in small quantities to
ultimate consumers.



   RETAIL, BIG BOX.  Any single use building, whether stand alone or
within a multi-building development, wherein the single use building occupies
at least 100,000 square feet of building coverage primarily devoted to, or
intended for, the sale or display of goods and merchandise for consumption by
the general public, including any outdoor sales and display area(s) and
storage/stockroom area(s), but excluding any outdoor area for the sale of
cars, trucks, boats, recreational vehicles, or manufactured homes.  For the
purposes of this definition, calculation of the building area(s) shall
include all other indoor and outdoor sales areas or customer service area(s)
that may be incidental to, but nevertheless share customer walking aisles or
store entrances with the big box retail use operator, whether or not the
area(s) are under the same management as the big box retail use operator.



   REVERSE FRONTAGE.  A lot having frontage on two non-intersecting
streets. The front of the lot shall be considered facing the interior street.



   SCREENING WALL.  A solid masonry wall designed and constructed so as
to conceal areas used for refuse, mechanical equipment, parking, storage and
service and loading bays from street and public view and to separate
potential incompatible land uses.



   SCHOOL or COLLEGE.  Unless otherwise specified, private or public
places of general instruction but shall not include daycare centers and/or
nursery schools, dancing schools, riding academies, trade or specialized
vocational schools.



   SERVICE STATION, AUTOMOTIVE.  A retail business engaged primarily in
the sale of motor fuels but also in supplying goods and services generally
required in the operation and maintenance of automotive vehicles. These may
include sale of petroleum products, sale and servicing of tires, batteries,
automotive accessories and replacement items, washing and lubrication
services, automotive maintenance and repair and the supplying of other
incidental customer services and products. Major automotive repairs, painting
and body and fender work, rental or sales of motor bikes, automobiles, boats,
trailers, trucks and any other type of sales or services not specifically
referred to herein are limited to the service area of the site.



   SHADE STRUCTURE.  An accessory building or a portion of a main
building with two or more open sides. It shall contain no space that is more
than 50% surrounded by walls.



   SHOPPING CENTER.  A group of stores planned and designed for the site
on which it is built, functioning as a unit, with off-street parking,
landscaped areas and pedestrian malls or plazas provided on the property as
an integral part of the unit.



   SIGN.  Any object, device, display or structure (including but not
limited to letters, words, numerals, figures, symbols, pictures, outline,
character, color, illumination, trademark, logo or any part or combination)
used for visual communication which is intended to attract the attention of
the public and is visible from the public rights-of-way or other properties.



   STABLE, COMMERCIAL.  A stable for horses, mules or ponies which are
let, hired, used or boarded on a commercial basis and for compensation.



   STABLE, PRIVATE.  A detached accessory building for the keeping of
horses, mules or ponies owned by the occupants of the premises and not kept
for remuneration, hire or sale.



   STORY.  That portion of a building included between the upper surface
of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the
topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper
surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished
floor level directly above a basement, cellar or unused under floor space is
more than six feet above grade as defined herein for more than 50% of the
total perimeter or is more than 12 feet above grade as defined herein at any
point, the basement, cellar or unused under floor space shall be considered
as a story.



   STREET.  A dedicated, public or private passageway, which affords a
principal means of access to abutting property. STREET shall mean any street,
avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, place, viaduct, easement for access
or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway or a
street or way shown in a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law or approved
by official action or a street or way in a plat duly filed and recorded in
the County Recorder's Office. A STREET includes the land within the street
right-of-way whether improved or unimproved and includes the improvements as
pavements, shoulders, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, parking space, bridges and
viaducts.



   STREET, ARTERIAL.  A street, which along with several others, forms
the skeletal structure of the traffic system within the municipality. Those
several streets carry the greatest number of cars across the municipality in
any direction.



   STREET, COLLECTOR.  A street that collects traffic from several
smaller streets within a residential neighborhood. It should serve as a major
access from a neighborhood to an arterial street or highway.



   STREET, CUL-DE-SAC.  A short local street permanently terminated in a
vehicular turnaround.



   STREET LINE.  A dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land
and a contiguous street (right-of-way).



   STREET, LOCAL.  Provides for direct access to residential, commercial,
industrial or other abutting land or local traffic movements and connects to
collector or arterial routes.



   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS.  Any change in the supporting members of a
building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, girders or any
complete rebuilding of the roof.



   STRUCTURE.  Any artificial piece of work constructed or erected, the
use of which requires a location on the ground or attached to something
having a location on the ground, but not including a tent, vehicle, trailer
coach or mobile home.



   SUBDIVIDER.  Individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association,
syndication, trust or other legal entity that files the application and
initiates proceedings for the subdivision of land in accordance with the
provisions of this Development Code, and the subdivider need not be the owner
of the property as defined by this Development Code.



   SUBDIVISION.  Improved or unimproved land or lands divided for the
purpose of financing, sale or lease, whether immediate or future, into four
or more lots, tracts or parcels of land; or, if a new street is involved, any
property which is divided into two or more lots, tracts or parcels of land
or, any property, the boundaries of which have been fixed by a recorded plat,
which is divided into more than two parts. SUBDIVISION also includes any
condominium, cooperative, community apartment, townhouse or similar project
containing four or more parcels, in which an undivided interest in the land
is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of any unit located thereon,
but plats of the projects need not show the buildings or the manner in which
the buildings or airspace above the property shown on the plat are to be
divided except as needed to ensure compliance with the regulations of this
Development Code. SUBDIVISION does not include the following:



      (1)   The sale or exchange of parcels of land to or between
adjoining property owners if the sale or exchange does not create additional
lots;



      (2)   The partitioning of land in accordance with other
statutes regulating the partitioning of land held in common ownership; and



      (3)   The leasing of apartments, offices, stores or similar
space within a building or trailer park, nor to mineral, oil or gas leases.



   SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE.  A contained body of water, used for swimming
or bathing purposes, either above ground level or below ground level, with
the depth of the container being more than 18 inches or the area being more
than 38 square feet.



   SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC.  The same definition as private pool but
operated as a commercial business. Public swimming pools shall conform to
county health requirements.



   TATTOO, BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENT.  Any establishment offering
indelible designs, letters, scrolls, figures, symbols or other marks that are
placed on or under the skin with ink or colors by the aid of needles or other
instruments and that cannot be removed without a surgical procedure; any
establishment offering designs, letters, scrolls, figures or symbols or other
marks done by scarring/branding on or under the skin; any establishment where
decorations or other devices are inserted into the skin; any establishment
using techniques such as penetrating, perforating, boring or creating a hole
in the skin or another human body part; or any establishment whose primary
function is permanent body alteration for non-surgical purposes.  The
following establishments shall be exempt from this definition: those where
offering permanent facial make-up/cosmetics ancillary to the primary
business; those where procedures are performed by a person authorized by the
laws of this state to practice medicine, osteopathy, chiropractic, podiatry,
naturopathy or acupuncture and the procedures are performed in conformity
with the standards of that profession; those where procedures are performed
by registered nurses, licensed practical nurses or technicians, when acting
under the supervision of a licensed physician or osteopath; those where the
only type of piercing offered is ear piercing.



   TOBACCO RETAILER.  Any person or business who primarily sells or
offers for sale, tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco paraphernalia, or who
distributes samples of tobacco products or paraphernalia.  These businesses
include but are not limited to, tobacco shops, cigars and pipe retailer,
cigarette or electronic cigarette retailer and smoking establishments.



   TOWER.  Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for
the purpose of supporting one or more wireless facilities, antennas for
telephone, radio, and similar communication purposes, including monopole
towers. The term includes, but is not limited to, radio and television
transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular
telephone towers, stealth towers, and alternative tower structures. The term
also includes the structure and any support thereto.



   TOWNHOUSE.  Single-family dwelling with party walls and no side yards
between abutting dwellings within a subdivision recorded in accordance with
state statutes.



   USE.  The purpose for which land or building is occupied or
maintained, arranged, designed or intended.



   USE, ACCESSORY.  A subordinate use customarily incident to and
conducted on the same lot with the principal use or building including bona
fide household employee’s quarters.



   UTILITIES.



      (1)   Installations or facilities, underground or overhead,
furnishing for the use of the public electricity, gas, steam, communication,
water, drainage, sewage disposal or flood control, owned and operated by any
person, firm, corporation, municipal department or board, duly authorized by
state or municipal regulation.



      (2)   As used herein may also refer to the persons, firms,
corporations, departments or boards, as sense requires.



   UTILITY COMPANY.  Any provider of utility services including but not
limited to water, sewer, electricity, gas, telephone, cable and the like
within the town.



   WALL.  Any structure or device required by this Development Code for
screening purposes forming a physical barrier, which is so constructed that
50% or more of the vertical surface is closed and prevents the passage of
light, air and vision through the surface in a horizontal plane. This shall
include concrete, concrete block, wood or other materials that are solids and
are so assembled as to form a screen. Where a solid wall is specified, 100%
of the vertical surface shall be closed, except for approved gates or other
access ways. Where a masonry wall is specified, the wall shall be concrete
block, brick, stone or other similar material and 100% of the vertical
surface shall be closed, except for approved gates or other access ways.



   WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY.



      (1)   Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network, including
both of the following:



         (a)   Equipment associated with wireless communications;
and



         (b)   Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or
fiber-optic cables, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable
equipment, regardless of technological configuration.



      (2)   Includes small wireless facilities.



      (3)   Does not include the structure or improvements on,
under, or within which the equipment is located.



      (4)   Does not include non-commercial, non-business fixed
wireless communications, such as television and satellite reception antennae
or amateur radio antennae.



   WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY; SMALL.  A wireless facility that
meets both of the following qualifications:



      (1)   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of not more
than six cubic feet in volume, or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed
elements, the antenna and all of the antenna’s exposed elements could fit
within an imaginary enclosure of not more than six cubic feet in volume.



      (2)   All other wireless equipment associated with the
facility is cumulatively not more than 28 cubic feet in volume. The following
types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation
of equipment volume pursuant to this code:



         (a)   An electric meter;



         (b)   Concealment elements;



         (c)   A telecommunications demarcation box;



         (d)   Ground-based enclosures;



         (e)   Grounding equipment;



         (f)   A power transfer switch;



         (g)   A cut-off switch; and/or



         (h)   Vertical cable runs for the connection of power
and other services.



   YARD.  An open area at grade level between the building envelope and
the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a
structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein. In
measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the
depth of a front yard or depth of a rear yard, the minimum horizontal
distance between the lot line and the main building envelope shall be used.







 



   YARD, FRONT.  An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a main
building envelope, extending the full width of the lot and situated between
the street line and the front line of the building envelope projected to the
side lines of the lot. The front yard of a corner lot may be either street
frontage. Double frontage lots within districts that require front yards
shall maintain the required front yard on both streets.



   YARD, REAR.  An open space on the same lot with a main building
envelope between the rear line of the building envelope and the rear line of
the lot extending the full width of the lot. The rear yard shall always be
opposite the front yard.



   YARD, SIDE.  An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a main
building situated between the building envelope and the side line of the lot
and extending from the front yard to the rear yard. Any lot line not a rear
line or a front line shall be deemed a side lot line. An INTERIOR SIDE YARD
is defined as the side yard adjacent to a common lot line.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. II, § 4-37)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006; Ord.
593-13, passed 4-1-2013; Ord. 601-13, passed 9-16-2013; Ord. 662-18, passed
8-20-2018)




ZONING DISTRICTS




§ 150.045  DISTRICTS.



   In order to classify, regulate, restrict and separate the use of land,
buildings and structures, and to regulate and to limit the type, height and
bulk of buildings and structures, and to regulate the areas of yards and
other open areas around and between buildings and structures, and to regulate
the density of dwelling units, the municipality is hereby divided into the
following zones:



   (A)   Residential districts.



      (1)   Rural Agricultural (RA-10);



      (2)   Rural Agricultural (RA-4);



      (3)   Single-Family Ranchette (R1-R);



      (4)   Rural Residential Equestrian Subdivision (RRES);



      (5)   Single-Family Residential (R1-18);



      (6)   Single-Family Residential (R1-6);



      (7)   Neighborhood Multiple-Family Residential (R-2);



      (8)   Multiple-Family Residential (MFR); and



      (9)   Manufactured Home Subdivision (MHS).



   (B)   Employment/commercial districts.



      (1)   Neighborhood Business (B-1);



      (2)   Neighborhood Office (NO);



      (3)   Downtown Commercial (DC);



      (4)   Highway Business Commercial (B-2);



      (5)   Tourist Commercial (TRC);



      (6)   Professional Office (PO);



      (7)   Public/Institutional (PI);



      (8)   Light Industrial (LI); and



      (9)   Heavy Industrial (HI).



   (C)   Overlay districts.



      (1)   Historic Overlay;



      (2)   Parking; and



      (3)   Recreation Vehicle Park/Subdivision.



   (D)   Mixed use districts.



      (1)   Planned Unit Development (PUD); and



      (2)   Territory Square (TS).



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. III, § 4-46)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006; Ord.
584-12, passed 10-1-2012)



§ 150.046  DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various
districts as shown on the zoning map, on file in the office of the Town
Clerk, accompanying the Code from which this Development Code is derived and
made a part of this Development Code, the following rules apply:



   (A)   Where a boundary is indicated as approximately following a
street or alley or the centerline thereof, or a lot line, the line shall be
construed to be the boundary.



   (B)   Where a boundary divides a lot, the location of the boundary
unless indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by use of the scale
appearing on the zoning map.



   (C)   Where a public street, alley or railroad or other right-of-way
is vacated or abandoned, the zone applied to abutting property shall
thereafter be deemed to extend to the centerline of the vacated or abandoned
right-of-way.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. III, § 4-47)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.047 DISTRICT USE REGULATIONS TABLES.



   (A)   Residential zoning district use regulations.



P=Permitted  N=Not Permitted  C=Conditional  T=Temporary Uses



 


Use

 

RA-10

 

RA-4

 

R1-R

 

RRES

 

R1-18

 

R-1-6

 

R-2

 

MFR

 

MHS






Agricultural buildings and structures

 

P

 

P

 

C

 

P

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N




Accessory buildings and uses

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P




Bed and breakfast

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N




Boarding or lodging house

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

C

 

C

 

N




Cemetery

 

C

 

C

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N




Condominium

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

P

 

P

 

N




Continuing care facility

 

C

 

C

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

C

 

N




Convent

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

N

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P

 

C




Duplex

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

P

 

P

 

N




Daycare center and/or nursery

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

N

 

C

 

C

 

N

 

C

 

N




Dwelling, multi-family

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

P

 

P

 

C




Dwelling, single-family

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

N




Farm

 

P

 

P

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N




Golf course

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C




Guest home, detached

 

P

 

P

 

C

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N




Greenhouse and/or nursery

 

C

 

C

 

N

 

C

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N




Group home

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C




Home for the aged or nursing home

 

C

 

C

 

N

 

C

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

C

 

C




Home occupation

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P




Manufactured home

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P

 

C

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

P




Medical marijuana operations, including medical marijuana dispensary offsite
cultivation locations, medical marijuana dispensaries and medical marijuana
infusion facilities (medical marijuana designated caregiver cultivation
locations and qualifying patient cultivation locations per applicable Town
and State Department of Health regulations)

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N




Model home complex and/or sales office

 

T

 

T

 

T

 

T

 

T

 

T

 

T

 

T

 

T




Mobile home

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N




Orphanage

 

C

 

C

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

P

 

N




Park, playground and community owned buildings

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P




Private club, fraternity, sorority and lodges

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

C

 

C




Public institutional buildings

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P




Public utility buildings, structures or appurtenances for public service uses

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C




Public or private school

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C




Ranch, non-commercial

 

P

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N




Recreation fields, public or private

 

P

 

P

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C




Recreation building

 

P

 

P

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C




Stable, private

 

P

 

P

 

C

 

P

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N




Stable, commercial

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N




Swimming pool (private)

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P




Temporary buildings used for the sale of homes or lots

 

T/C

 

T/C

 

T/C

 

T/C

 

T/C

 

T/C

 

T/C

 

T/C

 

T/C




Town home

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

P

 

P

 

N




Triplex

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

P

 

P

 

N





 



   (B)   Employment and/or commercial zoning district use regulations.



P=Permitted  N=Not Permitted  C=Conditional  T=Temporary Uses



 


Use

 

B-1

 

B-2

 

TRC

 

NO

 

PO

 

DC

 

PI

 

LI

 

HI






Airport

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

P

 

P

 

P




Armories and military installations

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

P

 

N

 

N




Accessory buildings

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P




Animal hospital and/or clinic

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

N

 

P

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N




Assembly within enclosed building

 

C

 

P

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

P

 

P




Art gallery

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

N

 

N




Automotive service stations and/or repairs including paint and body shops

 

C

 

P

 

C

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

P

 

P




Automobile wrecking yards

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N




Automobile rental agencies

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

P

 

P




Banks

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

N

 

N

 

N




Bar, lounge

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

N

 

C

 

C

 

N

 

N

 

N




Bed and breakfast

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

C

 

C

 

P

 

N

 

N

 

N




Billiards parlor < 5,000 square feet

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

N

 

N

 

P

 

N

 

C

 

C




Car wash, auto spa

 

C

 

P

 

C

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

P

 

P




College, business

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

N

 

P

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C




Commercial kennels, indoor

 

N

 

C

 

C

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

P

 

P




Commercial kennels, indoor and/or outdoor

 

N

 

N

 

C

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

C

 

P




Contractor office equipment yards

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

P

 

P




Correctional facility

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

C

 

C




Dairy/feedlot

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

C




Daycare center and/or nursery

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

N

 

N




Drive-through facilities

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

N

 

P

 

P




Dry cleaners without processing

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

N

 

P

 

P




Dry cleaners with processing

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

C

 

C




Dwelling, for sale, rent or lease

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

N

 

C

 

C




Farm

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

P

 

P




Gasoline dispensing and/or service stations

 

C

 

P/C

 

P/C

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

P/C

 

P/C




Grocery and/or supermarket

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

N

 

C

 

P

 

N

 

P

 

P




Halfway house

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

C

 

C




Hot mix, batch plants, concrete plants or similar uses

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

C

 

P




Hotel and/or motel

 

C

 

P

 

C

 

N

 

C

 

P

 

N

 

P

 

P




Hospital and outpatient clinics

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

N

 

C

 

N

 

P

 

P

 

P




Immigration processing and/or holding facility

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

C

 

C




Indoor commercial recreation facilities

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

N

 

C

 

C

 

N

 

P

 

P




Junk yard/salvage yard

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

C




Laundry (maximum 25 machines)

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

N

 

C

 

C

 

N

 

C

 

C




Laundry (more than 25 machines)

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

N

 

C

 

C

 

N

 

C

 

C




Manufactured home sales (new)

 

N

 

P/C

 

P/C

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

P/C

 

P/C




Manufacturing

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

C

 

P




Manufacturing, light

 

N

 

P

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

P

 

P




Medical, dental, clinical laboratories

 

C

 

P

 

P/C

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

C

 

C




Medical marijuana dispensaries

 

N

 

C

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

C

 

N




Medical marijuana operations, including medical marijuana dispensary offsite
cultivation locations and medical marijuana infusion facilities (medical
marijuana designated caregiver cultivation locations and qualifying patient
cultivation locations per applicable Town and State Department of Health
regulations)

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

C

 

N




Mini-storage facilities

 

N

 

C

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

P

 

P




Movie theaters excluding drive-in theaters

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

N

 

N

 

P

 

N

 

N

 

N




Motion picture production

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P

 

P




Museum and cultural centers

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P




Night watchman quarters

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P

 

P




Nursery, plant sales

 

C

 

P

 

C

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

P

 

P




Office, business

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

N

 

C

 

C




Office, professional

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

N

 

C

 

C




Office, semi-professional

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

N

 

C

 

C




Outdoor recreation facilities

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P

 

C

 

C




Quarry

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

C/T

 

P/T




Park, playground and community buildings

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

C

 

C




Personal services

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

N

 

P

 

P




Pharmacy > 10,000 square feet

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

C

 

P

 

P/C

 

N

 

C

 

C




Pharmacy > 10,001 square feet

 

P/C

 

P

 

P

 

N

 

P/C

 

P/C

 

N

 

C

 

N




Plasma donation center

 

N

 

P

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

P

 

P




Printing shop

 

P/C

 

P

 

C

 

N

 

C

 

P

 

N

 

P

 

P




Public, private or parochial schools

 

C

 

P

 

P/C

 

C

 

P

 

C

 

N

 

C

 

C




Public institutional buildings

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P




Public utility buildings

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P




Recreation vehicle park, campground

 

N

 

C

 

C

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

C

 

C




Refinery

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

C




Retail > 10,000 square feet

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

N

 

P

 

P




Retail > 10,000 square feet

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

N

 

C

 

C




Retail, big box

 

N

 

P

 

P

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

C

 

C




Retail, specialty

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

N

 

P

 

P

 

N

 

C

 

C




Restaurants with drive-through facilities

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

N

 

N

 

C

 

N

 

P

 

P




Restaurants without drive-thru

 

PP

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

N

 

P

 

N

 

P

 

P




Sale of new or used automobiles, trucks, boats, trailers and recreational
vehicles

 

C

 

P

 

C

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

P

 

P




Social service facilities

 

C

 

C

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N




Studio

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

N

 

N

 

N




Tattoo, body piercing establishment

 

N

 

P

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

P

 

P




Telephone answering service

 

C

 

P

 

C

 

C

 

P

 

N

 

N

 

P

 

P




Tobacco retailer

 

N

 

P

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

P

 

P




Vehicle motor sports facilities

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

C

 

P




Welding shop

 

N

 

C

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

P

 

P




Wholesale and/or distribution within enclosed building

 

C

 

P

 

C

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

P

 

P





 



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. III, § 4-48)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006; Ord.
555-11, passed 3-21-2011; Ord. 590-13, passed 1-22-2013; Ord. 593-13, passed
4-1-2013; Ord. 601-13, passed 9-16-2013; Ord. 606-13, passed 5-19-2014)



§ 150.048  RURAL AGRICULTURAL (RA-10).



   (A)   Purpose.  The rural agricultural (RA-10) district is intended
to preserve agricultural land and the agricultural heritage and aesthetic of
the area. Land use is composed of farming, agriculture and the raising of
livestock, together with a single-family residence and customary accessory
uses and buildings.



   (B)   (1)   Permitted uses.  The following uses are permitted in
the RA-10 zone:



      (2)   Those uses permitted in the RA-10 zoning district per
the table in § 150.047(A).



   (C)   Conditional uses.  Uses may be permitted subject to a
conditional use permit (see § 150.015 and the table in § 150.047(B)).



      (1)   Those uses conditionally permitted in the RA-10 zoning
district per the table in § 150.047(A).



      (2)   Because no list of uses can be exhaustive,
interpretations on unspecified uses shall be rendered by the Town Community
Development Director with the right to appeal to the Planning and Zoning
Commission and Town Council.



   (D)   Property development standards.  (See Part 8 of this chapter,
Additional Height and Area Regulations and Exceptions.)



      (1)   Setbacks.



 

Front
 
Interior Side
 
Street Side
 
Rear


50 feet
 
50 feet
 
50 feet
 
50 feet



 



      (2)   Area and bulk requirements.



 
 
Rural Agricultural Minimum Lot Area 10 acres
 
Minimum Lot Width
 
Minimum Lot Depth
 
Maximum Height


N/A
 

 
200 feet
 
200 feet
 
30 feet


Note: Regulations for distances between buildings, accessory buildings,
access, walls, fences and required screening are contained in Chapter 150,
Development Code.



 



   (E)   Parking.  The applicable provisions of Part 7 of this
chapter, Parking; Loading and Unloading shall apply.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. III, § 4-49)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006; Ord.
593-13, passed 4-1-2013)



§ 150.049  RURAL AGRICULTURAL (RA-4).



   (A)   Purpose.  The rural agricultural (RA-4) district is intended
to encourage agricultural use of land, and as a holding zone for land that is
not yet needed for more intensive use.



   (B)   (1)   Permitted uses.  The following uses are permitted in
the RA-4 zone:



      (2)   Those uses permitted in the RA-4 zoning district per the
table in § 150.047(A).



   (C)   Conditional uses.  Uses may be permitted subject to a
conditional use permit (see § 150.015 and the table in § 150.047(B)).



      (1)   Those uses conditionally permitted in the RA-4 zoning
district per the table in § 150.047(A).



      (2)   Because no list of uses can be exhaustive,
interpretations on unspecified uses shall be rendered by the Town Community
Development Director with the right to appeal to the Planning and Zoning
Commission and Town Council.



   (D)   Property development standards.  (See Part 8 of this chapter,
Additional Height and Area Regulations and Exceptions.)



      (1)   Setbacks.



 

Front
 
Interior Side
 
Street Side
 
Rear


40 feet
 
20 feet
 
40 feet
 
40 feet



 



      (2)   Area and bulk requirements.



 

Minimum Site Area
 
Minimum Lot Area 4 acres
 
Minimum Lot Width
 
Minimum Lot Depth
 
Maximum Height


N/A
 

 
150 feet
 
150 feet
 
30 feet


Note: Regulations for distances between buildings, accessory buildings,
access, walls, fences and required screening are contained in Chapter 150,
Development Code.



 



   (E)   Parking.  The applicable provisions of Part 7 of this
chapter, Parking; Loading and Unloading shall apply.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. III, § 4-50)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006; Ord.
593-13, passed 4-1-2013)



§ 150.050  SINGLE-RESIDENTIAL RANCHETTE (R1-R).



   (A)   Purpose.  The R1-R district is intended to promote and
preserve the development of rural single-family residential neighborhoods.
The dominant land use of this zone should be single-family dwellings with the
other allowed uses, educational, recreational and religious, dispersed
throughout and in proportion to the size of the R1-R neighborhood, so as to
adequately serve the neighborhood.



   (B)   Permitted uses.  The following are permitted uses in the R1-R
district:



      (1)   Accessory buildings and uses, including private swimming
pool, home occupation and model home;



      (2)   Dwelling, single-family;



      (3)   Farm animals, provided that there are no more than three
hoofed animals per acre; and



      (4)   Park, playground and community owned buildings.



   (C)   Conditional uses.  The following uses may be permitted
subject to a conditional use permit (see § 150.015):



      (1)   Agricultural buildings and structures;



      (2)   Bed and breakfast;



      (3)   Boarding and/or lodging house;



      (4)   Church;



      (5)   Convent;



      (6)   Golf course (except miniature course or practice driving
tee operated for commercial purpose), including clubhouse and service
facilities which are intended to primarily serve golf course uses and are no
closer than 300 feet to any exterior boundary of the golf course, except that
the facilities shall have direct access from a collector or arterial street
or a highway from which they shall be a distance of at least 50 feet.



      (7)   Guesthouse, detached;



      (8)   Manufactured home;



      (9)   Model home complex and/or sales office;



      (10)   Private club, fraternity, sorority and lodge;



      (11)   Public institutional buildings, such as hospitals, fire
stations, police stations, YMCA and Boys and Girls Club;



      (12)   Public or private school;



      (13)   Public utility buildings, structures or appurtenances
thereto for public service uses;



      (14)   Ranch, non-commercial;



      (15)   Recreation fields, public or private;



      (16)   Recreation buildings, public or private;



      (17)   Stable (commercial) provided the following criteria are
met:



         (a)   No stable, activity or pasture areas shall be
permitted within 40 feet of any residential zoning district or use;



         (b)   There shall be a buffer strip, maintained and used
as described in § 150.138(C) as it abuts any residential use or district and
adjacent to any public street;



         (c)   There shall be no shows or other activities which
would generate more traffic than is normal to a residential area, unless the
proposed site has direct access from an arterial street or highway;



         (d)   Permission for the shows and activities may be
obtained from the Council. Permission shall be requested in a letter that
explains the nature and duration of the activity and accommodations for
spectators, traffic and additional parking for cars and trailers. This letter
shall be submitted to the Town Clerk at least one week prior to the hearing
at which consideration is desired;



         (e)   All pasture and animal storage areas shall be
enclosed with fences or walls of a minimum of four feet in height;



         (f)   All laws applicable to the public health must be
complied with for the entire period of operation of the stable;



         (g)   All stable, activity and pasture areas that are
not grassed shall be treated for dust control to Pinal County Air Quality
Control standards; and



         (h)   Adequate parking shall be shown on the site plan
and improved to municipal standards.



      (18)   Temporary buildings used for the sale of homes and lots.



   Because no list of uses can be exhaustive, decisions on unspecified
uses will be rendered by the Planning Commission with appeal to the Town
Council.



   (D)   Property development standards. (See §§ 150.164 through
150.184 for additional standards and exceptions).



      (1)   Setbacks.



 


Front

 

Interior Side

 

Street Side

 

Rear




30 feet

 

25 feet

 

20 feet

 

20 feet




 



      (2)   Area and bulk requirements.



 


Minimum Site Area

 

Minimum Lot Area 1-1/4 acres

 

Minimum Lot Width

 

Minimum Lot Depth

 

Maximum Height




N/A

 



 

100 feet

 

150 feet

 

30 feet



Note: Regulations for distances between buildings, accessory buildings,
access, walls, fences and required screening are contained in §§ 150.164
through 150.184



 



   (E)   Off-street parking.  The provisions of §§ 150.156 through
150.163 shall apply.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. III, § 4-51)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.051  RURAL RESIDENTIAL EQUESTRIAN SUBDIVISION (RRES).



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of the rural residential equestrian
subdivision zoning district is to encourage unique, creatively developed
subdivisions that are unified by common amenities, operations and
associations for the accommodation of manufactured and/or site-built homes on
individually owned lots, including necessary accessory uses and amenities and
adequate open space to preserve the residential character. This district also
serves to create or preserve compatible, rural enclaves with specified animal
privileges within outlying and suburbanizing areas of Florence.



   (B)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the RRES
district:



      (1)   One dwelling unit per lot, which may be one of the
following:



         (a)   One manufactured home, being no more than five
years in age since the date of original construction, shall only be permitted
to replace an existing manufactured home on an approved RRES lot of record; or



         (b)   One site-built, single-family dwelling unit.



      (2)   Accessory buildings and uses, including private swimming
pools and home occupations;



      (3)   Agricultural animals, subject to the following:



         (a)   No agricultural animal/livestock shall be kept,
maintained or stabled on any lot of less than 42,000 square feet.



         (b)   Two horses are permitted per each residential lot
of record that exceeds 42,000 square feet.



         (c)   Offspring (under the age of six months) of
permitted horses on-site, do not count towards the number of permitted
animals;



         (d)   Temporary agricultural/livestock activities or
projects conducted primarily for educational purposes, i.e., Future Farmers
of America (FFA), 4-H or school credits, are permitted in the RRES zoning
district, and such animals are not counted toward the number of permitted
agricultural animals. Animals may not include swine or roosters. Active
membership must be maintained and verification of such may be required upon
request. In addition, a sign (of less than six square feet) designating a
given member (i.e., 4-H or Future Farmers of America) is in residence must be
visibly posted or displayed on the property at all times for any such project
or activity in progress.



         (e)   The area used for grazing, exercising or training
of agricultural animals shall be securely fenced to prevent the animals from
straying, or a suitable restraint shall be provided to prevent straying. No
confinement area shall be located in the front yard, and the grazing of
livestock shall be limited to the side and rear yards.



         (f)   Fencing shall be required for all agricultural
animals, and shall consist of a view- or partial view-type fence, pipe rail
or other similar fencing material, or a wall of sufficient height to restrain
the animal(s). The fence or wall shall be maintained and kept in a sound
condition at all times,



         (g)   Private stables for the housing of agricultural
animals shall be constructed so as to facilitate maintenance in a clean and
sanitary condition.



         (h)   Stables used for the keeping of agricultural
animals shall be located behind the front plane of the principal building or
structure. Stables shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from all property
lines and the principal structure or the distance required to comply with all
applicable codes, whichever is greater. Stables shall not exceed the height
regulations of the RRES zoning district.



         (i)   Corrals or yards areas used for the keeping of
agricultural animals shall be located within the rear half of the lot (or
side yard) or parcel, and shall be enclosed by a view- or partial view-type
fence, pipe rail or other similar fencing material, or wall of sufficient
height to restrain the animal(s). The fence or wall shall be maintained and
kept in a sound condition at all times.



         (j)   Animal wastes shall be stored at least 20 feet
from any property line, open space, drainage channel or surface waters, and
shall not violate the health and sanitation provisions of the town code and
applicable county codes.



      (4)   Secondary uses:



         (a)   Community or recreational facilities for the use
and benefit of the subdivision/ community association; and



         (b)   Common facility service buildings. All the
buildings shall be centrally located and use shall be restricted to occupants.



      (5)   Those uses permitted in the RRES zoning district per
Table 150.047(A).



   (C)   Conditional uses.  Uses may be permitted subject to a
conditional use permit (see § 150.015 and Table 150.047(A)).



      (1)   Those uses conditionally permitted in the RRES zoning
district per Table 150.047(A).



      (2)   Because no list of uses can be exhaustive,
interpretations on unspecified uses shall be rendered by the Town Community
Development Director, with the right to appeal to the Planning and Zoning
Commission and Town Council.



   (D)   Property development standards.  (See elsewhere in this
Development Code for additional standards and exceptions.)



      (1)   Principal structure setbacks.



 


Front

 

Interior Side

 

Street Side

 

Rear




20 feet

 

10 feet

 

10 feet

 

10 feet




 



      (2)   Area and bulk requirements.



 


Minimum Site Area

 

Minimum Lot Area 10 acres

 

Minimum Lot Width

 

Minimum Lot Depth

 

Maximum Height






 

42,000 square feet

 

60 feet

 

100 feet

 

30 feet



Note: Additional regulations for distances between buildings, accessory
buildings, access, walls, fences and required screening are contained in Part
8 of this chapter, Additional Height and Area Regulations and Exceptions.



 



      (3)   Accessory structure setbacks and height.



 


Front

 

Interior Side

 

Street Side

 

Rear

 

Maximum Height




60 feet

 

10 feet

 

10 feet

 

10 feet

 

20 feet




 



      (4)   Permanent foundation.  All manufactured homes must be
attached to a permanent foundation where the home is set at the level of the
adjacent grade, an installation commonly known as “ground-set”.



   (E)   Off-street parking. Parking regulations are as provided in
Part 7 of this chapter, Parking; Loading and Unloading.



(Ord. 606-13, passed 5-19-2014)



§ 150.052  SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R1-18).



   (A)   Purpose. The R1-18 district is intended to promote and
preserve the development of single-family residential neighborhoods. The
dominant land use of this zone should be single-family dwellings with the
other allowed uses, educational, recreational and religious, dispersed
throughout and in proportion to the size of the R1-18 neighborhood, so as to
adequately serve the neighborhood. Each R1-18 neighborhood should be served
by a conveniently located B-1 business area of a size in proportion to the
residential area it serves. This zone provides for the lowest intensity of
land use within the municipality, excepting the RA-10, RA-4 and R1-R
districts. Whenever possible, the R1-18 zone should be protected from high
intensity land uses and zones, and from heavily traveled transportation
routes by areas of land zoned with one of the transitional zones: R1-6, MFR,
MHS or NO.



   (B)   Permitted uses.  The following are permitted uses in the
R1-18 district:



      (1)   Dwelling, single-family;



      (2)   Accessory buildings (see § 150.258 for property
development standards) and uses, including private swimming pool, home
occupation and model home;



      (3)   Park, playground and community owned buildings; and



      (4)   Public institutional buildings.



   (C)   Conditional uses.



      (1)   The following uses may be permitted subject to a
conditional use permit (see § 150.015):



         (a)   Church;



         (b)   Convent;



         (c)   Golf course (except miniature course or practice
driving tee operated for commercial purpose), including clubhouse and service
facilities which are intended to primarily serve golf course uses and are no
closer than 300 feet to any exterior boundary of the golf course, except that
the facilities shall have direct access from a collector or arterial street
or a highway from which they shall be a distance of at least 50 feet;



         (d)   Group home;



         (e)   Manufactured home;



         (f)   Model home complex;



         (g)   Public utility buildings, structures or
appurtenances for public service uses;



         (h)   Public or private recreation fields and recreation
buildings;



         (i)   Temporary buildings used for the sale of homes or
lots; and



      (2)   Because no list of uses can be exhaustive, decisions on
unspecified uses shall be rendered by the Planning and Zoning Commission with
appeal to the Town Council.



   (D)   Property development standards.  (See §§ 150.164 through
150.184 for additional standards and exceptions.)



      (1)   Setbacks.



 


Front

 

Interior Side

 

Street Side

 

Rear




20 feet

 

13 total feet
5 feet minimum

 

15 feet

 

12 feet




 



      (2)   Area and bulk requirements.



 


Minimum Site Area

 

Minimum Lot Area 18,000 square feet

 

Minimum Lot Width

 

Minimum Lot Depth

 

Maximum Height




N/A

 



 

65 feet

 

110 feet

 

30 feet



Note: Regulations for distances between buildings, accessory buildings,
access, walls, fences and required screening are contained in §§ 150.164
through 150.184.



 



   (E)   Off-street parking.  The provisions of §§ 150.156 through
150.163 shall apply.



   (F)   Continuation or termination of certain nonconforming uses. 
All manufactured homes existing within the R1-18 zone as of the date of this
amendment shall be declared to be nonconforming, and shall be allowed to
remain until the time as any manufactured home within the R1-18 zone becomes
a hazard to the life or safety of the occupants and is in complete disrepair,
or the manufactured home is removed from the property, or any conditional use
permit becomes void, the use of the property shall then conform to all the
conditions then in force for the R1-18 zone. Any property owner effected
shall have the right to apply for a variance, as provided for elsewhere in
the Code, allowing for continued use by heirs, possible resale and
replacement under certain circumstances.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. III, § 4-52)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006; Ord.
606-13, passed 5-19-2014)



§ 150.053  SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R1-6).



   (A)   Purpose.  The R1-6 district is intended to allow for medium
density residential development that is compatible with R1-18 zoning
districts. Numerical restrictions have been kept to a minimum so as to allow
as much flexibility as possible in housing design and still ensure adequate
protection to adjacent R1-18 zoned property. This is a transitional zone and
should be used to separate and protect the R1-18 zone from more intense land
uses and zones and from heavily traveled transportation routes.



   (B)   Permitted uses.  The following uses are permitted in the R1-6
zone:



      (1)   Dwelling, single-family;



      (2)   Accessory buildings (see § 150.258 for property
development standards) and uses, including private swimming pools and home
occupations; and



      (3)   Park, playground and community owned buildings.



   (C)   Conditional uses.  The following uses may be permitted
subject to a conditional use permit (see § 150.015):



      (1)   Church;



      (2)   Convent;



      (3)   Golf course (except miniature course or practice driving
tee operated for commercial purpose), including clubhouse and service
facilities which are intended to primarily serve golf course uses and are no
closer than 300 feet to any exterior boundary of the golf course, except that
the facilities shall have direct access from a collector or arterial street,
or a highway, from which they shall be a distance of at least 50 feet;



      (4)   Group home;



      (5)   Manufactured home;



      (6)   Model home complex;



      (7)   Public institutional buildings;



      (8)   Public or private school;



      (9)   Public utility buildings, structures or appurtenances
thereto for public service uses; and



      (10)   Temporary buildings used for the sale of homes and/or
lots. Because no list of uses can be exhaustive, decisions on unspecified
uses shall be rendered by the Planning and Zoning Commission with appeal to
the Town Council.



   (D)   Property development standards.  (See §§ 150.164 through
150.184 for additional standards and exceptions.)



      (1)   Setbacks.



 


Front

 

Interior Side

 

Street Side

 

Rear




20 feet

 

10 feet

 

12 feet

 

12 feet




 



      (2)   Area and bulk requirements.



 


Minimum Site Area

 

Minimum Lot Area 6,000 square feet

 

Minimum Lot Width

 

Minimum Lot Depth

 

Maximum Height




N/A

 



 

45 feet

 

100 feet

 

30 feet



Note: Regulations for distances between buildings, accessory buildings,
access, walls, fences and required screening are contained in §§ 150.164
through 150.184.



 



   (E)   Off-street parking.  The provisions of §§ 150.156 through
150.163 shall apply.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. III, § 4-53)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006; Ord.
606-13, passed 5-19-2014)



§ 150.054  NEIGHBORHOOD MULTI-FAMILY (R-2).



   (A)   Purpose.  The R-2 district is intended to allow for higher
density residential development that is compatible with the R-1
(single-family) zone. Numerical restrictions have been kept to a minimum so
as to allow as much flexibility as possible in housing design and still
ensure adequate protection to adjacent R-1 zoned districts. This is a
transitional zone and should be used to separate and protect the R-1
districts from more intense land uses and zones, and from heavily traveled
transportation routes.



   (B)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-2
zoning district:



      (1)   Accessory buildings (See § 150.258 for property
development standards) and uses, including private swimming pools and home
occupations;



      (2)   Dwelling, single-family; and



      (3)   Duplex, triplex, condominium and town homes.



   (C)   Conditional uses.  The following uses may be permitted
subject to a conditional use permit (see § 150.015):



      (1)   Boarding or lodging house;



      (2)   Convent;



      (3)   Golf course (except miniature course or practice driving
tee operated for commercial purpose), including clubhouse and service
facilities which are intended to primarily serve golf course uses and are no
closer than 300 feet to any exterior boundary of the golf course, except that
the facilities shall have direct access from a collector or arterial street
or a highway from which they shall be a distance of at least 50 feet;



      (4)   Group home;



      (5)   Model home complex and/or sales office;



      (6)   Public institutional buildings;



      (7)   Public or private school;



      (8)   Public utility buildings, structures or appurtenances
thereto for public service uses;



      (9)   Temporary buildings used for the sale of homes and/or
lots; and



Because no list of uses can be exhaustive, decisions on unspecified uses
shall be rendered by the Planning and Zoning Commission with appeal to the
Town Council.



   (D)   Property development standards. (See §§ 150.164 through
150.184 for additional standards and exceptions).



      (1)   Setbacks.



 


Front

 

Interior Side

 

Street Side

 

Rear




20 feet

 

12 feet *

 

15 feet

 

10 feet



* Between structures.



 



      (2)   Area and bulk requirements.



 


Minimum Site Area

 

Minimum Lot Area 4,500 square feet unit

 

Minimum Lot Width

 

Minimum Lot Depth

 

Maximum Height




3 acres

 



 

75 feet

 

120 feet

 

30 feet




 



   (E)   Off-street parking.  The provisions of §§ 150.156 through
150.163 shall apply. In addition, parking shall be allowed in the rear ten
feet of the front yard only if it is screened from the street by a solid
wall, fence or landscape screen a minimum of three feet in height.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. III, § 4-54)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006; Ord.
606-13, passed 5-19-2014)



§ 150.055  MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (MFR).



   (A)   Purpose.  The MFR district is intended to allow for high
density residential development in close proximity to the downtown commercial
center. This direct relationship provides consumer support for the commercial
center and places necessary services and employment centers within walking
distance of a large number of people. In spite of the high density allowed,
the open space and landscaping requirements of this district are intended to
ensure a spacious residential character.



   (B)   Permitted uses.  The following uses are permitted in the MFR
district:



      (1)   Multiple unit dwellings including apartments,
condominiums and town home housing;



      (2)   Accessory buildings (see § 150.258 for property
development standards) and uses, including recreation building, private
swimming pools and home occupations;



      (3)   Boardinghouse or lodging house;



      (4)   Convent:



      (5)   Daycare center and/or nursery;



      (6)   Home for the aged or nursing home;



      (7)   Orphanage;



      (8)   Park, playground and community owned buildings; and



      (9)   Private lake, semi-public lake, swimming pools and
tennis courts.



   (C)   Conditional uses.  The following uses may be permitted
subject to a conditional use permit (see § 150.015):



      (1)   Private club, fraternity, sorority and lodges;



      (2)   School, public or private, having a curriculum
equivalent to a public school and having no room regularly used for housing
or sleeping;



      (3)   Church;



      (4)   Golf course;



      (5)   Nursing homes and convalescent homes;



      (6)   Group homes;



      (7)   Public utility buildings, structures or appurtenances
thereto for public service uses;



      (8)   Community buildings or recreational fields not publicly
owned; and



      (9)   Public or institutional buildings, such as hospitals,
fire stations, police stations, YMCA and Boys and Girls Club. Because no list
of uses can be exhaustive, decisions on unspecified uses shall be rendered by
the Planning and Zoning Commission with appeal to the Town Council.



   (D)   Property development standards.  (See elsewhere in this
Development Code for additional standards and exceptions.)



      (1)   Setbacks.



 


Front

 

Interior Side

 

Street Side

 

Rear




40 feet

 

20 feet *

 

25 feet

 

10 feet



* Between structures.



 



      (2)   Area and bulk requirements.



 

Minimum Site Area
 
Minimum Lot Area 3,000 square feet unit 
 
Minimum Lot Width
 
Minimum Lot Depth
 
Maximum Height


N/A
 

 
90 feet
 
120 feet
 
35 feet


* All other uses shall have a minimum of 10,000 square feet of lot area.

Note: Regulations for distances between buildings, accessory buildings,
access, walls, fences and required screening are contained in §§ 150.164
through 150.184.



 



   (E)   Off-street parking. The provisions of §§ 150.156 through
150.163 shall apply. In addition, parking shall be allowed in the rear ten
feet of the front yard only if it is screened from the street by a solid
wall, fence or landscape screen a minimum of three feet in height.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. III, § 4-55)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006; Ord.
606-13, passed 5-19-2014)



§ 150.056  MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION (MHS).



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of the manufactured home subdivision
zoning district is intended to encourage unique and creatively developed
subdivisions that are unified by common amenities, operations and
associations for the accommodation of manufactured homes on individually
owned or rented lots, including necessary accessory uses and amenities and
adequate open space to preserve the residential character.



   (B)   Permitted uses.  The following uses are permitted in the MHS
district:



      (1)   One manufactured home, being no more than five years in
age since the date of original construction, shall be permitted on each
approved manufactured home lot;



      (2)   Accessory buildings and uses, including private swimming
pools and home occupations;



      (3)   Secondary uses:



         (a)   Community or recreational facilities to an extent
not less than specified in the development requirements;



         (b)   Common facility service buildings (laundry
facilities, accessory supplies, park maintenance, management, community
buildings and other uses of a similar nature). All the buildings shall be
centrally located and use shall be restricted to occupants; and



         (c)   One dwelling unit for manager, caretaker and/or
watchperson employed on the premises.



   (C)   Conditional uses.  Reserved.



   Because no list of uses can be exhaustive, interpretations on
unspecified uses shall be rendered by the Town Community Development Director
with the right to appeal to the Planning and Zoning Commission and Town
Council.



   (D)   Property development standards.  (See elsewhere in this
Development Code for additional standards and exceptions.)



      (1)   Setbacks.



 


Front

 

Interior Side

 

Street Side

 

Rear




10 feet

 

5 feet

 

10 feet

 

10 feet




 



      (2)   Area and bulk requirements.



 


Minimum Site Area

 

Minimum Lot Area

 

Minimum Lot Width

 

Minimum Lot Depth

 

Maximum Height




8 acres

 

4,000 square feet

 

40 feet

 

100 feet

 

30 feet



Note: Regulations for distances between buildings, accessory buildings,
access, walls, fences and required screening are contained in Part 8 of this
chapter, Additional Height and Area Regulations and Expectations.



 



      (3)   Permanent foundation.  All manufactured homes must be
attached to a permanent foundation where the home is set at the level of the
adjacent grade, an installation commonly known as ground-set.



   (E)   Off-street parking.  Parking regulations are as provided in
Part 7 of this chapter, Parking; Loading and Unloading.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. III, § 4-56)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006; Ord.
570-12, passed 3-5-2012; Ord. 601-13, passed 9-16-2013; Ord. 606-13, passed
5-19-2014)



§ 150.057  NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS (B-1).



   (A)   Purpose.  The B-1 neighborhood business district is intended
to allow for the development of basic commercial uses to serve the daily
needs of a residential neighborhood. The size of any B-1 area should only be
as large as is necessary to serve a given neighborhood. All B-1 areas should
be located on a street of collector size or larger.



   (B)   Permitted uses.  The following uses are permitted in the B-1
zone:



      (1)   Retail stores with sales only, not to exceed 10,000
square feet of gross floor area, individually and not to exceed 50,000 square
feet in a commercial complex. Drive-through facilities and convenience uses
require use permit approval;



      (2)   Restaurants and cafés not including entertainment,
dancing, a bar for the serving of alcoholic beverages or drive-in types of
restaurants;



      (3)   Grocery store, supermarket or drug store;



      (4)   Personal and household services such as barbers, beauty
shops, health clubs and dry cleaners;



      (5)   Business and professional offices, banks and similar;



      (6)   Daycare center and/or nursery, nursery schools or
private kindergartens; and



      (7)   Laundry limited to machines not exceeding a 25-pound
capacity.



   (C)   Conditional uses. Conditional use permit required:



      (1)   Gasoline service station, provided the following
criteria are met:



         (a)   All structures shall be of a unique design that is
appropriate to the area in which they are constructed.



         (b)   The property adjacent to any street shall be
landscaped to a minimum depth of 15 feet from the right-of-way line. This
landscaped area may be penetrated by two access drives, 35 feet maximum width
each per street.



         (c)   All indoor service areas shall have vehicular
access doors that open only to an outdoor service area that is not on a
street side of the building. The outdoor service area shall be completely
enclosed by a solid wall or fence at least six feet in height, except for
access openings no wider than 12 feet. There shall be no repair work done
outside of the enclosed service areas.



         (d)   The minimum property size shall be 22,500 square
feet.



         (e)   No driveway shall extend into the curb radius at a
street intersection.



         (f)   All sources of artificial light shall be concealed
from view, except for freestanding standards, which shall have translucent
covers to diffuse the light and eliminate glare.



         (g)   All vending machines shall be within the building
or an area that is screened from public view.



      (2)   Car wash, self-service or coin-operated, provided there
is no conveyor belt or drying equipment as permitted in automobile laundry;



      (3)   Restaurant or café which include drive-up service;



      (4)   Indoor commercial recreation facilities;



      (5)   Small animal hospitals or clinics, confined to
completely enclosed sound-attenuated facilities, subject to:



         (a)   Animals shall not be boarded or lodged except for
short periods of observation incidental to care or treatment; and



         (b)   No kennel or exercise runs will be permitted.



   Because no list of uses can be exhaustive, decisions on unspecified
uses shall be rendered by the Planning and Zoning Commission with appeal to
the Town Council.



   (D)   Property development standards. (See §§ 150.164 through
150.184 for additional standards and exceptions.)



      (1)   Setbacks.



 


Front

 

Interior Side

 

Street Side

 

Rear




20 feet

 

10 feet

 

12 feet

 

10 feet




 



      (2)   Area and bulk requirements.



 


Minimum Site Area

 

Minimum Lot Area

 

Minimum Lot Width

 

Minimum Lot Depth

 

Maximum Height




N/A

 

N/A

 

50 feet

 

75 feet

 

35 feet




 



   (E)   Off-street parking.  The provisions of §§ 150.156 through
150.163 shall apply. In addition, parking shall be allowed in the rear ten
feet of the front yard only if it is screened from the street by a solid
wall, fence or landscape screen a minimum of three feet in height.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. III, § 4-58)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.058  NEIGHBORHOOD OFFICE (NO).



   (A)   Purpose.  The NO neighborhood office district is intended to
provide for low intensity commercial development in established single-family
residential neighborhoods. The standards provide for these uses to be
compatible with, and similar in character to, the R1-18 low density
residential zone. The primary main purposes of the NO zone is to provide for
conversion of existing single-family residential structures to more intense
use at the time as the conversion becomes appropriate. This is a transitional
zone and should be used to separate and protect the R1-18 zone from more
intense land uses and zones, and from heavily traveled transportation routes.



   (B)   Permitted uses.  The following uses are permitted in the NO
zone:



      (1)   Office, professional, for accountant, architect,
chiropodists, chiropractor, dentist, Engineer, lawyer, minister, naturopath,
osteopath, physician, surgeon, surveyor, optometrist and the like;



      (2)   Office, semi-professional, for insurance broker, public
stenographer, real estate broker, stock broker and other persons who operate
or conduct offices which do not require the stocking of goods for wholesale
or retail, but shall not include barber, beauty operator, cosmetologist,
embalmer or mortician except as otherwise provided;



      (3)   Studio for professional work or teaching of any form of
commercial or fine arts, photography, music, drama, dance, but not including
commercial gymnasium, dance hall or job printing;



      (4)   Dwelling units made available for rent, lease or sale;



      (5)   Accessory buildings (see § 150.258 for property
development standards) and uses, including recreation building, private
swimming pool, home occupation and model home;



      (6)   Art gallery;



      (7)   Pharmacy, limited to 10,000 square feet gross floor area;



      (8)   Banks, finance offices and lending institutions;



      (9)   Public or institutional buildings, such as hospitals,
fire stations and police stations, YMCA and Boys and Girls Club;



      (10)   Daycare center and/or nursery;



      (11)   Park, playground and community owned buildings; and



      (12)   Public utility buildings, structures or appurtenances
thereto for public service uses.



   (C)   Conditional uses.  The following uses may be permitted
subject to a conditional use permit (see § 150.015):



      (1)   Church;



      (2)   Community center, public, recreation and park facility
and



      (3)   School, elementary or secondary, meeting all
requirements of the compulsory education laws of the state. Because no list
of uses can be exhaustive, decisions on unspecified uses shall be rendered by
the Planning and Zoning Commission with appeal to the Town Council.



   (D)   Property development standards.  (See elsewhere in this
Development Code for additional standards and exceptions.)



      (1)   Setbacks.



 


Front

 

Interior Side

 

Street Side

 

Rear




20 feet from all streets *

 

6 feet **

 

10 feet

 

20 feet



* From all streets 20 feet, the front 10 feet of which shall be maintained as
open space, except that access drives may penetrate the open space.

** Unless a lesser yard has been legally established on a lot of record, in
which case the building may contain any use allowed in this zone.



 



      (2)   Area and bulk requirements.



 


Minimum Site Area

 

Minimum Lot Area

 

Minimum Lot Width

 

Minimum Lot Depth

 

Maximum Height




N/A

 

N/A

 

50 feet

 

50 feet

 

30 feet




 



   (E)   Off-street parking.  The provisions of §§ 150.156 through
150.163 shall apply. In addition, parking shall be allowed in the rear ten
feet of the front yard only if it is screened from the street by a solid
wall, fence or landscape screen a minimum of three feet in height.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. III, § 4-59)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.059  DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL (DC).



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of the downtown commercial zoning
district is to maintain and enhance the character of the historic buildings
within the central business district area of historic downtown Florence; and
facilitate opportunities for redevelopment and new development. Use and
development standard regulations for the DC district are designed to promote
a pedestrian-oriented specialty retail and mixed-use district by encouraging
the improvement of the pedestrian environment, delineating appropriate land
uses within the district and ensuring that new and renovated buildings are
designed to be compatible with the historic fabric of the area and at a scale
consistent with existing buildings within the DC district.



   (B)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   Personal and household services, such as clothing
alteration, seamstress shop, shoe repair shops, beauty and barber shops,
jewelry and watch repair, small appliance repairs, bank, credit union, travel
agency, launderette and dry cleaners (without processing);



      (2)   Specialty retail uses including, but not limited to,
gift shops, stationery and card stores, clothing stores, bicycle shop,
bookstores, art supply shops, florists, bakery, photo shop, copy/printing
shops, photo studios, delicatessen, coffee house, candy shop, billiards
parlor, movie theater, neighborhood grocery store, sporting goods store and
ice cream shop;



      (3)   Art studios for the production and teaching of fine art,
when located above the first floor or behind the commercial frontage;



      (4)   Art galleries, antiques, crafts, consignment and
collectibles sales;



      (5)   Restaurants, cafeterias, taverns, liquor store and
outdoor dining when ancillary to restaurant use;



      (6)   Hotels and bed and breakfasts;



      (7)   Residential units provided they are located behind the
Main Street frontage on the street level floor, located above the street
level floor if along the Main Street frontage and/or on any floor where not
located along the Main Street frontage;



      (8)   Professional and administrative offices;



      (9)   Private club or lodge provided the facilities are under
5,000 square feet; and



      (10)   Those uses permitted in the DC zoning district per the
table in § 150.047(B), employment an/or commercial zoning district use
regulations.



   (C)   Conditional uses.  Uses may be permitted subject to a
conditional use permit (see § 150.015 and the table in § 150.047(B)).



      (1)   Those uses conditionally permitted in the DC zoning
district per the table in § 150.047(B).



      (2)   Because no list of uses can be exhaustive,
interpretations on unspecified uses shall be rendered by the Town Community
Development Director with the right to appeal to the Planning and Zoning
Commission and the Town Council.



   (D)   Development standards.  The chart which follows specifies the
maximum building heights and minimum yard setbacks.



      (1)   Setbacks.



 


Minimum Yard Setbacks*




Land Use

 

Front

 

Side

 

Street Side

 

Rear




Commercial

 

0 feet

 

0 feet

 

0 feet

 

10 feet




Residential

 

0 feet

 

0 feet

 

0 feet

 

0 feet



*While zero lot line development is encouraged in the DC district, compliance
with other applicable code requirements, such as building and fire codes, is
still required.



 



      (2)   Area and bulk requirements.



 


Minimum Site Area

 

Minimum Lot Area

 

Minimum Lot Width

 

Minimum Lot Depth

 

Maximum Height




N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

35 feet *



* As measured from grade.



 



   (E)   Parking regulations.  With the exception with any potentially
applicable requirements for ADA (handicap accessible) parking for any new or
redeveloped property in the DC district and loading requirements for any
commercial business over 5,000 square feet, no on-site parking shall be
required in the DC zoning district.  Other applicable parking regulations
are as provided in Part 7 of this chapter, Parking; Loading and Unloading.



   (F)   Compliance with other provisions.



      (1)   Historic district provisions.  When a property located
within the DC zoning district is also located within the town’s historic
district, the provisions and regulations in § 150.066 shall apply.



      (2)   Additional height and area regulations and exceptions.
The provisions and regulations in Part 8 of this chapter, are applicable to
the DC zoning district.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. III, § 4-60)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006; Ord.
590-13, passed 1-22-2013)



§ 150.060  HIGHWAY BUSINESS COMMERCIAL (B-2).



   (A)   Purpose.  The highway business commercial zoning district is
intended to provide for general business and commercial uses in locations
which are suitable and appropriate, taking into consideration existing
conditions, future land use needs and the availability of public services.
The intent of this zoning district is to allow commercial uses to satisfy the
needs of the community while providing for a broad range of commercial
activities.



   (B)   Permitted uses.  The following uses are permitted in the B-2
district:



      (1)   Permitted uses in the B-2 highway business commercial
zoning district shall be only those uses listed below. Permitted uses are
subject to all other applicable standards of this section. No building permit
shall be issued for a use not specifically mentioned and until site plan
approval has been granted by the town;



      (2)   Those uses permitted in the B-1 neighborhood business
zoning district and per Table 150.047(B);



      (3)   Accessory buildings and uses ancillary to the permitted
use;



      (4)   Medical, dental and clinical laboratories;



      (5)   Hospital and outpatient clinics;



      (6)   Small animal hospitals or clinics, confined to
completely enclosed sound-attenuated facilities, subject to the following:



         (a)   Animals shall not be boarded or lodged except for
short periods of observation incidental to care or treatment; and



         (b)   No kennel or exercise runs will be permitted.



      (7)   General office uses;



      (8)   Drive-in window facilities;



      (9)   General big box retail stores such as: grocery stores,
retail drug stores, video stores, dry goods and notions stores, appliance
stores, home or hardware stores, floor and wall covering stores, furniture
stores, bicycle and sporting good stores, and apparel stores;



      (10)   Restaurants including drive-in and drive-through
facilities;



      (11)   Hotels and motels;



      (12)   Movie theaters (excluding drive-in movie theaters),
dance halls and bowling alleys;



      (13)   Household, sickroom or office equipment rental and
services;



      (14)   Car wash and auto spa;



      (15)   Sale of new or used automobiles, trucks, boats,
trailers and recreational vehicles;



      (16)   Sale of new manufactured homes;



      (17)   General auto repair, including auto painting and body
repair, provided all repair operations are conducted within a building and
including an outside vehicle storage area to be used only for vehicles under
repair which shall be screened from any street or surrounding property;



      (18)   Nurseries, flower and plant sales;



      (19)   Black smith shops;



      (20)   Night watchpersons quarters, as a security provision,
as an accessory use to a permitted commercial use with town approval;



      (21)   Businesses engaged in wholesaling, assembly or
manufacturing must be within a completely enclosed building and must have a
retail component on-site; and



      (22)   Public schools, private schools or parochial schools.



   (C)   Conditional uses.  Conditional use permit required:



      (1)   Amusement facilities, arcades, miniature golf, batting
cages, go-cart tracks and similar uses;



      (2)   Commercial kennels provided all animals are kept
indoors, and no outside runs are permitted;



      (3)   Churches or places of worship except those existing at
the time of the adoption of this Development Code;



      (4)   Social service and community service agency facilities
such as plasma centers, charity dining services, homeless shelters, day labor
hiring centers, substance abuse detoxification and treatment centers, rescue
missions and other similar social service uses; and



      (5)   Mini-storage facilities provided they are used solely
for dead storage purposes.



      (6)   Medical marijuana dispensaries.



   Because no list of uses can be exhaustive, interpretations on
unspecified uses shall be rendered by the Town Community Development Director
with the right to appeal to the Planning and Zoning Commission and Town
Council.



   (D)   Property development standards. (See §§ 150.164 through
150.184 for additional standards and exceptions.)



      (1)   Setbacks.



 


Land Use

 

Minimum Yard Setbacks

 

Lot Coverage






 

Front

 

Side

 

Side Street

 

Rear

 






B-2

 

25 feet **

 

10 feet

 

20 feet **

 

10 feet

 

60%



** The front ten feet of which shall be maintained as open space, except that
access drives may penetrate the open space.



 



      (2)   Area and bulk requirements.



 


Minimum Site Area

 

Minimum Lot Area

 

Minimum Lot Width

 

Minimum Lot Depth

 

Maximum Height




N/A

 

N/A

 

200 feet

 

100 feet

 

3 stories and/or



40 feet



* Additional building height allowances up to a maximum of 50 feet may be
obtained with a conditional use permit.



 



   (E)   Off-street parking.  The provisions of §§ 150.156 through
150.163 shall apply. In addition, parking shall be allowed in the rear ten
feet of the front yard only if it is screened from the street by a solid
wall, fence or landscape screen a minimum of three feet in height.



   (F)   Development standards.



      (1)   General architectural requirements. Mechanical
equipment, electrical meter and service components, and similar utility
devices, whether ground level, wall mounted or roof mounted, shall be
screened from public view and designed to appear as an integral part of the
building.



      (2)   Building elevations.  All building elevations which
face a public street or are adjacent to residential uses or zoning districts,
shall have an architectural design other than metal or corrugated metal.



      (3)   PUD buildings and group commercial development.  PUD
buildings in group commercial development including service stations,
convenience stores, chain restaurants, auto maintenance facilities and
similar uses should be designed in a compatible architectural style, and
incorporate the same materials, colors and landscaping as the host
development.



   (G)   General site planning requirements.  Service and loading bays
(car wash, automotive service, tires and the like) should be oriented away
from adjacent residential zoning districts.



      (1)   Drive-through windows should not face a public street;



      (2)   Equipment such as, but not limited to, vending machines
should be screened from street view and placed in an area designed for their
use, as an integral part of the structure;



      (3)   Open space equivalent to 10% shall be required for group
commercial development. Open space does not include parking areas.



      (4)   Bicycle parking facilities should be encouraged and
should be located near the pedestrian space.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. III, § 4-61)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006; Am.
Ord. 555-11, passed 3-21-2011)



§ 150.061  TOURIST COMMERCIAL (TRC).



   (A)   Purpose.  The tourist commercial zone is intended to provide
for development within close proximity to major arterial thoroughfares
providing specialty commercial areas tailored to the needs of visitors to the
town.



   (B)   Permitted uses.  The following uses are permitted in the TRC
district:



      (1)   Banks, finance offices and lending institutions;



      (2)   Restaurants and cafés including entertainment, dancing,
a bar for the serving of alcoholic beverages or drive-in types of restaurants;



      (3)   Art gallery;



      (4)   Pharmacy, limited to a maximum of 15,000 square feet of
floor area;



      (5)   Park, playground and community owned buildings;



      (6)   Bed and breakfast;



      (7)   Barber and beauty shops;



      (8)   Automobile rental agencies; and



      (9)   Museums and cultural centers.



   (C)   Conditional uses.  The following uses may be permitted
subject to a conditional use permit (see § 150.015):



      (1)   Hotels and motels;



      (2)   Freeway service facility;



      (3)   Gasoline dispensing and/or automotive service stations;



      (4)   Carwash, coin operated only; and



      (5)   Recreation vehicle park and/or campground.



   Because no list of uses can be exhaustive, decisions on unspecified
uses shall be rendered by the Planning and Zoning Commission with appeal to
the Town Council.



   (D)   Property development standards.  (See §§ 150.164 through
150.184 for additional standards and exceptions.)



      (1)   Setbacks.



 


Land Use

 

Minimum Yard Setbacks

 

Lot Coverage






 

Front

 

Side

 

Side Street

 

Rear

 






TRC

 

20 feet **

 

20 feet/0 **

 

20 feet */10 **

 

20 feet

 

60%



** The front ten feet of which shall be maintained as open space, except that
access drives may penetrate the open space.

** If alleyway or similar is provided.



 



      (2)   Area and bulk requirements.



 


Minimum Site Area

 

Minimum Lot Area

 

Minimum Lot Width

 

Minimum Lot Depth

 

Maximum Height




5 acres

 

½ acre

 

200 feet

 

100 feet

 

2 stories /35




 



   (E)   Off-street parking.  The provisions of §§ 150.156 through
150.163 shall apply. In addition, parking shall be allowed in the rear ten
feet of the front yard only if it is screened from the street by a solid
wall, fence or landscape screen, a minimum of three feet in height.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. III, § 4-62)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.062  PROFESSIONAL OFFICE (PO).



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of the professional office zone is
intended to provide a mix of finance, insurance and real estate and other
uses that require an office setting primarily located in the town core area.



   (B)   Permitted uses.  The following uses are permitted in the PO
zoning district:



      (1)   Business college, limited to the teaching of office and
business practices and skills;



      (2)   Office, business;



      (3)   Office, professional;



      (4)   Optician, limited to prescription work only;



      (5)   Physiotherapist;



      (6)   Studio for professional work or teaching of any form of
commercial or fine arts, photography, music, drama, dance, but not including
commercial gymnasium, dance hall or job printing;



      (7)   Hospitals for animals including boarding and lodging;
provided there shall be no open kennels maintained and provided and all
facilities will be in soundproof buildings;



      (8)   Church;



      (9)   Community center, public;



      (10)   Recreation and park facility, public;



      (11)   Accessory buildings (see § 150.258 for property
development standards) and uses, including recreation building, private
swimming pool, home occupation and model home;



      (12)   Art gallery;



      (13)   Pharmacy, prescription, limited to pharmaceuticals only;



      (14)   Banks, finance offices and lending institutions;



      (15)   School, elementary or secondary, meeting all
requirements of the compulsory education laws of the state; and



      (16)   Telephone answering service.



   (C)   Conditional uses.  The following uses may be permitted
subject to a conditional use permit (see § 150.015):



      (1)   Park, playground and community owned buildings;



      (2)   Public utility buildings, structures or appurtenances
thereto for public service uses;



      (3)   Public or institutional buildings, such as hospitals,
fire stations and police stations, YMCA and Boys and Girls Club; and



      (4)   Daycare center and/or nursery.



   Because no list of uses can be complete, decisions on unspecified uses
will be rendered by the Planning and Zoning Commission with appeal to the
Town Council.



   (D)   Property development standards. (See §§ 150.164 through
150.184  for additional standards and exceptions.)



      (1)   Setbacks.



 


Land Use

 

Minimum Yard Setbacks

 

Lot Coverage






 

Front

 

Side

 

Side Street

 

Rear

 






PO

 

20 feet *

 

10 feet/0 **

 

20 feet/10 **

 

10 feet

 

60%



** The front ten feet of which shall be maintained as open space, except that
access drives may penetrate the open space.

** If alleyway or similar is provided.



 



      (2)   Area and bulk requirements.



 


Minimum Site Area

 

Minimum Lot Area

 

Minimum Lot Width

 

Minimum Lot Depth

 

Maximum Height




4 acres

 

½ acres

 

200 feet

 

100 feet

 

35 feet




 



   (E)   Off-street parking.  The provisions of §§ 150.156 through
150.163 shall apply. In addition, parking shall be allowed in the rear ten
feet of the front yard only if it is screened from the street by a solid
wall, fence or landscape screen, a minimum of three feet in height.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. III, § 4-63)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.063  PUBLIC/INSTITUTIONAL (PI).



   (A)   Purpose.  The principal purpose of the (P/I)
Public/Institutional district is to allow those government and institutional
uses which are necessary to serve the public in particular locations of the
town and to distinguish them from private uses.



   (B)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   Open space, parks, fine arts center, convention center,
public recreational facilities, festivals and accessory uses;



      (2)   Public schools and playgrounds;



      (3)   Governmental office buildings and grounds, including
service and maintenance facilities;



      (4)   The public facilities as hospitals, libraries, museums
and similar public facilities;



      (5)   Public water production and storage facilities, public
sewage treatment plants, public facilities for the collection, transfer and
disposal of solid wastes;



      (6)   Airports, armories and military installations; and



      (7)   Other uses approved by the Town Council.



   (C)   Conditional uses.  Reserved.



    Because no list of uses can be exhaustive, decisions on unspecified
uses will be rendered by the Planning Commission with appeal to the Town
Council.



   (D)   Property development standards.  (See §§ 150.164 through
150.184  for additional standards and exceptions)



      (1)   Setbacks.



 


Land Use

 

Minimum Yard Setbacks

 

Lot Coverage






 

Front

 

Side

 

Side Street

 

Rear

 






P/I

 

20 feet

 

20 feet

 

20 feet

 

20 feet

 

N/A




 



      (2)   Area and bulk requirements.



 


Minimum Site Area

 

Minimum Lot Area

 

Minimum Lot Width

 

Minimum Lot Depth

 

Maximum Height




N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A




 



   (E)   Off-street parking.  The provisions of §§ 150.156 through
150.163 shall apply. In addition, parking shall be allowed in the rear ten
feet of the front yard only if it is screened from the street by a solid
wall, fence or landscape screen, a minimum of three feet in height.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. III, § 4-64)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.064  LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (LI).



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of the Light Industrial zoning district
is intended to promote and protect light manufacturing, warehouses and
research and development industries, to cluster the industries into
attractive planned industrial parks, to minimize incompatibility of
industrial uses with adjacent land uses and, provide sufficient space in
appropriate locations to businesses and manufacturing firms free from
offensive land uses in modern, landscaped buildings and surroundings.



   (B)   (1)   Permitted uses.  The uses permitted in the LI zone
are generally those industrial, office, storage, laboratory and manufacturing
uses which do not create any danger to health and safety in surrounding areas
and which do not create any offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor,
heat or glare and which, by reason of high value in relation to size and
weight of merchandise received and shipped, generate a minimum of truck
traffic.



      (2)   Those uses permitted in the LI zoning district per the
table in § 150.047(B).



   (C)   Conditional uses.  Uses may be permitted subject to a
conditional use permit (see § 150.015 and the table in § 150.047(B)).



      (1)   Those uses conditionally permitted in the LI zoning
district per the table in § 150.047(B).



      (2)   Because no list of uses can be exhaustive,
interpretations on unspecified uses shall be rendered by the Town Community
Development Director with the right to appeal to the Planning and Zoning
Commission and Town Council.



   (D)   Property development standards.  (See Part 8, Additional
Height and Area Regulations and Exceptions.)



      (1)   Setbacks.



 


Land Use

 

Minimum Yard Setbacks

 

Lot Coverage






 

Front

 

Side

 

Side Street

 

Rear

 






L/I

 

50 feet *

 

25 feet/0 **

 

50 feet * /20 **

 

25 feet

 

N/A



* From all streets, 50 feet which shall be maintained as open space, except
that access drives may penetrate the open space and parking may cover 15% of
the required setback area. The parking shall be screened from the street by a
solid fence, wall or landscaping screen of three feet in height.

** If alleyway or similar is provided.



 



      (2)   Area and bulk requirements.



 


Minimum Site



Area

 

Minimum Lot



Area

 

Minimum Lot



Width

 

Minimum Lot



Depth

 

Maximum



Height




5 acres

 

N/A

 

200 feet

 

200 feet

 

60 feet *



Additional building height allowances up to a maximum of 50 feet may be
obtained with a conditional use permit.



 



   (E)   Parking.  The applicable provisions of Part 7, Parking;
Loading and Unloading shall apply.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. III, § 4-65)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006; Ord.
555-11, passed 3-21-2011; Ord. 593-13, passed 4-1-2013)



§ 150.065  HEAVY INDUSTRIAL (HI).



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of the Heavy Industrial zoning district
is intended to promote and protect large and intensive industrial
manufacturing plants and their appurtenant uses, and to provide attractive
and well maintained and planned industrial parks for the location of the
activities.



   (B)   Permitted uses.  Those uses permitted in the HI zoning
district per the table in § 150.047(B).



   (C)   Conditional uses.  Uses may be permitted subject to a
conditional use permit (see § 150.015 and the table in § 150.047(B).



      (1)   Those uses conditionally permitted in the HI zoning
district per the table in § 150.047(B).



      (2)   Because no list of uses can be exhaustive,
interpretations on unspecified uses shall be rendered by the Town Community
Development Director with the right to appeal to the Planning and Zoning
Commission and Town Council.



   (D)   Property development standards.  (See Part 8 of the chapter,
Additional Height and Area Regulations and Exceptions.)



      (1)   Setbacks.



 


Land Use

 

Minimum Yard Setbacks

 

Lot Coverage






 

Front

 

Side

 

Side Street

 

Rear

 






H/I

 

50 feet *

 

25 feet

 

50 feet *

 

25 feet

 

N/A



* From all streets, 50 feet which shall be maintained as open space, except
that access drives may penetrate the open space and parking may cover 15% of
the required setback area. The parking shall be screened from the street by a
solid fence, wall or landscaping screen of three feet in height.



 



      (2)   Area and bulk requirements.



 


Minimum Site



Area

 

Minimum Lot



Area

 

Minimum Lot



Width

 

Minimum Lot



Depth

 

Maximum



Height




10 acres

 

N/A

 

200 feet

 

200 feet

 

60 feet *



* Additional building height allowances up to a maximum of 50 feet may be
obtained with a conditional use permit.



 



   (E)   Parking.  The applicable provisions of Part 7 of this
chapter, Parking; Loading and Unloading shall apply.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. III, § 4-66)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006; Ord.
593-13, passed 4-1-2013)



§ 150.066  OVERLAY DISTRICTS; HISTORIC DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   It is the purpose of the historic district to promote
the preservation of the unique historical character of the municipality while
encouraging the retention and rehabilitation of historic districts and
individual historic sites or structures in the community. The result of this
preservation and rehabilitation will be to provide for the educational,
cultural, economic and general social benefits which will occur because of
the Code while ensuring an orderly growth for the historic portions of the
community.



      (2)   To achieve these objectives, the historic district
zoning designation is to be superimposed over existing zoning classifications
where there is a recognized group of historic structures. This zoning
designation is not intended to modify or alter those land uses permitted by
the existing, underlying zoning and should not be used to do so. This zone
is, however, intended to encourage the preservation of historic districts and
structures, to promote their use while retaining their original architectural
style and character and to provide for their rehabilitation, if necessary.



      (3)   It is also the intent of this zone to ensure that
proposals for new or remodeled structures which are to be located within
designated historic districts are designed and constructed to harmonize with
the existing historic structures in the immediate vicinity. Achievement of
this objective will assist in the preservation of the historical character of
the district while retaining the property values within the district. It will
also provide for future development in the district. Finally, achieving this
objective will promote an awareness of the unique historical character of the
municipality for both its residents and visitors.



   (B)   Creation of historic district.  Based on the information
contained in Florence Townsite, A.T., the 1982 district nomination to the
National Register of Historic Places, and other pertinent material on the
history of the municipality which has been or will be prepared, the historic
sites and structures of the municipality can be delineated. Based on the
findings of these documents, a historic district may be proposed which will
include all or a portion of these identified historic sites or structures.



      (1)   This proposed historic district may be initiated by the
direct action of the Council or by the Commission. It may also be initiated
by the application of not less than 75% of the owners of property in the
proposed district or by the application of not less than 75% of the owners by
area in the proposed



district. For purposes of this calculation of the number of owners of
property within the proposed district and the amount of property which each
owns, the most recent records of the County Assessor’s office shall be
used. Also for this purpose, a single parcel of property held in joint or
common tenancy shall be counted as one owner and only one of the owners shall
have to sign the application for historic district zoning.



      (2)   In approving an application for historic district
zoning, the Council shall follow the same procedures that are used in other
zoning cases. Before initiating the formation of a historically zoned
district, however, the Council and/or the Commission may seek the advice,
assistance and participation of qualified groups or individuals interested in
the preservation and rehabilitation of the historic sites and structures of
the community.



   (C)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      BUILDING DETAILS.  Those features of a structure’s design
which relate it to a particular architectural period or style. These features
may include arches, cornices, grill work, shutters, trim over doors and
windows and other items.



      BUILDING FORM.  The size, shape, scale and mass of a structure.



      BUILDING MATERIALS.  The elements which make up the structure
and which are appropriate to a particular architectural period or style,
includes adobe, brick, wood, stucco, metal and other building materials.



      FACADE STYLE.  The appearance of the building taking all of the
design components (materials, form, details, proportion, projections and
recessions, rhythm, roof type and other design elements) into consideration.



      HEIGHT.  The vertical distance of a structure as measured
between the highest part of the structure and the finished grade at the
midpoint of the front facade of the structure, excluding chimneys or
mechanical equipment.



      HISTORIC SITE or HISTORIC STRUCTURE.  Those sites or structures
which:



         (1)   Are documented as dating from a particularly
significant period in the history of the municipality;



         (2)   Are associated with the lives of historically
outstanding persons;



         (3)   Are associated with events or occurrences of
significant historical importance;



         (4)   Are examples of the significant architectural
periods in the development of the municipality. These periods (as identified
in Florence Townsite, A.T.) include:



            (a)   The Sonoran Tradition (1866-1950);



            (b)   The Early Transitional Tradition (1871-1947);



            (c)   The Late Transitional Tradition (1878-1949);



            (d)   The American-Victorian Styles (1885-1922);



            (e)   The Bungalow Style (1908-1950);



            (f)   The Mission Revival Style (1912-1943);



            (g)   Early Twentieth Century Commercial and/or
Neo-Classic Revival Style (1913- 1936);



            (h)   Spanish Colonial Revival Style (1916-1931);
and



            (i)   Moderne Style (1920-1931).



         (5)   Are structures which have distinguishing
characteristics of style, type of construction or other aspects of
architecture and/or are the work of a builder, designer or architect of
historical importance to a specific period;



         (6)   Are related to events, persons or styles of
architecture which are at least 50 years old or are examples of outstanding
importance which are less than 50 years old but which deserve individual
recognition;



         (7)   Are related positively to the buildings and other
physical features in the immediate vicinity in terms of proportion, scale and
style such that they are an integral part of their setting; and



         (8)   Are used to contribute information of
architectural, archaeological, historical, cultural or social importance as
it relates to the unique character of the municipality.



      IMMEDIATE VICINITY.  Those structures which are within 200 feet
of the historic structure or which are clearly visible from the property
lines of the lot on which the structure is placed.



      PREVAILING SETBACK.  The most frequently found distance from the
front facade of the structures in the immediate vicinity to the front
property line. If this distance is less than the setback requirement of the
existing underlying zoning, the underlying zoning requirement shall prevail.
However, the Board of Adjustment shall be encouraged to grant variances to
this requirement in the case of historic or aesthetic importance.



      PROJECTIONS and RECESSIONS.  Those architectural features which
break up the smooth plane formed by a facade of a structure, includes
awnings, steps, entrances, overhangs, windows and other items.



      PROPORTION.  The relationship between the height and width of a
building’s facades, windows, doors and other architectural features.



      RHYTHM.  The ordered pattern of alternating between solids and
voids in a structure’s facades or in the other physical features of the
historic district.



      ROOF TYPE.  The design of the roof, including slope, size,
material and configuration, which is appropriate to a particular
architectural period or style.



      SITE UTILIZATION.  The spacing between buildings within the
immediate vicinity of the structure.



   (D)   Criteria.  Prior to designating an area as a historic
district and classifying it under this Development Code, the Council shall
consider the following:



      (1)   A historic district shall include structures which meet
the definition of HISTORIC STRUCTURES.



      (2)   A historic district shall consist of a group of historic
sites or structures which contribute to an appreciation and knowledge of the
unique architectural character of the municipality.



      (3)   A historic district should be easily distinguishable in
character and appearance from other parts of the community.



      (4)   A historic district should be of a size and shape which
make it a recognizable and comprehensive unit in appearance.



   (E)   Establishment and/or additions or deletions.  Prior to the
establishment of a historic district or prior to the amendment to an existing
district, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing to
consider the request. Notice of this hearing shall be sent to the owners of
all real property within the proposed historic district or in the area
proposed for amendment. This notice shall contain a map of the proposed
district or amendment area and a summary of these regulations. At this public
hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall:



      (1)   Review the procedure for initiating the proposal;



      (2)   Delineate the boundaries of the proposed historic
district or amendment to an existing district;



      (3)   Receive comments about the proposal; and



      (4)   Make a recommendation to the Council concerning the
proposal.



   (F)   Council action.  Within 30 days of receiving this
recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Council shall:



      (1)   Designate a historic district or amend an existing
district as proposed;



      (2)   Deny the initiative for establishment of a district or
amendment to an existing district; and/or



      (3)   Return the matter to the Planning and Zoning Commission
for another public hearing or further considerations.



   (G)   Designation.  A historic district zone shall be designated by
preceding the underlying zoning classification with the letters “HD”.
This designation shall not alter the uses permitted by the underlying zoning.



   (H)   Retention of existing zoning.  All property in the
municipality which has been designated as lying within a historic district
shall continue to be subject to the conditions of the zoning regulations
which they were subject prior to the historic designation.



   (I)   Historic District Advisory Commission.  The powers and duties
of the Historic District Advisory Commission are outlined § 32.070.



   (J)   New construction or alterations to existing structures.  The
construction of new structures or the alterations of existing structures or
any other activities within a historic district which require the issuance of
a building permit shall comply with the following requirements in the
preparation of these plans and details:



      (1)   Consistency with the Secretary of the interior’s
standards for the treatment of historic properties (36 C.F.R. part 68,
7-12-1995).



      (2)   While no specific architectural style will be required
for new construction within a historic district, the following criteria shall
be used by the Historic District Advisory Commission and the Council in
determining the compatibility of the request with existing structures in the
immediate vicinity and in the district as a whole:



         (a)   Height;



         (b)   Setbacks, including prevailing setback;



         (c)   Proportion;



         (d)   Rhythm;



         (e)   Site utilization;



         (f)   Facade style;



         (g)   Roof type;



         (h)   Materials;



         (i)   Projections and recessions;



         (j)   Details; and



         (k)   Building form.



      (3)   Each of these criteria shall be reviewed by the
Commission and the Council before they rule on the appropriateness of the
proposed new construction in the historic district.



   (K)   Iterations.



      (1)   Iterations to a structure within a historic district
shall comply with the following criteria and shall preserve the historical
and architectural character that makes the structure of historic significance
if architecturally and economically appropriate. These changes shall be in
keeping with the Secretary of the interior’s standards for rehabilitation
if economically feasible. The following criteria shall be used by the
Historic District Advisory Commission and the Council in determining the
compatibility of the request with the existing structure and with other
structures in the immediate vicinity:



         (a)   Height;



         (b)   Setbacks, including prevailing setback;



         (c)   Proportion;



         (d)   Rhythm;



         (e)   Site utilization;



         (f)   Facade style;



         (g)   Roof type;



         (h)   Materials;



         (i)   Projections and recessions;



         (j)   Details; and



         (k)   Building form.



      (2)   Each of these criteria shall be reviewed by the
Commission and the Council before they rule on the appropriateness of the
proposed alterations to an existing structure within a historic district.



   (L)   Demolition of structures.  The municipality shall not issue a
demolition permit for any structure or part of a structure within a historic
district until the application has been approved by either the Historic
District Advisory Commission or upon appeal to the Council. In making this
decision, the Commission and/or the Council shall consider the results of a
cost and/or benefit analysis prepared by the applicant, as prescribed earlier
in this division, as well as the plans for the property if the demolition
permit is approved. Utilizing this information, the Commission and/or the
Council shall determine if the structure or part of the structure may be
preserved physically or economically.



      (1)   If the Commission and/or the Council find that the
structure is in a condition that it is not economically or physically
feasible to preserve it, and that taking into consideration the interests of
the public and the interest of the property owner, they shall notify the Town
Manager of their decision and a demolition permit shall be issued.



      (2)   If it is found that the structure can be preserved in
terms of economic and physical feasibility, but the owner of the structure
continues to want it demolished, the Historic District Advisory Commission
shall have up to 180 days to attract a buyer for the property who will
preserve it. At the end of this 180 days, if a buyer for the property has not
been found, the Commission shall notify the Planning Director and a
demolition permit shall be issued.



      (3)   Approval by either the Historic District Advisory
Commission or the Council to the issuance of a demolition permit based on the
regulations of this Development Code does not require the issuance of this
permit if the municipality should find other reasons to deny the application
under the provisions of this Development Code.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. III, § 4-67)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006



§ 150.067  PARKING OVERLAY DISTRICT (P-1).



   (A)   Purpose.  It is the intent and purpose of this Development
Code to provide a district whereby off-street parking and parking structures
in a planned harmonious site may be provided, either above or below the
surface of the ground, for private, public, customer or commercial uses.



   (B)   Permitted uses.  Buildings, structures or premises shall be
used and buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, altered or
enlarged only for the following uses:



      (1)   Surfaced parking lots for the off-street parking of
passenger automobiles; and



      (2)   Carports.



   (C)   Property development standards. (See §§ 150.164 through
150.184 for additional standards and exceptions)



   (D)   Off-street parking. The provisions of §§ 150.156 through
150.163 shall apply.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. III, § 4-68)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.068  RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS AND/OR SUBDIVISIONS.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of this division is to provide for
recreational vehicle parks and/or subdivisions that are suitably developed
for the placement and occupancy of recreational vehicles for residential
purposes on leased, rented or owned spaces on a long-term or temporary basis.
The intent of these regulations is to encourage development of a unified
project with adequate open space provisions to preserve the residential
character of the area and to prohibit uses that are incompatible with the
surrounding areas and development.



   (B)   Permitted uses.  The following uses shall be permitted under
this division:



      (1)   Only one recreational vehicle permitted per approved
space or lot within a lawfully zoned, permitted, developed and conforming
recreational vehicle park;



      (2)   Manager’s office and residences may be of conventional
type construction;



      (3)   Recreational and social centers shall be of conventional
type construction and may be used for dancing, crafts, hobbies, games,
meetings, banquets, theatrical performances, movie viewing and similar
entertainment uses;



      (4)   Outdoor recreational facilities, such as parks, swimming
pools, ramadas, playgrounds, shuffle boards, tennis courts, putting greens
and similar recreational uses, provided all the improvements conform to state
and county regulations for semi-public uses;



      (5)   Coin-operated laundry facilities, maintenance building
and/or facilities;



      (6)   Security guard houses at park entrance;



      (7)   Recreational vehicle storage, including washing areas;



      (8)   Recreational centers and guest parking areas; and



      (9)   ACCESSORY STRUCTURES as defined in § 150.174. Accessory
structure plumbing shall be limited to drains for the use of one clothes
washer, one sink, one toilet and one shower or combination tub/shower.
Heating and/or cooling, electrical convenience outlets and ceiling fans may
be installed as per current Code requirements.



   (C)   Conditional uses. Because no list of uses can be exhaustive,
interpretations on unspecified uses shall be rendered by the Town Community
Director with the right to appeal to the Planning and Zoning Commission and
Town Council.



   (D)   Property development standards.



      (1)   Setbacks.



 


Front

 

Interior Side

 

Street Side

 

Rear




5 feet *

 

5 feet

 

10 feet

 

5 feet



* Exclusive of recreational vehicle tongue.



 



      (2)   Area and bulk requirements.



 


Minimum Site Area

 

Minimum Space Area

 

Minimum Lot Width

 

Minimum Lot Depth

 

Maximum Height




10 acres

 

2,000 square feet*

 

40 feet

 

50 feet

 

30 feet



*A maximum density of 14 recreational vehicles per net acre after deduction
of existing and/or proposed right-of-way.



 



   (E)   Access.  Access to all recreational vehicle parks shall be
from the interior of the park. There shall be no individual access to any
recreational space from the public right-of-way.



   (F)   Open space requirements.  A minimum of 75 square feet of
recreational open space and/or recreational facilities for each recreational
vehicle park. Public or private streets, vehicle storage areas and exterior
boundary landscaping areas shall not be included in calculating open space.



   (G)   Accessory structures.  Removal of sliding doors, windows or
modifications of the existing recreational vehicle enclosed by an accessory
structure is prohibited. Construction of all accessory structures shall
conform to all building codes currently in force in the municipality.



   (H)   Signs.  Directional and informational signs within the park
and one identification sign in accordance with all Codes.



   (I)   Temporary construction uses.  Temporary construction
buildings and yards necessary during the actual development of the park.



   (J)   Off-street parking.  Parking regulations are as provided in
Part 7 of this chapter, Parking; Loading and Unloading.



   (K)   Procedure for park approval.  Approval of a new or expanded
recreational vehicle park shall be pursued through the town’s design review
application process.  Any subdivision is subject to the town’s applicable
procedures and codes for subdivisions.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. III, § 4-69)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006; Ord.
445-06, passed 9-18-2006; Ord. 601-13, passed 9-16-2013)



§ 150.069  PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD).



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of the PUD district is intended to
accommodate, encourage and promote developments with innovative design
involving residential and nonresidential land uses, which together form an
attractive, harmonious unit in the community. Such a planned unit development
may be designed as a large-scale separate entity, able to function as an
individual community or neighborhood, as a small-scale project which requires
flexibility because of unique circumstances or design characteristics or as a
transitional area between dissimilar land uses. The planned unit development,
if so specified at the time of zoning approval, may include standards or
criteria that differ from those regulations pertaining to other districts
when warranted by circumstances such as but not limited to, alternative
residential lot design, innovative architectural or subdivision design
features, retirement housing, in-fill development involving a small or
irregularly shaped parcel or other circumstances found by the town through
the PUD approval to merit departure from the regulations pertaining to other
districts. The PUD may be used either as an overlay district to provide
flexibility in an otherwise established land use district, or it can be used
as an independent district. This district, which may only be developed in
accordance with an approved development plan is further established to
provide both the developer and the town with reasonable assurances that
specific, proposed uses, intensities and phasing are consistent with the
adopted general plan.



   (B)   General applicability.  The provisions of this Development
Code shall apply to all planned unit development documents and any additional
or supplemental information that is deemed necessary by the Planning
Director, or designee, to meet the following objectives: to accommodate
variations in building design, lot arrangements and land uses for a maximum
choice in the types of environments for residential, commercial, industrial
uses and facilities, to provide for a coordinated and compatibly arranged
variety of land uses with efficient and safe traffic circulation, including
the separation of pedestrian from vehicular traffic through innovative site
planning, to maintain quality of living excellence with the provision of
usable open space standards to minimize adverse environmental impact on
surrounding areas and, to assist in fulfilling the goals, objectives and
policies of the town’s general plan and amendments thereto.



   (C)   Permitted uses.  All uses permitted within the PUD district
are determined by the underlying zoning district, or by an approved
development plan for the site. In the development of a balanced community, a
variety of housing within one project shall be deemed most in keeping with
the objectives of this Development Code. All other uses shall be determined
by the compatibility of the uses with each other as well as with surrounding
land uses and shall conform to policies established in the town’s general
plan.



   (D)   Density and intensity.  Densities and intensities permitted
in the PUD district shall conform with the town’s general plan except as to
portions of the PUD specifically covered by a plan of development,
development agreement, standards or stipulations adopted prior to June 19,
2006.



   (E)   Procedures.  A PUD proposal shall be submitted to the
Planning Director in the form of a preliminary development plan consisting of
a graphic layout with accompanying narrative. For small-scale or single phase
projects, the PUD shall be filed as a zoning application and be reviewed and
considered for approval in conjunction with the Committee, Planning and
Zoning Commission and Town Council procedures. For large, multi-phase
projects, the zoning application may be filed as a conceptual preliminary
plan with sufficient description and documentation to identify the nature,
mix and general arrangement, density, open space and quality of the project,
which may be approved upon review by the Committee, Planning and Zoning
Commission and Town Council.



   (F)   Pre-application meeting.  A pre-application meeting shall be
held between the owner or owner’s representative(s) and the town. Formal
application shall then be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Department, at
which time the application shall be forwarded to the Committee for review and
recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission at a public hearing, in
accordance with § 150.019. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hear the
case and forward its recommendation to the Council. Within two years of
preliminary PUD approval, the applicant shall submit the final PUD to the
Planning Commission. The Commission’s recommendations on the final
development plan shall be referred to the Town Council for review and
approval. Failure to initiate and complete all improvements within the time
limits stipulated as part of the final PUD approval shall be cause for the
Council to rescind the re-zoning, unless extension of time is granted by the
Council.



   (G)   Preliminary application.  A preliminary PUD (showing general
land use concepts, but not requiring lotting plans at this stage) shall be
submitted to and reviewed by the Planning Director, or designee, for
consistency with town codes, policies and plans and shall indicate the
following:



      (1)   Locational information including an area map showing
adjacent property ownership and existing uses within 300 feet of the parcel,
and a legal description of the metes and bounds of the parcel;



      (2)   Physical constraints to the site’s development:
existing topographical features, including any portions of the site that are
subject to flooding (indicating the extent and frequency, retention areas,
calculations and maintenance responsibility), proposed roadway or major
utility line extensions which may impact development and areas within
aircraft approach and holding patterns and the other impediments to the
property’s use and improvement as may be present or planned for the future;



      (3)   Proposed site development addressing the location and
nature of the various uses and their areas in acres (summarizing land use
areas, total number of dwelling units and approximate percentage allocation
by dwelling type, calculation of the residential density in dwelling units
per gross acre as defined in the general plan;



      (4)   The proposed circulation system, including any
improvements (public or private) needed to accommodate additional traffic;



      (5)   The open space system (including a general statement
regarding ownership and maintenance) with indication of responsiveness to
general plan recreation and/or open space and perimeter treatments;



      (6)   Relationship of the project to surrounding land uses; and



      (7)   Evidence of proposed land use compatibility with
existing and projected community requirements, with the goals of the general
plan.



   (H)   Preliminary review.  The preliminary PUD shall be reviewed by
the Town Planning Department with staff comments forwarded to the Committee
as well as any other agencies deemed appropriate by the Department. The
Department shall compile and forward written comments within 30 days.



   (I)   Waiver.  The Planning Director or designee, in writing, may
waive any of the above required information which is not applicable or
require additional information when necessary to clarify any aspect of the
project or its potential impacts on the community.



   (J)   Committee review.  The Committee shall conduct a meeting to
review and make a recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission of the
findings.



   (K)   Planning and Zoning Commission review.  Thereafter, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall conduct a public hearing on the
preliminary PUD and transmit recommendations to the Town Council for review.



   (L)   Town Council review.  The Town Council may adopt the
recommendations of Planning and Zoning Commission without holding a second
public hearing if there is no objection, request for public hearing or
protest pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-462.04(D). The Council shall hold a public
hearing if requested by the applicant, any person appearing in opposition at
the Commission hearing or who has filed a written protest, or any member of
the Town Council.



   (M)   Town Council approval.  The Town Council may approve a PUD
only upon finding that the proposal meets the intent, objectives and general
requirements of the PUD district and is in conformance with the town general
plan, amendments thereto and all pertinent codes and policies.



      (1)   Conditions.  The Council may, as necessary, attach
conditions to PUD approval, which may include but are not limited to the
following considerations: intensities and densities, use limitations,
landscaping, screen planting, setback and height of buildings, paving,
location of drives and parking areas, storm drainage and storm water
retention, public and/or private open space, shape and size of lots, grouping
and uses of buildings, maintenance of grounds, regulation of signs, fences
and walls, adequacy of vehicle and pedestrian circulation and access, timing
and phasing, elevations and architectural theme or any other reasonable
considerations the Council finds germane to maintain community character and
neighborhood quality.



      (2)   Approval time limit.  Unless otherwise specified by
Council approval, the preliminary PUD shall be submitted, in its entirety or
for initial development phases, for preliminary plat approval within two
years from Council adoption.



   (N)   Final approval.  Final PUD review and approval, may be
processed simultaneously with preliminary plat review. The plans required
under this Development Code may be submitted in a form which satisfies the
requirements of the subdivision regulations for final plat approval if
submitted at the same time. Portions of the PUD which are intended for
development at later stages, one year or more from the date of approval,
shall not be required to show precise lot or site dimensions but shall be
individually processed prior to the issuance of development permits. The
applicant shall submit 25 copies of the final development plan, not less than
11 inches by 17 inches in dimension, and one color transparency to the
Planning and Zoning Department containing the following information, unless
specifically provided otherwise:



      (1)   All information required on the preliminary development
plan as revised in response to preliminary plan approval, with plans showing
location and type of all improvements including schematic grading plans with
proposed treatment of sloped retention areas and the following explanatory,
supporting details:



         (a)   Introduced by a statement of intended design
philosophy and environmental quality (text, graphics or photographic
examples), traffic analysis, including interior roadways, typical development
envelopes for residential uses and building arrangements for recreational,
employment, commercial or institutional uses;



         (b)   Standards including demand and capacity analyses
for municipal systems such as transportation, water supply, sewage disposal
and other community facilities, such as schools, public safety, cultural and
social services (such as libraries or multi-generational activity centers);



         (c)   If the development is to be phased, a general
indication, with chronology of the intended total project’s staging and, if
applicable, a list of development standards from which departure is requested
stating justifications for each in terms of increased environmental quality;
and



         (d)   Plans and elevations indicating a variety of
building types, materials, colors and the number of dwelling units by type
with estimated school enrollment to be generated for all portions of the PUD
to be constructed pursuant to this review and, for subsequent phases, the
timing of development in numerical order, if applicable.



      (2)   The PUD shall meet all applicable standards of design
and construction required by pertinent town codes and policies unless
modifications are accepted by the Planning Director or Town Council,
whichever is applicable.



      (3)   All portions of the PUD, whether under development or
reserved for future phases shall be maintained free and clear of weeds and
debris with posted signs prohibiting dumping of waste, scrap or fill material
of any type.



      (4)   The developer shall submit and the Planning Director
shall make a part of the case file record statements regarding any and all
approved deviations from the provisions of this Development Code.



   (O)   Zoning map.  Upon Town Council approval, the PUD zoning shall
be, by ordinance, reflected on the town zoning map.



   (P)   Town Engineer approval.  The Town Engineer’s approval of
conceptual water, sewer and drainage master plans shall be obtained as a
condition of development.



   (Q)   Development standards. The development plan shall respond to
the following requirements:



      (1)   Flexible development.  Quality land improvement,
consistent with the town general plan, is required of developers in exchange
for the applicant’s alternative proposals for meeting or exceeding
standards of the underlying zoning district (or comparable district); and



      (2)   Alternative development methods.  The alternative
development methods may be expressly stipulated in the final development plan.



   (R)   Density and/or intensity.  Specific dwelling unit yields may
be proposed for individual parcels and development units, notwithstanding
otherwise applicable standards, so long as they are consistent with the
principles of the general plan.



   (S)   Minimum lot area.  Single-family residential developments may
propose lotting arrangements with a portion of the site in parcels with less
than the otherwise applicable minimum lot area of 6,000 square feet, in
consideration of the following criteria as well as other justifications which
the applicant may provide:



      (1)   Mixed housing types including multi-family units with
attention to shelter affordability;



      (2)   Additional useable open space being provided;



      (3)   Compact residential lots are proximate to employment or
freeway interchange or create a desirable housing market, such as attracting
active retirees;



      (4)   Lots with areas less than 6,000 square feet are internal
to the development or are adjacent to nonresidential uses; and/or



      (5)   Illustrations of the proposed street scene where garages
are not dominating, porches are provided and the like.



   (T)   Property improvement specifications.  Unless otherwise
requested, approved and specified on the final development plan, improvements
to individual lots or sites shall conform with the standards set forth in the
zoning district tables for the district most nearly approximating proposed
uses and intensities of use.



      (1)   Joint use parking facilities, including appropriately
buffered and screened recreational vehicle, automotive maintenance and
washing areas, may be proposed in accordance with § 150.155.



      (2)   Parking spaces shall be designated for parks and
recreation areas.



      (3)   Separate, designated spaces shall be provided for
temporary model home sales or rental offices.



   (U)   Signage.  Comprehensive signage packages shall be proposed to
identify and provide entry monumentation, street signs and common area
information, including monument signs for freestanding nonresidential uses
and directory signage for retail, office or industrial park centers.



   (V)   Other improvements.  Off-site installation of municipal
system extensions, including streets, sidewalks, pathways, drainage
facilities, water, sewer and private provider utility trenching and
sub-station facilities necessary to serve the development may be master
planned in compliance with town engineering specifications or with
attenuation methods and materials approved by the Public Works Director or
designee.



   (W)   Open space.  Allotments of required percentages of the gross
site area in improved or preserved open space to be maintained shall be
specified in the final development plan. Desert or agricultural lands,
portions of natural washes, stormwater retention areas, golf courses and
lineal pathway and/or trail corridors may be accepted as appropriate to the
development. Minimum open space shall be provided, based on the following
average lot sizes:



      (1)   Open space requirements:



 


Average Lot Size

 

Minimum Open Space




Less than 6,000 square feet

 

15%




6,000-10,000 square feet

 

10%




10,001-18,000 square feet

 

5%




18,001 plus square feet

 

No minimum




 



      (2)   Common open space useable for recreation or leisure
purposes shall constitute not less than 75% of residential development’s
open space requirements in development units where the number of multi-family
units and average lot size of 6,000 square feet in gross area or less
represents the majority of dwelling units. Percentages for larger lot
development units or nonresidential parcels shall be specified in the final
development plan. Peripheral landscape tracts are required along arterial
roadways and the outer edges of planned development units. Tract widths, wall
treatments and improvements such as pathways or street furniture shall be
specified on the final development plan. Tracts 35 feet or greater in width
may abut lots with 2-story dwellings.



   (X)   Amenity expectations.  Development plans shall specifically
address and provide positive response in terms of land improvement
enrichments for the benefit of residents, businesses, visitors and the entire
community, including, but not limited to, the following:



      (1)   Residential neighborhoods.  Safety, spaciousness,
attractive appearance, streetscape, recreation, outdoor enjoyment,
residential privacy and compatibility among land uses and housing types are
among considerations to which development plans shall respond.



      (2)   Design.  Planned neighborhoods’ visual appearance
shall be enhanced by creative, master planned response to the design
standards and regulations as outlined in §§ 150.080et seq.



      (3)   Facilities.  Housing areas are expected to provide and
maintain amenities to enhance neighborhood livability and sustain-ability for
residents of all ages.



      (4)   Recreational facilities.  Each dwelling should be
located within 1,000 feet of the nearest common open space or within 500 feet
of a pathway linkage (sidewalk and/or bike path) to the facilities.



      (5)   Drainage structures.  Open, flow-conducting swales,
retention or detention basins, which may be coordinated with areas credited
toward open space requirements, should be engineered to prevent safety hazard
or creation of attractive nuisance.



      (6)   Community integration. Neighborhood design contributes
to town-wide enhancements as well as features that provide residential
diversity and linkages among neighborhoods.



      (7)   Pathways.  Bicycle and pedestrian connections to
schools, parks, shopping and other neighborhood activity centers should be
conveniently accessible from all dwellings.



      (8)   Neighborhood identity.  Entry monumentation, banners,
public art, variations in lighting fixtures or street furniture help to
distinguish neighborhood units.



      (9)   Residential safety.  Pedestrian and security lighting,
non-access landscaping varieties, traffic visibility, elimination of lurking
areas and public safety and/or emergency accessibility should be addressed.



      (10)   Commercial, employment or institutional uses.  Safety,
reduction of traffic congestion, architectural excellence, compatible
signage, landscaping and/or street furniture treatments in peripheral tracts
and parking lots, integration of impacts on other properties in the vicinity
are among considerations to which development plans shall respond.



      (11)   Design.  Planned neighborhoods’ visual appearance
shall be enhanced by creative, master planned response to the design
standards and regulations as outlined in §§ 150.080et seq.



      (12)   Facilities.  Community benefitting spaces, fixtures
and conveniences should be installed and maintained in accessible, secure
locations.



      (13)   Activity centers.  Gathering places (including
performance sites, outdoor dining, recreation or relaxation areas) may be
provided for customers, business invitees, employees and residential
neighbors’ use at appropriate times.



      (14)   Joint use facilities.  Parking, playing fields,
restrooms, drinking fountains, plazas, walkways and other facilities may be
installed and maintained for community use.



      (15)   Transportation amenities.  Bicycle and pedestrian
convenience should be stressed, with consideration of bus stop improvements,
park-and-ride lots, employee shuttle services and the like.



      (16)   Community integration. Non-residential development
should seek to relate, both visually and functionally, with its surrounding
neighborhood.



      (17)   Open space connection.  Recreation space and
multi-purpose pathways are employed as means to allow employees or customers
from the adjacent neighborhood to access shopping or jobs and interact with
business people.



      (18)   Transitional buffering.  Separation distance,
landscaping, walls or joint-use areas are provided to protect residential
privacy and soften the impacts and edges between nonresidential and housing
areas.



      (19)   Impact mitigation.  Noise, glare, dust and industrial
emissions should be abated to acceptable residential levels at residential
property lines. Exposure to hazardous materials of any type is prohibited
outside of enclosed, controlled-environment structures.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. III, § 4-57)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006; Ord.
584-12, passed 10-1-2012)



§ 150.070  TERRITORY SQUARE (TS).



   (A)   Adoption.  The territory square zoning district zoning book
is adopted by reference.



   (B)   Purpose.  The purpose of the territory square zoning district
is to allow for a more creative and flexible hybrid zoning mechanism that can
be utilized to effectively implement the town-endorsed North End Framework
Vision Plan. This zoning district is intended to accommodate, encourage and
promote high quality and innovative residential, non-residential and mixed
use development within a centralized area of Florence that is critical for
the ultimate connectivity of historic and downtown Florence with
suburbanizing areas of Florence north of the Gila River. Furthermore, the
purpose of the territory square zoning district is to encourage social,
physical and economic advantages resulting from the comprehensive and orderly
planned use of land resources and land development strategies as reflected in
the North End Framework Vision Plan.



   (C)   General applicability. The provisions of the territory square
zoning district shall apply only to those properties within the indicated
boundaries of the territory square area as indicated within the territory
square zoning district zoning book and as identified as part of the Territory
Square MPC (Master Planned Community) on the town’s general plan future
land use map. All development within the territory square area shall be
subject to the provisions in the territory square zoning district code book,
except where applicable provisions are not expressly stated in the territory
square zoning district code book. In the case of the latter, the town will
refer to other applicable codes within the town's code of ordinances, such as
the town's Development Code.



   (D)   Permitted uses. Permitted uses within the territory square
zoning district are defined within the territory square zoning district code
book. Furthermore, any municipal use or any infrastructure use necessary to
support development within the territory square area shall be considered a
principally permitted use. Because no list of uses can be exhaustive,
interpretations on unspecified uses shall be rendered by the Community
Development Director, with the right to appeal to the Planning and Zoning
Commission and Town Council.



   (E)   Development standards. Development standards within the
territory square zoning district are defined within the territory square
zoning district code book.



      (1)   Setbacks. Setback ranges are defined within the
territory square zoning district zoning book. Final setbacks for each
development block or subdivision shall conform to the specified ranges and be
precisely defined as each development block or subdivision is processed
through the town's subdivision and/or design review application process. This
flexibility affords increased latitude in establishing setbacks that work
best for the type of development being proposed with each land use group area.



      (2)   Parking.  Parking shall be in compliance with
applicable sections of the town's Development Code, except that community or
municipal parking areas will be encouraged within the core land use group and
the town, upon review, may approve the usage of alternative parking surfaces.
Parking deviations from the town's Development Code can be proposed for
consideration by the Planning and Zoning Commission by means of a design
review application process.



      (3)   Roadways. The Town Engineer shall be allowed to
consider, and where appropriate, approve alternate roadway development
standards as indicated within the territory square zoning district zoning
book or as proposed as part of a subdivision or design review application.



      (4)   Signs. General language regarding the character of
signage is indicated in the territory square zoning district zoning book.
Signage cannot deviate from or exceed that allowed by town code, except as
may be allowed by comprehensive sign plans for territory square approved
through the design review process. Comprehensive sign plans may apply by land
use group or development blocks within a land use group.



      (5)   Design review. All future development shall be subject
to the town's design review process, which shall consider, amongst other
things, site design, architectural designs, building materials, lighting,
parking, landscaping, grading, drainage, access, circulation, building
colors, signage, building locations, buffering, sanitation, walls, fences,
fire protection and compatibility with surrounding properties. Design review
approval is required prior to the issuance of building permits for the site.



   (F)   Density and intensity. Densities and intensities permitted in
the territory square zoning district shall conform to those set forth within
the territory square zoning district zoning book.



   (G)   Procedures. Application of the territory square zoning
district to properties shall be subject to the rezoning process as defined
with the town's code of ordinances and per applicable state statutes.
Amendments to the territory square zoning district code book shall be
processed as text amendments to the town's Development Code.



(Ord. 584-12, passed 10-1-2012)



REGULATIONS



PART 1.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 150.080  NONCONFORMING USE.



   (A)   Continuance of use of land; abandonment.  The lawful use of
land existing on July 19, 2006, although not conforming to the provisions
hereof for the land, may be continued, but if the nonconforming use is
abandoned, and a nonconforming use discontinued for a period of three months,
it is presumed abandoned, then any future use of the land shall be in
conformity with the provisions of this Development Code.



   (B)   Continuance of use of building or land.  The lawful use of a
building or land existing on July 19, 2006 may be continued, although the use
does not conform with the provisions of this Development Code for the
building or land and the use may be continued providing only reasonable
repairs and alterations are made. Whenever a nonconforming use of a building
or land has been changed to a more restricted use or to a conforming use, the
use shall not thereafter be changed to a less restricted use or a
nonconforming use.



   (C)   Abandonment of use of building or land.  In the event that a
nonconforming use of any building is abandoned, and a nonconforming use
discontinued for a period of three months is presumed abandoned, then any
future use of the building or land shall be in conformity with the provisions
of this Development Code.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-91)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.081  ENLARGEMENT OF BUILDING OR LAND; DESTRUCTION.



   (A)   Enlargement, extension, reconstruction or structural
alteration of building or land.  No existing building or land designed,
arranged or intended for or devoted to a use not permitted under the
regulations of this Development Code for the district in which the building
or land is located shall be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or structurally
altered unless the building and the enlargement, extension, reconstruction
and structural alterations, and further use hereof, conform in every respect
with the regulations specified by this Development Code for the district in
which the building or land is located, provided nothing herein shall prohibit
any reasonable repairs or alterations in a building or land used for the
existing purposes.



   (B)   Destruction of building or land.  If at any time any building
or land in existence or maintained on July 19, 2006, which does not conform
to the regulations for the district in which it is located, shall be
destroyed by fire, explosion, during modification, remodeling, renovation or
acts of God or acts of the public enemy to the extent of 50% of its value as
determined by three competent appraisers, then and without further action by
the Council, the building and the land on which the building was located or
maintained shall from and after the date of the destruction be subject to all
the regulations specified by this Development Code for the district in which
the land and building are located.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-92)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.082  ABANDONED OR JUNKED VEHICLES.



   (A)   All abandoned or junk vehicles, or vehicles while being
repaired or restored, shall be stored in an enclosed area by the owner or
occupant of the property upon which the vehicle is located, in such a manner
as to not be visible from any point lying outside the property upon which the
abandoned or junk vehicle is stored or parked.



   (B)   ABANDONED OR JUNK VEHICLE.  A vehicle or any major portion
thereof which is incapable of movement under its own power and will remain so
without major repair or reconstruction or a vehicle not having current
license and registration.



   (C)   MAJOR REPAIR.  The removal from any vehicle of a major
portion thereof including, but not limited to, the differential,
transmission, head, engine block or oil pan.



   (D)   VEHICLE.  Any self-propelled device in, upon or by which any
person or property is or may be transported upon a public highway excepting
devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or
tracks.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-93)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



PART 2.  OUTDOOR LIGHTING CONTROL



§ 150.083  INTENT.



   It is the intent of this Development Code to encourage lighting
practices and systems which will:



   (A)   Minimize light pollution, glare, light trespass and conserve
energy and resources while maintaining nighttime safety, utility, security
and productivity; and



   (B)   Curtail the degradation of the nighttime visual environment.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-111)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.084  CONFORMANCE WITH APPLICABLE CODES.



   (A)   All outdoor artificial illuminating devices shall be installed
in conformance with the provisions of this Development Code, and any building
codes which may hereafter be enacted, as applicable.



   (B)   Where any provisions of any of the state statutes, or any of
the federal law or any companion Code comparatively conflicts with the
requirements of this Development Code, the most restrictive shall govern.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-112)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.085  APPROVED MATERIAL AND METHODS OF INSTALLATION.



   (A)   The provisions of this Development Code, are not intended to
prevent the use of any material or method of installation not specifically
prescribed by this Development Code provided any alternate has been approved.



   (B)   The Planning Director or designee thereof may approve any
alternate provided the alternate:



      (1)   Provides approximate equivalence to these specific
requirements of this Development Code; or



      (2)   Is otherwise satisfactory and complies with the intent
of this Development Code.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-113)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.086  PERMANENT EXEMPTIONS; NONCONFORMING FIXTURES.



   All outdoor light fixtures existing and fully installed prior to July
19, 2006, may remain nonconforming indefinitely; provided, however, that no
change in use, replacement, structural alteration or restoration after
abandonment of outdoor light fixtures shall be made unless it thereafter
conforms to the provisions of this Development Code.



   (A)   Fossil fuel light.  All outdoor light fixtures producing
light directly or indirectly by the combustion of natural gas or other
utility type fossil fuels are exempt from this Development Code.



   (B)   Federal and state facilities.  Those facilities and lands
owned, operated or protected by the federal government or the state are
exempted by law from all requirements of this Development Code. Voluntary
compliance with the intent of this Development Code at those facilities is
encouraged.



   (C)   Special exemption.  The Planning Director or designee thereof
may grant a special exemption to the requirements of § 150.094 only upon a
written finding that there are extreme geographic or geometric conditions
warranting the exemption and that there are no conforming fixtures that would
suffice.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-114)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.087  REQUEST FOR TEMPORARY EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Any individual may submit a written request on a form prepared
by the municipality to the Planning Director or designee thereof for a
temporary exemption to the requirements of this Development Code, the
exemption to be valid for 30 days, renewable at the discretion of the
Planning Director or designee thereof. The request for temporary exemption
shall contain minimally the following listed information:



      (1)   Specific exemptions requested;



      (2)   Type and use of exterior light involved;



      (3)   Duration of time for requested exemption;



      (4)   Total wattage of lamp or lamps;



      (5)   Proposed location of exterior light;



      (6)   Previous temporary exemptions, if any; and



      (7)   Physical size of exterior light and type of shielding
provided.



   (B)   In addition to the above data, the Planning Director or
designee thereof may request any additional information necessary to make a
reasonable evaluation of the request for temporary exemption.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-115)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.088  APPEAL FOR TEMPORARY EXEMPTION.



   The Planning Director or designee thereof, within five days from the
date of the properly completed request for temporary exemption, shall approve
or reject in writing the request. If rejected, the individual making the
request shall have the right of appeal to the appropriate Board of Adjustment
for review pursuant to the procedures applicable to other appeals.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-116)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.089  PROCEDURES FOR CODE COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   Applications.  Any individual applying for a building or use
permit under this Development Code, and intending to install outdoor lighting
fixtures shall, as a part of the application, submit evidence that the
proposed work will comply with this Development Code.



      (1)   All other individuals intending to install outdoor
lighting fixtures shall submit an application to the Manager or designee
thereof providing evidence that the proposed work will comply with this
Development Code.



      (2)   Utility companies entering into a duly approved
agreement with the town, which agreement requires compliance with the
provisions of this Development Code, shall be exempt from applying for and
obtaining a permit for the installation of outdoor light fixtures, including
residential security lighting.



   (B)   Content.  The submission shall contain but shall not
necessarily be limited to the following, all or part of which may be part of
or in addition to the information required elsewhere in this Development Code
upon application for the required permit:



      (1)   Plans indicating the location on the premises, and the
type of illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, other devices and
the like;



      (2)   Description of the illuminating devices, fixtures,
lamps, supports and other devices and the like. This description may include,
but is not limited to, manufacturers' catalog cuts and drawings (including
sections where required); and



      (3)   The above required plans and descriptions shall be
sufficiently complete to enable the Town Manager or designee thereof to
readily determine whether compliance with the requirements of this
Development Code will be secured. If the plans and descriptions cannot enable
this ready determination, by reason of the nature or configuration of the
devices, fixtures or lamps proposed, the applicant shall submit evidence of
compliance by certified test reports as performed by a recognized testing lab.



   (C)   Issuance of permit.  Upon compliance with the requirements of
this Development Code, the outdoor lighting fixtures may be installed as
provided in the approved application. In the event the application is part of
the building permit application under this Development Code, the issuance of
the building permit will be made if the applicant is in compliance with this
Development Code as well as the other requirements for issuance under this
Development Code. Appeal procedures of the zoning regulations for decisions
of the Town Manager or designee thereof shall apply.



   (D)   Amendment to permit.  Should the applicant desire to
substitute outdoor light fixtures or lamps after a permit has been issued,
the applicant must submit all changes to the Town Manager or designee thereof
for approval, with adequate information to assure compliance with this
Development Code.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-117)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.090  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Shielding.  All exterior illuminating devices, except those
exempt from this Development Code, shall be fully or partially shielded as
required by division (C) below.



      (1)   FULLY SHIELDED means that those fixtures shall be
shielded in such a manner that light rays emitted by the fixture, either
directly from the lamp or indirectly from the fixture, are projected below a
horizontal plane running through the lowest point on the fixture where light
is emitted.



      (2)   PARTIALLY SHIELDED means that those fixtures shall be
shielded in such a manner that the bottom edge of the shield is below the
plane center line of the light source (lamp), minimizing light above the
horizontal.



   (B)   Filtration.  Those outdoor light fixtures requiring a filter
in division (C) below shall be equipped with a filter whose transmission is
less than 5% total emergent flux at wavelengths less than 3,900 angstroms.
TOTAL EMERGENT FLUX is defined as that between 3,000 and 7,000 angstrom
units. It is recommended that existing mercury vapor fixtures shall be
equipped with a filter whose transmission is less than 10% total emergent
flux at wavelengths less than 4,400 angstroms or shall be replaced. Low
pressure sodium lamps are the preferred lamp for minimizing adverse effects
on astronomical observations.



   (C)   Requirements for shielding and filtering.  The requirements
for shielding and filtering light emissions shall be as indicated in the
following table:



 


Fixture Lamp Type

 

Shielded

 

Filtered






Low pressure sodium1

 

Partially

 

None




High pressure sodium

 

Fully

 

None




Metal halide6

 

Fully

 

Yes




Fluorescent

 

Fully5

 

Yes2




Quartz3

 

Fully

 

None




Incandescent greater than 150W

 

Fully

 

None




Incandescent 150W or less

 

None

 

None




Mercury vapor

 

Fully7

 

Yes7




Fossil fuel

 

None

 

None




Glass tubes filled with neon, argon, krypton

 

None

 

None




Other sources

 

As approved by town

 





Footnotes:


1. This is the preferred light source to minimize undesirable light into the
night sky affecting astronomical observations.


2. Warm white and natural lamps are preferred to minimize detrimental effects.


3. For the purposes of this Development Code, quartz lamps shall not be
considered an incandescent light source.


4. Most glass, acrylic or translucent enclosures satisfy these filter
requirements.


5. Outdoor advertising signs of the type constructed of translucent materials
and wholly illuminated from within do not require shielding.


6. Metal halide display lighting shall not be used for security lighting
after 11:00 p.m. (or after closing hours if before 11:00 p.m.) unless fully
shielded. Metal halide lamps shall be in enclosed luminaries.


7. Recommended for existing fixtures. The installation of mercury vapor
fixtures is prohibited.




 



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-118)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.091  PROHIBITIONS.



   The following prohibitions apply throughout the town:



   (A)   Searchlights.  The operation of searchlights for advertising
purposes is prohibited.



   (B)   Recreational facility.  No outdoor recreational facility,
public or private, shall be illuminated by nonconforming means after 11:00
p.m. except to conclude a specific recreational or sporting event or any
other activity conducted at a ballpark, outdoor amphitheater, arena or
similar facility in progress prior to 11:00 p.m.



   (C)   Outdoor building or landscaping illumination.  The unshielded
outdoor illumination of any building, landscaping, signing or other purpose
is prohibited except with incandescent fixtures less than 150 watts.



   (D)   Mercury vapor.  The installation of mercury vapor fixtures is
prohibited.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-119)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006) 
Penalty, see § 150.999



PART 3.  SIGN REGULATIONS



§ 150.092  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this Development Code is to establish comprehensive
provisions that will promote public welfare and safety by safe placement and
installation of appropriate signage, establish reasonable regulations to
promote economic vitality for local businesses and services and enhance the
visual environment of the town.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-136)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.093  INTENT.



   The intent of these provisions is to maximize establishment
identification, balance sign function with the community's aesthetic
standards, avoid over-proliferation of signs and maintain a high quality of
signs throughout the town.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-137)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.094  GENERAL APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   The regulations, requirements and provisions set forth in this
Development Code shall apply to all signs erected, placed or constructed
within the town.



   (B)   Sign permits shall be required for all signs except those
signs specified in § 150.123. The Planning Director or designee shall issue
a sign permit only if the proposed sign, construction, alteration,
re-erection, maintenance and location of the sign comply with these
regulations.



   (C)   All signs shall be structurally designed, constructed, erected
and maintained in accordance with all applicable provisions and requirements
of the town codes and ordinances.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-139)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.095  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.



   A-FRAME SIGN.  A portable and temporary sign used to display
advertising or a business logo. Might also be used to indicate hours of
operation or be used as menu boards.



   ANIMATED SIGN.  Any sign or part of a sign which changes physical
position by any movement, rotation or undulation or by the movement of any
light used in conjunction with a sign such as blinking, traveling, flashing
or changing degree of intensity of any light movement other than burning
continuously.



   AWNING, CANOPY or MARQUEE SIGN.  A sign that is mounted or painted on
or attached to an awning, canopy or marquee that is otherwise permitted by
this Development Code. A MARQUEE is defined as a canopy constructed of rigid
materials which projects over an entrance to a building.



   BANNER SIGN.  A sign designed to advertise products, businesses, or
events that is temporary in nature and printed on cloth, vinyl or plastic and
typically suspended from two ends that are attached to buildings or poles.
BANNERS are not permanently attached and can not be enclosed in a rigid
frame. May also be referred to as pennant signs.



   BILLBOARD.  The same as an off-site sign.



   BUSINESS SIGN.  A sign which directs attention to a business or
profession conducted on-site or to a commodity or service sold, offered or
manufactured on-site, or to an entertainment offered on-site.



   CABINET SIGN.  A 3-dimensional structure which includes a frame,
borders and sign panel face and which may include internal lighting.



   CONSTRUCTION SIGN.  A temporary sign, limited to the period of
construction, erected on a premises of an existing construction project, and
designating the architect, contractor, designer Engineer, financier or name
and nature of the project.



   DIRECTIONAL SIGN.  A sign containing information for the purpose of
directing traffic or pedestrian travel and placed on the property to which or
on which the public is directed. No more than 25% of the area of a
directional sign may be devoted to the display of a business logo or
identification on the signs.



   DIRECTORY SIGN.  A sign listing the names, uses and/or locations of
the various businesses or activities conducted within a building or group of
buildings, but not for the purpose of advertising products, goods or services.



   FIGURATIVE SIGN.  A sign that advertises the occupant’s business
through the use of graphic or crafted symbols, such as shoes, keys, glasses,
books and the like.  FIGURATIVE SIGNS may be incorporated into any of the
allowable sign types identified in this Development Code.



   FREEWAY PYLON SIGN.  A freestanding identification sign, permitted as
part of a comprehensive sign package, for a multi-tenant commercial or
industrial development that is adjacent to a freeway and has at a minimum 300
feet of freeway frontage.



   FREESTANDING MONUMENT SIGN.



      (1)   An identification sign on its own self-supporting
permanent structure, detached from supportive elements of a building, on a
base that has an aggregate width of at least 50% of the width of the sign and
with supports that complement the materials and colors used in the
architecture on-site.



      (2)   Street address numerals shall be provided on any
freestanding monument sign located along the street to which the address
numbering applies, in a contrasting color and/or material from the color and
material used for the background for the numerals on the sign.



   ILLUMINATED SIGN.  A sign with the surface artificially lighted,
either internally or externally.



   MENU BOARD SIGN.  A sign displaying the bill of fare of a drive-in or
drive-through restaurant.



   NONCONFORMING SIGN.  A sign lawfully erected and maintained prior to
the adoption of this Development Code which does not conform with the
requirements of this Development Code.



   OFF-SITE SIGN.  A sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service, entertainment, product or attraction sold, offered or
existing elsewhere than upon the property where the sign is located.



   OPEN HOUSE DIRECTIONAL SIGN.  A sign used to advertise the sale of a
house and direct traffic to the house for sale.



   PARAPET SIGN.  A sign attached to that portion of a building's
exterior wall that projects above the plate line of the building.



   POLITICAL SIGN.  A temporary sign which supports any candidate for
public office or urges action for or against any other matter of a political
nature.



   PORTABLE SIGN.  A temporary sign not affixed to a structure or
ground-mounted on a site.



   PROJECTING SIGN.  A sign attached to a building or other structure and
extending in whole or in part not more than 12 inches beyond the building or
other structure.



   READER PANEL SIGN.  A sign which identifies a noncommercial
institution or organization, on-site, which contains the name of the
institution or organization and associated individuals and general
announcements of events or activities at the institution, or similar messages
of general public interest and is designed to permit immediate change of copy.



   REAL ESTATE SIGN.  A sign advertising the sale, lease or rent of the
property or building upon which it is located.



   RESIDENTIAL KIOSK SIGN.  A town-provided, informational sign
indicating direction to multiple residential developments and community
facilities.



   ROOF SIGN.  A sign erected on, above or over the roof so that it
projects above the highest point of the roofline, parapet or fascia.



   SHINGLE SIGN.  A sign suspended from, and located entirely under a
covered porch, covered walkway or an awning and is anchored or rigidly hung
to prevent the sign from swinging due to wind movement.



   SIGN.  Any identification, description, illustration, symbol or device
which is affixed directly or indirectly upon a building, vehicle, structure
or land and which identifies or directs attention to a product, place,
activity, person, institution or business.







 



   SIGN AREA.  The entire area within a continuous perimeter, enclosing
the extreme limits of sign display, including any frame or border. Curved,
spherical or any other shaped sign face shall be computed on the basis of
actual surface area. The copy of signs composed of individual letters,
numerals or other devices shall be the sum of the area of the smallest
rectangle or other geometric figure encompassing all of the letters or
devices.



   SIGN HEIGHT.  The vertical distance measured from the lowest adjacent
grade to the highest point of the sign or sign structure.



   VEHICLE SIGN.  A sign mounted, painted or otherwise placed on a truck,
bus, car, boat, trailer or other vehicle or equipment and used in such a
manner that the sign is visible from a public street or right-of-way and the
primary purpose of the vehicle or equipment is for the display of the
signage. The primary purpose of the vehicle or equipment shall be presumed to
be for the display of the signage if the vehicle and/or equipment is not in
operating condition, currently registered or licensed to operate on public
streets and actively used in the daily function of the business to which the
signs relate, or is used primarily as a static display for the display of the
signage. Vehicles and equipment engaged in active construction projects and
the on-premise storage of equipment and vehicles offered to the general
public for rent or lease shall not be considered to be vehicle signs.



   WALL SIGN.  A sign fastened to or painted on the exterior wall of a
building or structure in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting
structure for, or forms the background surface of the sign.



   WINDOW SIGN.  Any poster, cut-out letters, painted text or graphic, or
other text or visual presentation affixed to the interior or exterior of a
window, or placed within six feet behind a window pane, and is placed to be
read from the exterior of a building. This does not include any item of
merchandise normally displayed within a store window of a merchant.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-138)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006; Am.
Ord. 573-12, passed 3-19-2012)



§ 150.096  LOCATION.



   (A)   Signs shall not be located in a manner that interferes with
pedestrian or vehicular travel, poses a hazard to either pedestrians or
vehicles or within the specified SIGHT TRIANGLE as defined in § 150.169.



   (B)   Signs shall be located a minimum of five feet from property
lines.



   (C)   Signs shall not be located within, on or projecting over any
public street, right-of-way or other public property, except for
town-approved residential kiosk sign structures, A-frame signs, bus bay
signs, shingle signs and projecting signs as permitted by this Development
Code. The town may install signs on its own property to identify public
buildings and uses, and to provide necessary traffic control.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-140)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006; Am.
Ord. 573-12, passed 3-19-2012)



§ 150.097  MAINTENANCE.



   All signs and sign structures, conforming and nonconforming, shall be
maintained in good order, repair and appearance at all times so as not to
constitute a danger or hazard to the public safety or create visual blight as
determined by the Planning Director or designee.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-141)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.098  SOURCE OF ILLUMINATION; SUPPORTS.



   (A)   The source of the sign's illumination, except neon
illumination, shall not be visible from any street, sidewalk or adjacent
property. This shall not preclude the use of neon sign elements within the
commercial zoning districts, which are subject to staff review and approval.



   (B)   There shall be no visible angle iron supports, guy wires,
braces or secondary supports except in the case of projecting signs. All sign
supports shall be an integral part of the sign design.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-142)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.099  PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.



   Signage within approved Planned Unit Developments (PUDs) may deviate
from the requirements of this Development Code provided the PUD has an
approved comprehensive sign package and all proposed signage within the PUD
is in compliance with that comprehensive sign package.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-143)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.100  COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   Signage should comply with the town design standards adopted
by the town on February 26, 2001, and as amended from time to time.



   (B)   Signs and/or banners should not be placed in such a manner
that they obstruct town required informational, traffic or safety signs.



   (C)   Where there is conflict between these regulations and other
town regulations, the more restrictive shall apply.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-144)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.101  SIGN AREA.



   SIGN AREA is defined and shall be measured as follows:



   (A)   Sign copy mounted or painted on a background panel or area
distinctively painted, textured or constructed as a background for the sign
copy shall be measured as that area within the outside dimensions of the
background panel or surface. The base of a freestanding monument sign shall
not be calculated as sign area unless the base contains signage (see
definition of SIGN).



   (B)   Sign copy mounted as individual letters and/or graphics
against a wall or parapet of a building or other structure that has not been
painted, textured or otherwise altered to provide a distinctive background
for the sign copy shall be measured as a sum of the smallest rectangle that
will enclose each word and each graphic in the total sign copy.



   (C)   Multi-face signs shall be measured as follows:



      (1)   A 2-faced sign shall be considered as one sign when
determining the sign area, provided both faces are parallel and the distance
between faces does not exceed four feet or the interior angle between the two
sign faces is 60 degrees or less. If the interior angle is greater less than
60 degrees, the sign area shall be the sum of the area of the two faces.



      (2)   Where a sign has three or more faces, the area of the
sign shall be calculated as 50% of the sum of the area of all faces.



      (3)   Where a sign is a spherical, freeform, sculptural,
figurative or other non-planar sign, the sign area shall be 50% of the sum of
the area of the sides of the smallest polygon that will encompass the sign
structure.



   (D)   The aggregate sign area of all signs on a lot or parcel shall
be the sum of the areas of all the signs except the area for the following:



      (1)   Directional signs, assisting in the flow of traffic,
which do not exceed an area of six square feet or a height of three feet and
may include a maximum of 25% of the sign area devoted to the display of a
business logo or identification.



      (2)   Street address wall signs, which do not exceed an area
of six square feet.



      (3)   Signs necessary for safety, which do not exceed an area
of six square feet or height of three feet.



      (4)   One sign per lot, parcel or business which does not
exceed an area of three square feet and is located near the entrance to the
lot, parcel or business for the purpose of aiding pedestrian traffic.



      (5)   For sale, lease or rent signs.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-145)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.102  SIGN HEIGHT.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.



      SIGN HEIGHT is defined and shall be measured as follows:



   (B)   Freestanding signs shall be measured as the vertical distance
from the top of the highest element of the sign or sign structure to the top
of the curb or crown of the nearest adjacent roadway where no curb exists.
The height of any monument base or other structure erected to support or
ornament the sign shall be measured as part the sign height.



   (C)   Wall or parapet-mounted sign height shall be measured as the
vertical distance to the top of the sign or sign structure from the base of
the wall on which the sign is located.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-146)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.103  PERMITTED PERMANENT SIGNS.



   (A)   Residential districts.  For all signs within residential
districts (RA-10, RA-4, R1-R, R1-18, R1-6, MFR, MHS and residential PUDs) the
following shall apply:



      (1)   Wall sign.  May or may not be illuminated with a
maximum height of ten feet except where specifically noted.



      (2)   Single residence uses.  One or more identification
signs may be permitted. Signs may include only the name of the residence or
occupant, and the street address. Street address signs shall not exceed a
total aggregate area of three square feet. Within the RA-10, RA-4, R1-R,
R118, R1-6, MFR, MHS and residential PUD zoning districts, a total aggregate
area of four square feet may be permitted.



      (3)   Multiple residence uses (includes apartments,
condominiums, townhouses, a manufactured home park, recreational vehicle park
or similar such use). One or more identification sign per unit, not to exceed
a total aggregate area of three square feet, may be permitted. The maximum
height of any identification sign, for multi-story buildings, shall be six
feet from the story floor level. The sign may include only the name of the
residence or occupant, and the street address or unit number. Building number
or letter signs for multiple building developments shall be in compliance
with Fire Department requirements and shall not be counted as part of the
aggregate sign area.



      (4)   Non-residential uses (such as but not limited to
churches, schools, group homes and farms, but not intended for home
occupations).  One or more identification sign per lot or parcel, not to
exceed a total aggregate area of 16 square feet, may be permitted unless
deviations are approved through a use permit. The sign may include the name
and/or logo of the facility, organization or development and the street
address.



   (B)   Freestanding monument sign.  May or may not be illuminated
with a maximum height of six feet.



      (1)   Multiple residence uses (includes apartments,
condominiums, townhouses, a manufactured home park, recreational vehicle park
or similar use).  A maximum of two freestanding monument signs with an
aggregate area of 32 square feet may be permitted. The maximum height shall
be six feet. Signs should be located near the main entrances and may include
the name and/or logo of the development and shall include the street address.
Street address numerals shall be provided on any freestanding monument sign
located along the street to which the address numbering applies, in a
contrasting color and/or material from the color and material used for the
background for the numerals on the sign.



      (2)   Nonresidential uses (such as but not limited to
churches, schools, group homes and farms, but not intended for home
occupations).  One freestanding monument sign per lot, not exceeding 32
square feet in area nor a height of six feet, may be permitted. The sign may
include the name and/or logo of the facility, organization or development and
shall include the street address.



   (C)   Directional signs.  The signs are permitted for multiple
residence uses and nonresidential uses and shall not exceed an area of six
square feet or a height of three feet. These signs shall not be included in
calculating the total aggregate area of signage allowed on a particular lot
or for a particular business, and may include a maximum of 25% of the sign
area devoted to the display of a business logo or identification. They shall
not be located within the sight triangle of any driveway. The use, number and
location of the signs must be approved through the design review process and
comply with all other code requirements.



   (D)   Directory signs.  The signs may be used for multiple
residence uses and nonresidential uses when required to identify the location
of various buildings, offices or businesses within a complex. The use, number
and location of the signs must be approved through the design review process
and comply with all other code requirements. Each sign may be illuminated and
have a maximum area of 18 square feet and a maximum height of six feet. These
signs shall not be included in calculating the total aggregate area for
signage allowed on a parcel or lot or for a particular business.







 



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-147)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.104  TOTAL SIGNAGE.



   (A)   Single residence uses.  A maximum aggregate area of three
square feet per lot or parcel may be permitted.



   (B)   Multiple residence uses (includes apartments, condominiums,
townhouses, a manufactured home park, recreational vehicle park or similar
use).



      (1)   One wall sign per individual unit or dwelling, not to
exceed three square feet, may be permitted.



      (2)   A maximum of two freestanding monument signs per
development, with a total aggregate area of 32 square feet, may be permitted.



      (3)   Freestanding directory or directional signs may be
permitted through the design review process.



   (C)   Non-residential uses (such as but not limited to churches,
schools, group homes, farms, but not intended for home occupations).



      (1)   A maximum of two signs per lot or parcel may be
permitted with the total aggregate sign area not to exceed 48 square feet.



      (2)   Freestanding directory signs may be permitted through
the design review process.



      (3)   Freestanding directional signs may be permitted through
the design review process.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-148)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.105  READER PANEL SIGNS.



   (A)   Elementary and secondary schools may also have, in addition to
§ 150.104, one freestanding reader panel sign with an area not exceeding 32
square feet and a height not greater than 14 feet.



   (B)   Churches may use up to one-half of the allowed freestanding
sign area for a reader panel.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-149)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.106  COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.



   Signs within commercial districts (B-1, NO, B-2, TRC, TRC/NO, PO and
commercial PUDs) shall comply with the following applicable restrictions.
Additionally, any complex of three or more businesses shall be required to
submit a comprehensive sign package to be reviewed and recommended by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the Town Council.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-150)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.107  WALL SIGNAGE.



   (A)   Wall signage may or may not be illuminated.



   (B)   Wall signs pertaining to any one business within a complex, on
a separate parcel or lot, or on a freestanding PUD shall be permitted on the
exterior walls of the space occupied by the business in accordance with the
following guidelines:



      (1)   A wall sign may be permitted on any building elevation
and shall have a maximum area not to exceed one square foot for each linear
foot of the building wall upon which the sign is displayed.







 



      (2)   Under no circumstances may any business have an
aggregate area for all wall signs exceeding 200 square feet, unless as
otherwise approved with a comprehensive sign plan.



      (3)   Signage shall not extend horizontally a distance greater
than 80% of the width of the building wall on which it is displayed.



      (4)   Wall-mounted cabinet signs exceeding ten square feet in
area are prohibited, unless the sign:



         (a)   Utilizes a cabinet that is stylized in shape,
rather than rectangular, to reflect the shape of the image printed on the
sign face;



         (b)   Utilizes a molded sign face, with embossed copy,
sign copy or sign copy in relief; or



         (c)   Utilities a nationally registered trademark.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-151)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.108  FREESTANDING MONUMENT SIGNAGE.



   May or may not be illuminated.



   (A)   One freestanding monument sign for identification purposes
shall be permitted per business, except as otherwise allowed.



   (B)   Any freestanding sign shall not exceed eight feet in height.



   (C)   For a single tenant building, the sign shall not exceed 32
square feet in area and may include the name and/or logo of the business and
shall include the address.







 



   (D)   For a single building development with multiple tenants, the
sign shall not exceed 48 square feet in area and may include the name and/or
logo of the businesses and shall include the address.



   (E)   For multiple building developments or commercial centers, one
sign may be permitted for every 330 feet of street frontage for the entire
development with a maximum of two signs per street frontage if applicable.
The individual buildings within the development and/or the PUD sites within
the commercial center shall not be considered as separate developments for
signage purposes.



   (F)   The minimum distance between two signs on the same street
frontage shall be 330 feet. Each sign may be a maximum of 48 square feet in
area and may be either a freestanding center identification sign or a
multi-tenant identification sign.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-152)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.109  DIRECTIONAL SIGNS.



   The signs shall not exceed an area of six square feet or a height of
three feet. These signs shall not be included in calculating the total
aggregate area of signage allowed on a particular lot or for a particular
business, and may include a maximum of 25% of the sign area devoted to the
display of a business logo or identification. They shall not be located
within the sight triangle of any driveway. The use, number and location of
the signs must be approved through the design review process and comply with
all other code requirements.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-153)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.110  DIRECTORY SIGNS.



   The signs may be used when required to identify the location of various
buildings, offices or businesses within the complex. The use, number and
location of the signs must be approved through the design review process and
comply with all other code requirements. Each sign may be illuminated and
have a maximum area of 18 square feet and a maximum height of six feet. These
signs shall not be included in calculating the total aggregate area for
signage allowed on a parcel or lot or for a particular business.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-154)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.111  DRIVE-THROUGH RESTAURANT MENU BOARDS.



   (A)   Each drive-through restaurant may be permitted one preview
menu board and one ordering menu board. These signs may be freestanding or
wall-mounted and shall be located a minimum of 45 feet from the street
property line and the front of the board(s) shall not be visible from the
public street. The maximum aggregate area for both signs shall not exceed 50
square feet or a maximum height of eight feet per sign. These signs shall not
be included in calculating the total aggregate area for signage allowed on a
parcel, lot or for a particular business.



   (B)   Freestanding menu boards shall have a monument base of masonry
construction and shall have a landscape area at the base of the sign equal to
at least two square feet for each square foot of sign area.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-155)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.112  WINDOW SIGNAGE.



   The total aggregate area of all window signs shall not exceed 25% of
the total area of the windows through which they are visible.







 



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-156)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.113  AWNING SIGNS.



   A maximum of 25% of the front face area of the awning may be used for
signage. Awning signs may identify the name of the business. Logos may be
used but not in such a way where it is the predominant element of the awning
sign. The signs shall not include any additional advertising copy.



Window Signage







 



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-157)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.114  SHINGLE SIGNS AND PROJECTING SIGNS.



   (A)   Shingle signs shall have a maximum area of three square feet.



   (B)   One shingle sign or projecting sign, which is designed and
oriented primarily for the aid of pedestrians, may be allowed per business
and shall be located immediately adjacent to the business it identifies.



   (C)   Shingle signs and projecting signs shall have an eight foot
minimum clearance between the bottom of the sign and the sidewalk.



   (D)   Projecting signs for each ground floor business on a street
shall not exceed one square foot for each linear street frontage of the
business, up to a maximum of 15 square feet.



   (E)   May identify the name and/or logo of the business, and the
signs shall not include any additional advertising copy.



   (F)   A wall or parapet sign is not permitted if a projecting sign
is used to identify the business.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-158)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.115  PARAPET SIGNS.



   (A)   Parapet signs shall not project above the top of the building
parapet.



   (B)   A maximum of 25% of the front face area of the parapet may be
used for signage.



   (C)   Parapet signs may identify the name of the business. Logos may
be used but not in such a way where it is the predominant element of the
parapet sign. The signs shall not include any additional advertising copy.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-159)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.116  TOTAL SIGNAGE.



   (A)   The total maximum aggregate signage, inclusive of wall,
freestanding monument, window, awning, shingle, projecting or parapet signs,
shall not exceed 232 square feet for a single-tenant development.



   (B)   The total maximum aggregate signage, inclusive of wall,
freestanding monument, window, awning, shingle, projecting or parapet signs,
shall not exceed 248 square feet for a multi-tenant development. The
freestanding monument sign(s) for multi-tenant, multi-building or shopping
center developments shall not be counted towards the individual businesses'
or anchor tenant's allowed signage provided that the name of the businesses
or anchor tenant is not part of the center identification name on the
freestanding sign. In addition, drive-through restaurants may be permitted
one freestanding or wall-mounted preview menu board and one ordering menu
board with a maximum aggregate area of 50 square feet for both signs.



   (C)   Freestanding directional signs may be permitted through the
design review process.



   (D)   In addition to the above, multiple building developments or
commercial centers may be permitted additional freestanding center or
multi-tenant identification signs with a maximum area of 48 square feet each
in accordance with the provisions outlined in this Development Code.



   (E)   The provisions above shall apply unless the guidelines are
addressed in an approved comprehensive sign plan.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-160)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.117  READER PANEL SIGNS.



   Theaters, municipal uses, religious and academic institutions, or
quasi-government organizations may also have, in addition to § 150.116, one
freestanding reader panel sign not to exceed 24 square feet in area and six
feet in height.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-161)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.118  INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Signs within industrial districts (LI and HI) shall comply
with the following applicable restrictions.



   (B)   Additionally, any development of three or more businesses
shall be required to submit a comprehensive sign package to be reviewed and
recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the Town
Council.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-162)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.119  TEMPORARY SIGNS.



   (A)   Banners, pennants and displays for grand openings and special
events.



      (1)   All businesses shall be permitted to display grand
opening signs at the time of original opening or when reopened by a new owner
or lessee for a maximum period of 60 days.



      (2)   The signs may be allowed on-site, in commercial or
industrial districts or public or institutional property. In residential
districts, the signs may only be permitted for multiple residence uses and
nonresidential uses.



      (3)   Banners, pennants and other displays for special events
and promotions may be allowed for a maximum period of 30 consecutive days on
each occasion, with the exception of grand opening or reopening signs.



      (4)   No pennant, banner or display shall be placed on or
above the roof of any building.



      (5)   A minimum of 30 days shall pass between each display.



      (6)   For special events and promotions, the maximum banner
size shall be 48 square feet and shall be limited to one per street frontage
of the business.



      (7)   For grand openings, the maximum banner size shall be 48
square feet, and shall be limited to three per street frontage of the
business.



      (8)   Banners and pennants shall be displayed on the building
or within the parking area, perimeter landscape or some other area of the
development. No banner shall be located in a manner that impedes visibility
or accessibility.



   (B)   Special events; off-site directional signs.



      (1)   A sign plan shall be required in conjunction with the
special event permit or temporary use permit. The sign plan shall show the
proposed location, placement and size of all off-site directional signs.



      (2)   Signs may be placed 24 hours in advance of the event and
shall be removed within 24 hours after the conclusion of the event.



      (3)   Signs shall not be placed or located within the public
rights-of-way.



      (4)   Prior to installation, approval shall be obtained from
the owner of the property on which off-site directional signs will be placed.



   (C)   Banners.



      (1)   Banners shall be made of cloth, nylon or similar
material.



      (2)   Banners may be hung from street lights that are
specifically designed to accommodate banners and which advertise a
town-authorized special event or a community wide event or a community
message but not for individual businesses.



      (3)   Approval of the time and location of the banners shall
be obtained from the Planning Director, or designee, and the Public Works
Director or designee on forms provided by the town's Planning and Zoning
Department.



   (D)   Political signs.



      (1)   Signs pertaining to an election shall not be displayed
earlier than 60 days prior to an election and shall be removed within ten
days after the specific election to which they refer.



      (2)   Signs shall not be placed in any portion of the public
right-of-way.



      (3)   Prior to installation, approval shall be obtained from
the owner of the property on which political signs will be placed.



   (E)   Real estate signs.  Signs advertising the sale, lease or
renting of a building, suite, dwelling or lot shall conform to the following
regulations and are exempt from the total aggregate sign area:



      (1)   In residential zoning districts one non-illuminated
sign, located on the subject property, shall be permitted. The sign shall not
exceed six square feet in area or five feet in height. Parcels or lots of
five or more acres shall be permitted one sign with a maximum area of 32
square feet and a maximum height of eight feet per street frontage.



      (2)   For vacant property in commercial and industrial zoning
districts 1, non-illuminated sign, shall be permitted which shall not exceed
32 square feet in area nor eight feet in height.



      (3)   For developed property within the commercial and
industrial zoning districts, one non-illuminated sign, pertaining only to the
building upon which displayed, shall be permitted. The sign shall have a
maximum area of 12 square feet and a maximum height of six feet.



      (4)   A maximum of four open house directional signs,
including any sign on the property of the home for sale may be posted for
each home provided they are not placed or located upon town sidewalks or
within the public rights-of-way. Each sign shall have a maximum height of
three feet. The signs may be posted only when a sales person is on duty at
the home and for no longer than nine hours during any 24 hour period.



   (F)   Construction or development signs.



      (1)   One sign may be posted on the lot or parcel where the
construction or repair will be conducted. The sign shall have a maximum area
of 32 square feet and a maximum height of eight feet.



      (2)   If construction plans have not been submitted to the
town for the parcel or lot within 120 days after issuance of the construction
or development sign permit, the sign shall be removed and will not be
approved for replacement until after a building permit has been issued by the
town for the project.



      (3)   In all cases, signs shall be removed within ten days
following the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the project.



   (G)   A-frame signs.



      (1)    An A-frame sign shall be no greater than three feet in
width and four feet in height.



      (2)   A-frame signs shall be limited to one per street
frontage of the business.



      (3)   A-frame signs may only be displayed during the posted
hours the business is open to conduct business.



      (4)   Must include the name of the business being advertised.



      (5)   A-frame signs shall be located only:



         (a)   At grade level.



         (b)   On the property of the business being advertised
or in the right-of-way immediately adjacent to the business property.



      (6)   A-frame signs should not be located:



         (a)   In parking aisles or stalls.



         (b)   In raised or painted medians.



         (c)   Across any street from the business being
advertised.



         (d)   So as to cause a hazard to or impede pedestrian
traffic.



         (e)   In driving lanes.



         (g)   On fences, boulders, trees, planters, other signs,
vehicles, utility facilities, or any structure.



      (7)   A-frame signs shall be professionally constructed and
maintained in a manner free from chipping paint, cracks, gouges, and/or loss
of letters.



      (8)   The following shall be prohibited on A-frame signs:



         (a)   Any form of illumination, including flashing,
blinking, or rotating lights.



         (b)   Animation.



         (c)   Reflective materials.



         (d)   Speakers or other sound emitting devices.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-163)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006; Am.
Ord. 573-12, passed 3-19-2012)



§ 150.120  SUBDIVISION SIGNS.



   The following signs may be permissible after administrative review and
approval by the Planning Director or designee.



   (A)   Permanent subdivision entry/identification signs.



      (1)   A wall sign or monument sign may be permitted at the
entryway(s) of a subdivision. The signage shall be integrated to complement
the streetscape and landscaping frontages. A maximum aggregate area of 24
square feet per subdivision or parcel and/or unit may be permitted.







 



      (2)   The maximum height of any subdivision entry and/or
identification sign shall be six feet. The sign may include only the name of
the development and the street address.



   (B)   Temporary subdivision advertising and directional signs,
on-site sign.  During the construction phase, each subdivision shall have
one sign located at the subdivision (on-site) advertising the subdivision.
The sign shall have a maximum area of 96 square feet and may be single or
double faced with a maximum height of 13 feet and boxed edges. The sign shall
not be located within 100 feet of any property line of an existing residence.
The sign must be removed when 95% of the lots within the subdivision are sold
and/or the on-site sales office(s) closes. Additional on-site subdivision
advertising and directional signs may be permitted in a PUD district if prior
approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission and Town Council is obtained.



Temporary Subdivision Advertising and Directional Signs







 



   (C)   Residential kiosk signs.



      (1)   Sign panels on a town-approved kiosk structure may be
authorized for the purpose of providing directional information to community
facilities and residential developments, including manufactured home parks
and apartments, which are offering the first time sale and/or lease of
single-family subdivisions, multi-family condominiums or apartments that are
located within the town limits. Sign panels may be single or double-faced.
Maximum sign height for a single sign structure (kiosk) shall be 13 feet.



      (2)   Sign panels shall be located on designated town kiosk
structures within the public right-of-way, or, upon finding that the location
will not permit adequate directional information, kiosk structures may be
approved on private property with the written permission of the property
owner.



      (3)   The permission shall include the consent of the property
owners to allow the town, in the event of non-compliance, to enter the
property and remove the sign. A kiosk location plan shall be prepared showing
the site of each kiosk and shall be submitted to and approved by the Planning
Director or designee prior to the acceptance of a sign permit application.



      (4)   Each temporary real estate directional sign panel may
contain only the name of the subdivision or builder or new multi-family
development, the corporate logo and a directional arrow. Community
directional sign panels (town hall, library, medical facilities, parks,
historic sites and the like) may also be allowed on kiosk structures.



      (5)   No temporary real estate kiosk sign shall be placed
within 100 feet of another except when they are across the street from one
another.



      (6)   Directional sign panels shall conform to colors and
design standards approved by the Planning Director or designee.



      (7)   Any sign panel approved for a particular development
project within the town shall not be changed to another project without prior
approval of the Planning Director or designee.



   (D)   Flags.  Subdivision identification flags may be placed on or
behind the property line of the subdivision. No more than six flags may be
placed at any one subdivision. The flags shall have a maximum area of 12
square feet, shall contain no lettering and may not be maintained higher than
25 feet above the adjoining ground. The flags must be removed when 95% of the
lots in the subdivision are sold and/or the on-site sales office closes.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-164)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.121  PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DIRECTIONAL SIGNS.



   A maximum number of three homebuilder or marketing directional signs
may be permitted within an approved PUD. Each sign shall have a maximum
height of three feet and six square feet in area.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-165)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.122  SUBMITTAL AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Sign permit approval is required for constructing or altering
any non-exempt sign.



   (B)   A sign permit application shall be made in writing on forms
provided by the Planning and Zoning Department.



   (C)   The following information will be required on all sign permit
applications:



      (1)   Business owner's name, address and telephone number.



      (2)   Sign contractor's name, address and telephone number.



      (3)   Inventory of all existing signs on the property showing
the type, dimensions and location of each sign.



      (4)   Fully dimensioned plans and elevations showing the
dimensions, design copy and location of each proposed sign in relation to the
property line(s) and public right-of-way.



      (5)   Plans indicating the scope and structural detail of the
work to be done; including details of all connections, supports, footings and
materials to be used.



      (6)   Required information for an electrical permit for all
signage illumination. Please contact the Building Safety Department for
specific requirements and/or additional information.



      (7)   Comprehensive sign packages, if required by this
Development Code, shall provide information regarding the color(s), material,
type and letter samples that are for all tenant signage, freestanding center
identification signage, directional signs, window signs and any other
information deemed necessary by the town to adequately review the
comprehensive sign package.



      (8)   A PUD must submit a comprehensive sign package and may,
through the comprehensive sign package, request deviations from the sign
regulations only if the deviations are reviewed and recommended by Planning
and Zoning Commission and approved by the Town Council.



      (9)   Two copies of all information listed above shall be
submitted with the application for each sign, one copy being returned to the
applicant at the time the permit is issued.



      (10)   Before issuing any sign permit required by this
Development Code, the town shall collect a fee in accordance with a fee
schedule established by the Town Council. If work, for which a permit is
required by this Development Code, is started before a permit has been
issued, the fees specified above shall be doubled. The payment of the double
fee shall not relieve any persons from complying fully with the requirements
of this Development Code in the execution of the work or from any penalties
prescribed herein.



      (11)   All signs for which a permit is required shall be
subject to inspections during various stages of construction as prescribed by
the Town Building Safety Department.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-166)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.123  EXCEPTIONS; PERMITS NOT REQUIRED.



   Sign permits are not required for the following signs provided that the
signs are subject to all other provisions of this Development Code (Note:
Electric permit required for all exterior electric signs):



   (A)   Any sign not exceeding six square feet in area and not
otherwise prohibited by this Development Code;



   (B)   Standard sign maintenance;



   (C)   Relocation as required by the town;



   (D)   Garage sale signs not exceeding six square feet. The signs
shall not be up longer than three days. Signs may not be located upon town
sidewalks or within the public rights-of-way. Signs may be placed, in the
permitted areas, only between sunrise and sunset. Signs shall be removed
daily prior to sunset or they shall be subject to confiscation by the town;



   (E)   Grand opening and special event banners; A-frame signs;
political signs; and



   (F)   Messages painted directly on or adhesive vinyl film affixed
to, the exterior surface of existing mineral glass windows, except that the
aggregate square footage of the signs shall be calculated as window signage.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-167)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006; Am.
Ord. 573-12, passed 3-19-2012)



§ 150.124  EXCEPTED SIGNAGE.



   The provisions of this Development Code shall not apply to the
following (Note: Electric permits are required for all exterior electric
signs):



   (A)   Flags, pennants or insignia of any nation, state, county, town
or other political unit, or any church or religious organization;



   (B)   Tablets, grave markers, headstones, statuary or remembrances
of persons or events noncommercial in nature;



   (C)   Works of fine art, historic or cultural artifacts when not
displayed in conjunction with a commercial enterprise which may derive direct
commercial gain from the display;



   (D)   Temporary decorations or displays celebrating the occasion of
traditionally accepted patriotic, religious or local holidays or events;



   (E)   Temporary signs less than 30 days for events of a general
town-wide, civic or public benefit;



   (F)   Signs not visible beyond the boundaries of the lot or parcel
upon which they are located, or from any public right-of-way;



   (G)   The placement and maintenance of official traffic, fire and
police signs, signals and devices and markings of the state and the town or
other authorized public agency, and the posting of notices as required by law;



   (H)   Non-illuminated directional or informational signs of a
non-commercial public or quasi-public nature, including street, building or
suite numbers which do not exceed six square feet;



   (I)   Signs displayed during recognized holidays, as identification
of temporary sales areas for trees and similar holiday items in conjunction
with an approved permit should one be required. The signs shall be excepted
only when displayed within 30 days of the recognized holiday;



   (J)   Signs displayed within the interior of a building;



   (K)   Identification signs for individual residences; and



   (L)   On-site directional and similar informational signs provided
the signs are utilized only when necessary for traffic directional or similar
informational purposes and do not display corporate colors, logos or other
commercial messages. The signs shall be wall mounted or, if detached, shall
not exceed a height of three feet.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-168)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.125  PROHIBITED SIGNS.



   Any sign not specifically listed as permitted by this Development Code
is prohibited, including, but not limited to the following:



   (A)   Billboards are prohibited in the town;



   (B)   Vehicle signs or signs mounted, attached or painted on
trailers, boats or motor vehicles primarily or consistently parked, stored or
displayed in a manner intended to attract the attention of the public for
advertising purposes;



   (C)   Signs attached to any utility pole, structure, street light,
traffic signal, tree, fence, fire hydrant, bridge, park bench or other
location on public property unless otherwise specifically allowed in this
Development Code;



   (D)   The use of pennants, banners, balloons and similar displays
except as permitted elsewhere in this Development Code;



   (E)   Off-site signs, unless otherwise permitted by this Development
Code, more specifically signs which direct attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a location
other than the premises on which the sign is located;



   (F)   Signs that are animated, audible, rotate or have intermittent
or flashing illumination or emit audible sound or visible matter, except time
and/or temperature units or to drive-up menu boards, except as otherwise
approved in a comprehensive sign plan;



   (G)   Roof signs, signs displayed in a manner or location that
prevent free ingress and egress from a door, window or other exit;



   (H)   Portable signs and/or temporary signs which advertise a
business, commodity, service, entertainment, product or attraction except as
permitted elsewhere in this Development Code;



   (I)   Signs displayed in a location prohibited by this Development
Code;



   (J)   Weekend directional signs;



   (K)   Projecting signs unless mounted entirely under an awning or
roof hanging and designed primarily for the aid of pedestrian traffic. The
signs shall not interfere with the pedestrian traffic; and



   (L)   Awning mounted signs, unless painted directly on the face of
the awning.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-169)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006; Am.
Ord. 573-12, passed 3-19-2012)   Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.126  LEGAL NONCONFORMING SIGNS.



   (A)   LEGAL NONCONFORMING SIGN(S) shall mean a sign that is lawfully
existing at the time of the enactment of this Development Code that does not
conform to the regulations as specified in this Development Code.



   (B)   A legal nonconforming sign may continue to be utilized in
perpetuity only in the manner and to the extent that it existed at the time
of the adoption of this Development Code or any amendment thereto.



   (C)   A legal nonconforming sign may not be altered in any manner
not in conformance with this Development Code. This does not apply to
reasonable repair and maintenance of the sign or to a change of copy provided
that by changing the copy, structural alterations are not required.



   (D)   Any construction permit which invokes certificate of occupancy
requirements shall specify and require that any nonconforming sign located
within the boundaries of the development site and within the limits of the
applicant's control, authorized by the permit shall be brought into
conformance with the provisions of this Development Code, provided that if
the nonconforming sign is a type of sign that is prohibited under § 150.125,
it shall be removed.



   (E)   Legal nonconforming signs that are located on a parcel of
property which is severed from a larger parcel of property and acquired by a
public entity for public use by condemnation, purchase or dedication may be
relocated on the remaining parcel without extinguishing the legal
nonconforming status of that sign provided that the nonconforming sign:



      (1)   Is not increased in area or height to exceed the limits
of the district in which it is located;



      (2)   Remains structurally unchanged except for reasonable
repairs or alterations;



      (3)   Is placed in the most similar position on the remaining
property that it occupied prior to the relocation; and



      (4)   Is relocated in a manner so as to comply with all
applicable safety requirements.



   (F)   After relocation pursuant to this division, the legal
nonconforming sign shall be subject to all provisions of this Development
Code in its new location.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-170)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.127  SIGNS RENDERED NONCONFORMING.



   (A)   Except as provided in this Development Code, a nonconforming
sign may continue in the manner and to the extent that it existed at the time
of the ordinance adoption, amendment or annexation which rendered the sign
nonconforming. This Development Code shall not prohibit reasonable repairs
and alterations to nonconforming signs.



   (B)   A sign approved by variance or comprehensive sign plan before
June 19, 2006, shall not be considered nonconforming and shall not be subject
to the regulations set forth in this Development Code.



   (C)   A nonconforming sign shall not be re-erected, relocated or
replaced unless it is brought into compliance with the requirements of this
Development Code.



   (D)   If the structure of a nonconforming sign is changed, the
height and area of the sign shall not be increased to exceed the height and
area limits of the site on which it is located. If the sign exceeds the
site's height and/or area limitations, the excess height and/or area shall be
reduced a minimum of 50%. Two reductions shall be permitted; after the third
structural change, the sign shall conform to current standards. Nothing in
this Development Code shall require a nonconforming sign to be reduced to a
height or area less than that allowed on the site.



   (E)   If a nonconforming sign is located on a parcel which is
experiencing development for which site plan and/or design review is
required, the height and area of the sign shall not be increased to exceed
the height and area limitations of the site. If the sign exceeds the site's
height and/or area limitations, the excess height and/or area shall be
reduced to a minimum of 50%. Two reductions shall be permitted; after the
third structural change, the sign shall conform to current standards. Nothing
in this Development Code shall require a nonconforming sign to be reduced to
a height or area less than that allowed on the site.



   (F)   Site plan and/or design review required by one of the
following types of development shall not cause reduction in a sign's
nonconforming height and/or area:



      (1)   An addition of less than 2,000 square feet when the
addition is less than 50% of the size of the usable space of the site which
is the subject of design review. A series of additions, which total more than
50% of the usable space of the site shall require reduction of
non-conformities. Usable space shall not include areas such as restrooms and
storage rooms.



      (2)   An addition of more than 2,000 square feet when the
addition is less than 10% of the size of the usable space of the site which
is the subject of design review. A series of additions, which total more than
10% of the usable space of the site shall require reduction of
non-conformities. Usable space shall not include areas such as restrooms and
storage rooms.



      (3)   A modification required by federal, state or local
regulations or programs.



   (G)   Any nonconforming sign shall be removed or rebuilt in full
conformity to the terms of this Development Code if it is damaged or allowed
to deteriorate to such an extent that the cost of repair or restoration is
50% or more of the cost of replacement of the sign.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-171)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.128  SIGNS FOR A LEGAL NONCONFORMING USE.



   New or additional signs for a nonconforming use shall not be permitted.
A nonconforming sign for a nonconforming use which ceases to be used for a
period of 90 consecutive days or is suspended by a conforming use, shall be
considered a prohibited sign and shall be removed or brought into conformance
upon establishment of a conforming use.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-172)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.129  SIGNS RENDERED DISCONTINUED.



   (A)   Sign structures which remain vacant, unoccupied, devoid of any
message for a period of six months, or display a message pertaining to a time
event or purpose that no longer applies shall be deemed to be discontinued.



   (B)   A sign whose use has been discontinued is prohibited and shall
be removed by the owner of the sign or owner of the premises. Removal shall
occur by no later than six months after the use has been discontinued.



   (C)   The owner and/or operator of a discontinued business shall
cover the sign copy used to advertise the business.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-173)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.130  UNSAFE SIGNS.



   If the Planning Director or designee determines any sign or sign
structure to be in an unsafe condition, he or she shall immediately notify,
in writing, the owner of the sign who shall correct the condition within 48
hours. If the correction has not been made within 48 hours, the Planning
Director, or designee, may have the sign removed if it creates a danger to
the public safety or have any necessary repairs or maintenance performed at
the expense of the sign owner, owner or lessee of the property upon which the
sign is located. The cost shall be an assessment against the property which
may be recorded by the town pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-499.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-174)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



PART 4.  LANDSCAPE STANDARDS



§ 150.131  STANDARDS.



   Standards and requirements are provided for the installation of
landscaping for all new and expanded development within the town in order to
promote the general welfare of the community, effectuate attractive and
logical development, aid in the enhancement of property values, create an
attractive appearance along town streets, complement the visual effect of
buildings, provide appropriate buffers between incompatible land uses and
protection from intense activities and to aid in conserving water by
encouraging the use of varieties of plants, trees and shrubs indigenous to
arid regions which are characterized by low-water consumption. The standards
and regulations of this Development Code shall be held to be the minimum
requirements necessary for the promotion of the foregoing objectives of this
Development Code. In those instances where the minimum standards and
requirements are not sufficient to achieve the purpose and objectives of this
Development Code, the Planning Director or designee may impose other
reasonable requirements as may be deemed appropriate.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-201)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.132  GENERAL APPLICABILITY.



   The landscape plan, installation and maintenance provisions of this
Development Code shall apply to all new buildings, all new uses of land and
any addition to or expansion of existing buildings and uses, occurring in any
multi-family, commercial or industrial districts and to nonresidential uses
in the residential districts. The provisions and guidelines of this
Development Code shall apply to residential uses in the agricultural,
single-family and multiple family districts.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-202)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.133  BUILDING AND OCCUPANCY PERMITS.



   (A)   Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the Planning
Director or designee shall review and approve the site plan and landscape
plan.



   (B)   In lieu of the installation of plant material prior to
issuance of an occupancy permit, a cash deposit or an irrevocable letter of
credit in an amount guaranteeing the complete 100% installation of the plant
material within six months may be accepted by the Planning Director or
designee. Failure to install the material in the six month time period shall
be deemed a violation of this Development Code, and the town may use the cash
deposit or funds set aside by letter of credit to complete the landscape
improvements required.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-203)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.134  APPROPRIATE USE OF LANDSCAPING.



   (A)   Any landscape areas in the public right-of-way shall comply
with all the requirements of this Development Code and with the criteria of
the State Department of Water Resources. These criteria specify plant
material which have low water needs and encourage the conservation of water
resources.



   (B)   Landscaped areas shall not be used for parking of vehicles,
display of merchandise or other uses detrimental to the landscaping, but may
be used for screening and decorative walls and for art.



   (C)   Plant material that is high in pollen production is
discouraged. Also, extreme care should be exercised when using plants that
are known to be poisonous.



   (D)   Plants should be placed in such a way as to maximize
survivability (i.e., low water-use plants should not be placed in drainage
ways, and the use of frost-tender plants should be limited to accent
locations, not primary focal points).



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-204)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.135  MAINTENANCE.



   The landscape areas on-site, as well as in the required right-of-way,
shall be maintained by the owner or owner's association (should the property
be subdivided) or the lessee of the site. Any areas designated and intended
for the purposes of on-site water retention shall be maintained and reserved
for the specific purpose. Any alteration or deterioration of those areas
shall be considered a violation of this and any applicable codes.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-205)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006) 
Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.136  COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   Any plant material that does not survive shall be replaced
within 30 days.



   (B)   The removal, failure to maintain or destruction of landscape
material previously approved by the town shall constitute a violation of this
Development Code. Replacement of landscape material shall be of like size as
that which was removed or destroyed.



   (C)   Landscaping and irrigation systems shall be reasonably
maintained in accordance with the approved site and/or landscape plan. Plant
material shall not be severely pruned such that the natural growth pattern or
characteristics are significantly altered. Palm trees shall, however, be
pruned once each year to remove dried fronds and eliminate fire hazard and
insect infestation.



   (D)   Modifications and/or removal of existing landscaping on other
than single-family residential property shall require prior approval.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-206)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.137  MAINTENANCE BY TOWN.



   (A)   The town may accept responsibility for the maintenance and
operation of all landscaping and appurtenances installed in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter for reverse street frontage landscaping or any
landscaping and appurtenances installed within other street rights-of-way,
which rights-of-way are described by one of the following categories:



      (1)   Arterial and/or secondary street right-of-way adjacent
to single-family residential areas that back onto the arterial and/or
secondary street, and have a screening wall constructed on the rear property
line;



      (2)   Arterial street rights-of-way adjacent to single-family
residential areas that side onto the arterial street and which have a
screening wall constructed on the side property line;



      (3)   Public bridle trails, bicycle paths and multi-use
recreational facilities within town limits;



      (4)   Median islands on arterial and secondary public streets
within the town;



      (5)   All publicly dedicated alleys within town limits;



      (6)   Dedicated street rights-of-way abutting municipal public
facilities;



      (7)   Street landscaping within districts specially approved
or created by Town Council; and



      (8)   Flood control facilities which have been accepted for
operation and maintenance by the town.



   (B)   Prior to the town accepting for maintenance any reverse street
frontage landscaping or other street right-of-way landscaping, the following
conditions shall have been satisfied:



      (1)   The landscaping shall be inspected and approved by the
town for compliance with the approved landscape plan. The town shall perform
the inspection within 30 days of a written request to schedule an inspection.



      (2)   The subsequent completion of the 24 month maintenance
period wherein the developer shall be responsible for all watering, weeding
and replacement of all dead or dying plant materials.



      (3)   A final inspection called by the developer or his or her
representative at the completion of the 24 month maintenance period resulting
in final approval and acceptance by the town.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-207)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.138  LANDSCAPE PLAN AND DESIGN STANDARDS.



   (A)   Landscape plan.  A landscape plan shall be prepared,
submitted and approved for all applicable development projects in accordance
with the procedures, design standards and requirements set forth in this
Development Code.



   (B)   Plan submittal.  Three copies of the landscape plan shall be
submitted to the Planning Director or designee for review and approval, and
shall include the following information:



      (1)   The location and identification of all proposed
landscape areas (on-site, street right-of-way, parking area, landscape
buffers and others);



      (2)   Data pertaining to the amount of net site area, the
ground floor areas of all proposed buildings, the number of required and
proposed parking spaces and the amount of all proposed landscaped areas,
required and provided;



      (3)   The location of all proposed trees, shrubs and other
landscape materials and improvements;



      (4)   Notes or graphical representations adequately showing
the intent of the proposed plans and materials and indicating how those plans
will comply with this Development Code;



      (5)   The location, height, type and general design and finish
of all proposed walls and other screenings;



      (6)   The location of all proposed storm water retention areas;



      (7)   A specific schedule of all trees and shrubs identified
by common and botanical name and the quantity and size of each tree and shrub
to be installed; and



      (8)   All changes in landscape plans or landscaping on-site
before, during or after preliminary or final landscape plan approval shall be
approved by the Planning Director or designee prior to the installation of
any landscape change.



   (C)   Design standards.  Each site to be developed shall be
required to provide landscape areas and amounts equal to or exceeding the
following minimum amounts:



      (1)   Each site of a multi-family use shall have a minimum of
20% of the net site and/or lot area in landscaping.



      (2)   Each site of commercial use shall have a minimum of 15%
of the net site and/or lot area in landscaping.



      (3)   Each site of industrial use shall have a minimum of 10%
of the net site in landscaping.



      (4)   In addition to the minimum on-site landscaping, there
shall be landscaping in the entire area of the right-of-way, between the
property line and back of street curb except for approved driveways, walkways
and bike paths.



      (5)   Landscape designs shall be compatible with adjacent
properties.



   (D)   On-site water retention areas.  All on-site water retention
areas, other than paved surfaces, shall be entirely landscaped and shall
comply with the following criteria:



      (1)   The retention areas shall not occupy more than 50% of
the on-site street frontage landscape area;



      (2)   All retention areas shall maintain slopes no steeper
than 6:1 when adjacent to public rights-of-way, or when there is pedestrian
type access to that portion of the basin. Side slopes adjacent to walls,
fences, hedges and the like (i.e., no or limited pedestrian type access in
that area) may have side slopes up to 4:1; and



      (3)   All mounding and berming shall have slopes no steeper
than 4:1.



   (E)   Parking areas. All parking areas shall incorporate the
following elements:



      (1)   Landscape islands, with raised concrete curbing to
define parking lot entrances, aisles and ends of all parking aisles;



      (2)   Landscape islands to separate rows of more than 15
parking spaces;



      (3)   Each landscape island shall be a minimum of three feet
in total width including curbing and equal 75% of the length of the parking
stall(s); and



      (4)    Each landscape island shall include a minimum of one
tree of 15-gallon size and five shrubs of five-gallon size for each parking
stall length.



   (F)   Vegetative ground cover.  A minimum of 50% of the landscaped
areas are to be planted with vegetative ground cover. Minimum size and
spacing to be one gallon size plants at a maximum three feet on center.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-208)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.139  DESIGN CRITERIA PERTAINING TO SPECIFIC DISTRICTS OR USES.



   (A)   Entry features of future commercial and industrial development
sites shall be landscaped in the first phase of construction.



   (B)   In multi-family and nonresidential uses in the agricultural,
single-family and 2-family districts, the required front and street side
yards shall be entirely landscaped except for necessary and provided walkways
and driveways.



   (C)   In the commercial and industrial development, a minimum of 30
feet of any yard adjacent to a street shall be entirely landscaped, except
for required walkways and access driveways.



   (D)   Where multi-family, commercial, office or industrial uses are
adjacent to or separated by an alley or lesser separation from any
residential development or district, the trees shall be planted at 20 feet on
center, with every other tree being a minimum 24-inch box size.



   (E)   Where a commercial, office or industrial user of over 50,000
square feet building area is located adjacent to a residence or residential
district, the landscape buffer described in § 150.138(C), shall be increased
to ten feet (adjacent to that user), with two rows of trees along the
interior side of the required wall. Each tree shall be a minimum 15-gallon
size spaced 20 feet on center, staggered for maximum effect in buffering the
two uses.



   (F)   Trees shall be required along all street frontages according
to the following criteria:



      (1)   A minimum of one tree shall be planted for every 25 feet
of lineal street frontage;



      (2)   The trees selected shall be compatible with the overall
site and landscape plan, as well as adjacent sites; and



      (3)   All trees shall be planted and staked in accordance with
the Standard Tree Planting Detail located below.



   (G)   All developments that back or side onto a street and which
have a six foot high screening wall constructed on the property line shall
install within the street right-of-way contiguous with the property, three
water conserving variety shrubs and one water conserving variety tree for
every 30 feet of the reverse street frontage. All trees and shrubs shall be
provided with an automatic drip or soaker irrigation system. Ground cover
shall be one-fourth inch minus decomposed golden granite without plastic
liners. A pre-emergent herbicide shall be applied to the ground prior to and
after the placement of natural surface materials (decomposed granite, river
run rock and the like) in any landscaped area to prevent weed growth. The
foregoing requirement shall apply in lieu of the street frontage landscape
improvements required in this section.







 



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-209)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.140  PLANTING SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Unless otherwise specified herein, all required trees shall be
a minimum of 15 gallons in size and at least 50% of those trees must be
24-inch boxes or larger size.



   (B)   All shrubs shall be a minimum of five gallons in size.



   (C)   All 15-gallon trees must be a minimum of eight feet in height,
four feet in spread and one and one-fourth-inch truck caliper at the ground
level.



   (D)   All 24-inch boxes and larger trees shall be a minimum of ten
feet in height, six feet in spread and two inch trunk caliper at the ground
level.



   (E)   Upon approval of the Planning Director or designee, the
installation of 20 square feet of vegetative groundcover in any landscaped
area shall substitute for one required shrub, up to a maximum of 30% of the
required shrubs in any particular landscaped area.



   (F)   Fifteen gallon size trees (of a non-deciduous variety) 20 feet
on center shall be planted along any property lines of parcels developed for
multi-family, commercial, office or industrial uses which are adjacent to or
separated by an alley from any residential development or district. Minimum
width of landscape buffer shall be six feet clear.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-210)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.141  APPROVAL BY PLANNING DIRECTOR.



   (A)   The types and varieties of landscaping shall be approved by
the Planning Director.



   (B)   Whenever olive trees (Olea Europaea) are specified, they shall
be the Swan Hill variety.



   (C)   All Mexican Fan Palms (Washington Robusta), California Fan
Palms (Washingtonia Filifera) and Queen Palms (Cocos Plumosa) shall have a
minimum five-foot trunk height measured from the base of the trunk to the
base of the fronds when located within the public right-of-way or within 50
feet of the street property line.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-211)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.142  LANDSCAPED AREAS.



   (A)   All landscaped areas shall be finished with a natural topping
material which may include, but not limited to, the following: turf,
groundcover, planting, decomposed granite (two inches minimum depth), river
run rock, expanded shale or bark.



   (B)   A pre-emergent herbicide shall be applied to the ground prior
to the placement of natural surface materials (decomposed granite, river run
rock and the like) in any landscaped area to prevent weed growth.



   (C)   An automatic irrigation system which may be spray, flood,
soaker or drip type system. A pressure-type vacuum breaker shall be required
with the installation of all sprinkler systems.



   (D)   All irrigation systems and landscaped areas shall be designed,
constructed and maintained as to promote water conservation and prevent water
overflow or seepage into the street or parking areas.



   (E)   Landscaped areas along street frontages shall be contoured or
bermed to provide variations in grade, visual relief, parking lot screening
and a more pleasing aesthetic value. All on-site parking areas shall be
screened from street view by a landscaped berm or decorative wall not less
than three feet in height. The required height of the berm or wall shall be
measured from the highest finished grade of the adjacent on-site parking area
or adjacent finished grade of the street, whichever is greater.



   (F)   All landscaping and landscape materials established in close
proximity to a driveway or street intersection shall be installed and
maintained in a manner which does not effect visibility.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-212)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.143  ENFORCEMENT.



   Where, in the opinion of the Planning Director or designee, there
exists extraordinary conditions of topography, land ownership, site
boundaries and dimensions, adjacent development characteristics or other
circumstances not provided for in this Development Code, the Planning
Director or designee may modify or vary the strict provisions of this
Development Code in such a manner and to such an extent as is deemed
appropriate to the public interest, provided that the purpose and intent of
this Development Code is maintained with the modification or variance.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-213)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.144  ALTERNATE MATERIALS.



   The Planning Director or designee may accept alternate sizes or
varieties of plant material of comparable value and durability when it is
shown that specified plant materials cannot reasonably be obtained from local
nursery stock.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-214)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.145  INSPECTION AND APPROVAL.



   (A)   All projects required by this Development Code to be
landscaped shall pass a landscape inspection prior to certificate of
occupancy being issued by the town. The inspections shall be requested by the
applicant at least 24 hours prior to being performed.



   (B)   The town shall have the right to refuse to pass any project
not meeting the provisions of this Development Code.



   (C)   The town shall also have the right to reject landscape
materials which are substandard as to size, condition or appearance including
a pre-inspection of materials at the supplier if deemed necessary



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-215)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.146  RESIDENTIAL LANDSCAPE DESIGN STANDARDS.



   Single-family and 2-family dwelling homebuilders are required and
homeowners are encouraged to observe the following guides when maintaining
master planned residential landscaping.



   (A)   General guidelines.  Traditional landscapes with extensive
turf areas, trees and shrubs requiring large amounts of water shall be
replaced with low water use landscapes (xeriscapes).



   (B)   Water conservation guidelines.  In order to conserve water as
required by the Department of Water Resources and the town regulations, the
following landscape and irrigation criteria shall be followed:



      (1)   Grass (turf) use shall be restricted to 30% of the
“gross” area of single-family and 2-family lots;



      (2)   Drip emitters shall be used in watering trees, shrubs,
flowers and groundcovers;



      (3)   Landscape plantings should be grouped according to
similar water needs; and



      (4)   Low water use trees, shrubs, flowers and groundcovers
are to be used in conjunction with desired landscape materials.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-216)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



PART 5.  WALLS AND FENCES



§ 150.147  GENERAL APPLICABILITY.



   Walls or fences include any structure intended for confinement,
prevention of intrusion, boundary identification or screening of activity.
Screening devices are any structure installed to conceal refuse, mechanical
equipment, parking (service and loading bays or lanes), multi-family
habitation and commercial or industrial activities from adjacent residential
districts and from street view.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-221)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.148  PLACEMENT REGULATIONS.



   (A)   No walls, buildings or other obstructions to view in excess of
two feet in height shall be placed on any corner lot within a triangular area
formed by the street right-of-way lines and a line connecting them at points
33 feet from the intersection of the street right-of-way lines.



   (B)   Height of walls and fences in residential districts shall be
measured from the lowest adjacent grade, except when adjacent to an alley or
street right-of-way which has a higher grade than the adjacent site, then the
height shall be measured from the top of the crown of road or alley (if no
curb). Height of screening devices shall be measured from the highest
adjacent grade.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-222)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.149  DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION, MAINTENANCE AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   (A)   Design criteria.



      (1)   All fences or walls shall be located entirely upon the
private property of the persons, firms or corporation constructing or causing
the construction of the fence unless the owner of the property adjoining
agrees in writing that the fence or wall may be erected on the division line
of the respective properties.



      (2)   Any fence or wall constructed so as to have only one
elevation FINISHED, which shall be defined as not having its supporting
members significantly visible, shall be erected such that the finished
elevation of the fence is exposed to the adjacent property.



      (3)   Outdoor storage areas for materials, trash, equipment,
vehicles or other similar items shall be provided with a masonry screening
wall six feet in height.



      (4)   Parking areas shall be screened from street view by
masonry walls or berms to a minimum height of three feet above the highest
finished grade (may be supplemented by up to 25% intermittent landscaping).



      (5)   Masonry walls six feet in height shall be installed
along interior boundaries of a site adjacent to or across from a residential
district.



   (B)   Construction maintenance.



      (1)   Every fence or wall shall be constructed in a
substantial, workmanlike manner and of a substantial material reasonably
suited for the purpose for which the fence or wall is proposed to be used.
Every fence or wall shall be maintained in a condition of reasonable repair
and shall not be allowed to become or remain in a condition of disrepair,
damage or unsightliness, or constitute a nuisance, public or private. Any
fence or wall which is, or has become, dangerous to the public safety, health
or welfare, or has become unsightly through improper maintenance or neglect
is a public nuisance and the Planning Director or designee shall commence
proper proceedings for the abatement thereof.



      (2)   No fence may be constructed of combustible materials,
erected, placed or located to serve as a perimeter fence if within four feet
of a property line, except that gates for the fences may be of a combustible
material provided the gate is no wider than 12 feet.



   (C)   Additional criteria for specified use types and conditions are
required.



      (1)   In residential and agricultural districts with
residential uses, the maximum height of any freestanding wall or fence in a
required front yard shall be three feet, except for walls that create a
portal which shall be designed as an integral component of the portal fixture
as determined during staff review process. In rear and side yards, the
maximum height shall be six feet.



      (2)   All fences in a side or rear yard of a lot abutting an
alley must allow for a three foot deep by eight foot wide inset with gate for
storage of garbage cans.



      (3)   Exterior boundaries of mobile home and/or RV
subdivisions and mobile home and/or RV parks shall be bounded by a six-foot
high masonry wall. Land between the wall and the public street improvement
shall be landscaped with street trees and other landscaping materials and
shall be maintained by the owners or tenants.



      (4)   In LI and HI districts, walled areas for storage of
materials and equipment may include three-strand barbed wire or barbed tape
for maximum security (maximum eight foot height).



      (5)   All utility substations, wells, storage facilities and
other utilities shall be screened from view by a solid masonry wall or
landscape screen.



      (6)   Open wire fences exceeding the otherwise permitted
heights may be built around schools and other public or quasi-public
facilities when necessary for the safety or restraint of the occupants.



      (7)   Open wire fences exceeding the otherwise permitted
heights may be built around tennis courts by use permit or administrative
approval, dependent upon the following criteria:



         (a)   Use permit is required for open wire fences around
tennis courts that are located within 500 feet of the nearest property line
of any property zoned or platted for single-family residential development;



         (b)   Use permit is not required for open wire fences
around tennis courts where there is no residentially zoned property line
within 500 feet of the tennis court; and



         (c)   A building permit must be obtained prior to the
installation of any fence that exceeds six feet in height.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-223)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.150  BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any electric
fence or any fence constructed in whole or in part of barbed wire. Any fence
is hereby declared a public nuisance and subject to abatement by order of the
court.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-224)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006) 
Penalty, see § 150.999



PART 6.  SWIMMING POOLS



§ 150.151  GENERAL APPLICABILITY.



   Outdoor swimming pools, in ground or above ground, wading pools, hot
tubs, spas or other similar pools used or designated to be used for swimming,
wading or bathing purposes shall be fenced and are subject to these
regulations. Wading pools, fish ponds or shallow decorative pools less than
18 inches deep may be exempt, except where the Planning Director or designee
in individual cases deems it a public nuisance and/or dangerous to the public
health, safety and welfare.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-236)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.152  LOCATION.



   (A)   Residential districts.  In any residential district, private
swimming pools shall be located in the side or rear yards and shall not be
any closer that three feet from any property line and may not be located
within any recorded easement except with a written approval of the easement
holder. In case of a corner lot, a pool may not be located any closer than
five feet to the street side property line. Minimum width of yards adjacent
to an alley, an alley easement, a street or an existing building shall not be
less than the depth of the pool adjacent thereto unless approved in writing
by the Planning Director, and in no case shall the yards be reduced to less
than three feet in the side or rear yard or five feet in the street yard.



   (B)   Nonresidential districts.  In any district other than those
above, a private swimming pool or a semi-public swimming pool shall not be
closer than seven feet to any property line, except that in the case of a
corner lot, a swimming pool shall not be closer than ten feet to the side
property line on the street side and, if located in other than a side yard,
rear yard or in a court or other open space which is more than 50% surrounded
by a building, the same shall be subject to the grant of a use permit as
provided for in this Development Code.



   (C)   Public swimming pools.  No public swimming pool shall be
located closer than 25 feet to any lot line on the lot which it is situated.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-237)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.153  ENCLOSURES AND GATES.



   (A)   Enclosures.  All swimming pools shall be enclosed by wall of
a single-family residential building, a solid wall, chain link or wrought
iron fence not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height. If the
design or material of the fence or gate is such that there are openings, the
openings shall be of a size to prohibit a spherical object four inches in
diameter from passing through or under the fence or gate. If a residence or
living area constitutes part of the enclosure for a swimming pool or other
contained body of water, in lieu of the requirements above, at least one of
the following shall apply:



      (1)   Between the swimming pool or other contained body of
water and the residence or living area, a minimum four foot wall, fence or
barrier to the pool area that meets all of the requirements of § 150.152(A).



      (2)   The pool shall be protected by a motorized safety pool
cover which requires the operation of a key switch that meets the American
Society of Testing and Materials Emergency Standards (ASTME) 13-89 and which
does not require manual operation other than the use of the key switch.



      (3) All ground level doors or other doors with direct access to
the swimming pool or other contained body of water shall be equipped with a
self-latching device that meets the requirements of this division. Emergency
escape or rescue windows from sleeping rooms with access to the swimming pool
or other contained body of water shall be equipped with a latching device not
less than 54 inches above the floor. All other operational dwelling units or
guest room windows with similar access shall be equipped with a screwed in
place wire mesh screen, or a keyed lock that prevents opening the window more
than four inches, or a latching device located not less than 54 inches above
the floor.



      (4)   If the swimming pool is an aboveground swimming pool
which has non-climbable exterior sides which are a minimum height of four
feet. Any access ladder or steps shall be removable without tools and secured
in an inaccessible position with a latching device not less than 54 inches
above the ground when the pool is not in use.



      (5)   It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance to
maintain an outdoor swimming pool, either above or below ground level, with a
maximum depth of 18 inches or more in the town unless either the premises
upon which the pool is located or the pool itself is enclosed as required
herein. Irrigation and storm water retention facilities, and the water
features in public parks and golf courses are exempt from the fencing
requirement of this Development Code.



   (B)   Gates.  All gates shall be substantially the same height as
the wall or the fence and shall be self-closing and self-latching and be
constructed in such a manner as to prevent uninvited access.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-238)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.154  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   The above regulations shall not apply to non-permanent wading
pools made of rubber, plastic or similar materials and containing water up to
a maximum depth of not more than 18 inches.



   (B)   Where the premises upon which the pool is located abuts a body
of water in an approved planned unit development, the fence enclosure
parallel to the water shall not be required to provide that the abutting
enclosure extends horizontally 18 inches beyond the lake bank. For purposes
of this exception, the ABUTTING shall mean terminating at the point of
contact with the lakeside edge of the bank.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-239)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.155  PERMIT, INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   A building permit shall not be issued for any swimming pool
unless the plans for the pool provide for an enclosure as required by this
Development Code.



   (B)   No swimming pool shall be filled in whole or in part with
water unless the pool structure has been installed in accordance with this
Development Code and approved by the Building Official or designee.



   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of both the property owner and
the occupant of the premises to install and maintain the fences, locks,
latches and gates in good condition and proper working order when water is in
the pool, and either or both may be deemed in violation of this Development
Code for failure to do so.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-240)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006) 
Penalty, see § 150.999



PART 7.  PARKING; LOADING AND UNLOADING



§ 150.156  PARKING AREAS.



   Parking areas required herein shall be provided, improved and
maintained in accord with the following specifications.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-256)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.157  PARKING STANDARDS PERTAINING TO ALL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   No building permit shall be issued until the applicant has
presented satisfactory evidence to the Planning Director or designee that he
or she owns or has otherwise available for his or her use, sufficient
property to provide required parking.



   (B)   No additions to or enlargement of an existing building or use
shall be permitted unless parking requirements are met for the entire
building or use.



   (C)   For new buildings, building expansion or conversions, plans
must show the arrangement of required parking spaces, and indicate sufficient
space for turning maneuvers and adequate ingress and egress by patrons and
delivery vehicles to the parking area before a permit is granted. Plans shall
be submitted full dimensioned to the Planning Director or designee for
approval prior to the permit being granted.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-257)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.158  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL SPACES.



   (A)   Required parking and loading spaces, maneuvering areas,
driveways and fire lanes shall be paved with asphalt, concrete or masonry to
a sufficient thickness to withstand repeated vehicular traffic.



   (B)   All vehicular egress from parking lots to public right-of-way
shall be by forward motion only, except in the case of single-family and
2-family residences fronting on a local street or a primary or secondary
collector street.



   (C)   Tandem arrangement of required parking spaces is prohibited,
except as otherwise permitted by this Development Code.



   (D)   Permanent use of off-street parking areas for other than the
purpose shall constitute a violation of this Development Code. Should the
owner or occupants of a building change the use of the building and thus
increase the requirement for off-street parking, it shall constitute a
violation of this Development Code, until the parking requirements have been
complied with.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-258)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006) 
Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.159  PARKING STANDARDS FOR NONRESIDENTIAL OR MIXED-USES.



   (A)   Mixed uses computed separately.  In case of mixed uses, the
total requirements for off-street parking space shall be the sum of the
requirements of the various uses computed separately.



   (B)   Maintenance.  It shall be the joint and separate
responsibility of the lessee and owner of the principal use, uses or building
to maintain in a neat and adequate manner, the parking space, access ways,
striping, landscaping and required fences or screening.



   (C)   Parking area improvements.  For multi-family residential,
commercial, industrial and PUD districts, the following shall apply:



      (1)   Parking areas shall be screened from street view and
residential development by a berm, and/or wall (minimum of three feet in
height), with landscaping.



      (2)   Lights illuminating a parking space shall be arranged
and screened to reflect light away from adjoining residences and streets.
Light standards shall be a maximum height of 24 feet.



      (3)   Except where a wall is required, a minimum six-inch high
curb or permanently attached or affixed bumper guard shall be constructed so
that no part of a vehicle extends beyond the property line.







 



   (D)   Access.  Off-street parking space shall be connected with a
public street by a paved driveway, which affords safe and reasonably
convenient ingress and egress. The minimum width of driveways shall be 40
feet if ingress and egress are the same. If ingress and egress are by
separate drives, then the minimum width of each drive shall be 20 feet.



   (E)   Parking space location.  All required parking spaces for
non-residential or mixed uses shall be located on the lot upon which the use
is located or on an adjacent lot. Required parking spaces for multi-family,
commercial or industrial use may be located on an adjacent lot in another
district (other than in a single-family residential district).



   (F)   Joint use parking for PUD.



      (1)   If an applicant for a mixed use PUD can demonstrate
through a parking study supplied by the applicant and approved by the
Planning Director or designee that the peak parking demand for the mixed uses
will be less than the sum of the parking spaces required for each use served,
a reduction in spaces may be allowed.



      (2)   The approved joint use parking plan shall specify the
typical hours of operation with anticipated periods of greatest parking
demand for all uses within the development and shall indicate the number,
location and convenience of pedestrian access of all spaces available to
serve each use.



      (3)   The joint use parking plan shall remain on file with the
Planning and Zoning Department for the purpose of monitoring the continued
adequacy of available parking.



      (4)   At the time of joint use parking plan approval, or at
any subsequent time when uses, intensities of use or hours of operation may
be expanded or otherwise change, or upon findings that the parking facilities
are inadequate, the Planning Director or designee may require additional site
area to be provided, and as necessary, improved to supply additional parking
facilities.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-259)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.160  PARKING STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL USES.



   (A)   Parking space location.  No part of any vehicle parked in the
front yard of a single-family or 2-family residence lot shall extend over the
public right-of-way or sidewalk, pavement edge or street curb where no
sidewalk exists; nor shall any vehicle be parked within the area formed by a
ten-foot by ten foot triangle as measured from the point of intersection of
the back of the sidewalk, or street curb where no sidewalk exists, and a side
property line extended to the back of the sidewalk, or street curb where no
sidewalk exists, when the side property line is within five feet of a
driveway or an improved parking surface located on an adjacent lot.



   (B)   Parking space allocation and/or improvement standards. 
Requirements and directions for the allocation, and design of parking spaces
in all residential districts are described for various land uses.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-260)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.161  PARKING STANDARDS; CALCULATIONS.



   Calculations to determine the required number of parking spaces, and
the design of the space shall consider the following:



   (A)   Minimum standards for parking space allocation shall be
subject to the requirements of this Development Code.



   (B)   The maximum number of parking spaces provided shall not exceed
the minimum number of spaces and an additional 20% of parking spaces, except
as otherwise provided in this Development Code.



   (C)   Parking lots shall be designed with a clear hierarchy of
circulation with major access drives providing access from the major street,
major circulation drives forming circulation through the parking area and
parking aisles whose purpose is to provide access to parking spaces.



   (D)   Reciprocal access between adjacent commercial developments is
required.



   (E)   Large parking lots shall be divided into a series of smaller
lots of approximately 150 spaces each, using raised landscape island(s) at
least ten feet in width, and at least 500 square feet in total area, located
along the sides of the parking areas to separate large parking areas.
Walkways should be considered as part of these landscape areas. Raised
landscape strips at least five feet wide and at least 95 square feet in total
area, should be located on the ends of parking rows, extending the full
length of parking spaces. Additional landscape islands should be considered
in the interior of the individual parking areas to provide shade and break up
large expanses of parking area. As part of design review, town staff shall
provide review parking lot and landscape layouts to determine if they are in
keeping with the requirements of this Development Code.







 



   (F)   Parking areas may be combined and share the required landscape
buffers.



   (G)   Parking lots shall be separated from the sides of buildings by
a raised walkway with a minimum width of six feet.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-261)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.162  ALTERNATIVE DESIGN STANDARDS.



   (A)   To provide flexibility in design and development of projects,
alternative design standards are provided. The total number of parking spaces
may be increased by 10% above the maximum for each additional 2-1/2% increase
in total landscape area, exceeding the minimum required amount. However, in
no case may the total number of parking spaces be increased by more than 40%
above the base maximum allowed.



   (B)   In the case of fractional results in calculating parking
requirements, the required number shall be rounded up to the nearest whole
number if the fraction is 0.5 or greater.



   (C)   All uses not specifically designated, or similar to a
specified use, shall have parking space requirements determined by the
Planning Director.



   (D)   In multi-family, commercial and industrial districts,
handicapped parking spaces shall be provided at the ratio of three spaces for
the first 50 parking spaces provided, and one space for each 20 spaces
thereafter.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-262)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.163  PARKING SPACE ALLOCATION REQUIREMENTS.



 


Use

 

Minimum Standards




Residential





Single residences, duplexes and detached dwellings
 
2 spaces per dwelling unit


Mobile home
 
1 space per unit



Multiple residence and apartments



Efficiencies and studios
 
1 space per dwelling unit


One and 2 bedroom unit
 
1-1/2 spaces per dwelling unit


Two+ bedroom units
 
2 spaces per dwelling unit


All apartment developments with five or more units shall also provide guest
parking and recreational vehicle parking
 
1 space per 10 dwelling units


Condominium and  town homes
 
2 spaces per unit plus 1 guest space for each additional and 1 recreational
vehicle park for each 10 units


Boarding house or similar facility
 
1 space per each 2 guest rooms plus 2 spaces for the dwelling unit



Public assembly and schools



Churches and clubs, lodges and fraternal  buildings, assembly halls, funeral
homes, community centers, libraries, auditoriums and theaters
 
1 space for each 75 square foot of indoor floor area used for public assembly


Schools, kindergarten through ninth grade
 
1 space per 375 square foot indoor floor area


High schools, academies, colleges, universities, trade or vocational schools
 
1 space per 200 square foot indoor floor area



Health care



Medical or dental offices and out-patient
 
1 space per 150 square foot indoor floor area clinics


Hospitals, nursing and convalescent homes
 
1 space per 400 square foot indoor floor area


Day nurseries
 
1 space per 375 square foot indoor floor area, but not less than 5


Retail and other commercial developments
 
1 space per 300 square foot floor area




 



 


Use

 

Minimum Standards




Independent commercial buildings and uses





General offices and/or retail and services
 
1 space per 300 square foot floor area


General auto repair. Garage, service station, car wash and drive-through
lubrication shops
 
1 space per 300 square foot floor area, including service bays, wash tunnels
and retail areas


Hotel and motel
 
1 space per room or suite or rooms plus 1 space for each 25 rooms for truck
trailers and recreational vehicles, the space is to be 10 feet by 75 feet


Restaurant and/or bar
 
1 space per 50 square foot floor area and outdoor seating area


Outdoor sales and service areas (car lots, plant nurseries, building supplies
and the like)
 
1 space per 375 square foot indoor floor area, of sales and service building,
but not less than 4 spaces per use



Recreation



Bowling alleys
 
5 spaces per lane plus ancillary use requirements


Theaters
 
1 space for every 3 patron seats


Golf course
 
1 space per 2 practice tees in driving range plus 4 spaces per green plus
ancillary use requirements


Miniature golf, amusement parks and water slides
 
1 space per 500 square foot outside recreation area


Health spas and/or clubs, gyms and tennis, handball, racquetball courts
and/or clubs
 
1  space per 100 square foot indoor floor area, excluding courts, which
require 2 spaces per court


Skating rinks and dance halls
 
1 space per 75 square foot gross floor area used for recreational activities
and ancillary use requirements



Industrial buildings and uses



Industrial buildings and uses
 
2 spaces for every 3 employees on the shift with the greatest number of
employees



Independent industrial buildings and uses



Warehouses
 
One space per 900 square foot floor area


Manufacturing
 
One space per 600 square foot floor area




 



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-263)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.164  OFF-SITE LOADING.



   (A)   Minimum loading space.  Commercial and industrial uses
requiring delivery shall observe minimum loading space accommodation.



   (B)   Spaces required.  Every hotel, restaurant, department store,
freight terminal or railroad yard, hospital or sanitarium, industrial plant,
manufacturing establishments, retail establishment, storage warehouse or
wholesale establishment and all other structures devoted to similar
mercantile or industrial pursuits which has an aggregate gross floor area of
15,000 square feet or more, shall provide off-street truck loading or
unloading berths in accordance with the following table:



 


Square Feet of Aggregate Gross Floor Area Required





Building greater than 15,000 square feet up to and including 40,000 square
feet
 

1



40,001 square feet up to 100,000 square feet
 

2



100,001 square feet up to 160,000 square feet
 

3



160,001 square feet up to 240,000 square feet
 

4



240,001 square feet up to 320,000 square feet
 

5



320,001 square feet up to 400,000 square feet
 

6



400,001 square feet up to 490,000 square feet
 

7



Each additional 100,000 square feet
 

1 additional





 



   (C)   Any office building 100,000 square feet or larger shall have
at least 1 off-street loading berth.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-264)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.165  STANDARDS FOR OFF-STREET LOADING FACILITIES.



   All off-street loading facilities shall conform to the following
standards:



   (A)   Dimensions.  Unless otherwise specified in these zoning
regulations, berths required shall be at least 45 feet in length and all
loading berths shall be at least 12 feet in width and 14 feet in height,
exclusive of aisle and maneuvering space.



   (B)   Locations.



      (1)   The space may occupy all or any part of any required
yard space, except front and side yards, and shall not be located closer than
50 feet to any lot in any residential zone unless separated from the zone by
a screening wall with a height of eight feet, a 20-foot landscape buffer with
at least 50% of the view obscured by evergreen plant material or a
combination of the above as approved by the Planning Director or the Planning
and Zoning Commission.



      (2)   Sufficient room for turning and maneuvering vehicles
shall be provided on the site so that vehicles shall cross a property line
only by driving forward. Driving over curbs or pavement rails is prohibited.



      (3)   Each loading berth shall be accessible from a street or
alley or from an aisle or drive connecting with a street or alley, without
traversing a residential district.



      (4)   Off-street loading facilities for a single use shall not
be considered as providing required off-street loading facilities for any
other use.



      (5)   If more than one use is located on a site, the number of
loading berths provided shall be equal to the sum of the requirements
prescribed in this Development Code for each use.



      (6)   If more than one use is located on a site and the gross
floor area of each use is less than the minimum for which loading berths are
required but the aggregate gross floor area is greater than the minimum for
which loading berths are required. Off-street loading berths shall be
provided as if the aggregate gross floor area were used for the use requiring
the greatest number of loading berths.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-265)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.166  IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS.



   (A)   The loading area, aisles and access drives shall be paved and
maintained so as to provide a durable, dustless surface and shall be so
graded and drained so as to dispose of surface water without damage to
private or public properties, streets or alleys.



   (B)   Bumper rails shall be provided at locations where needed for
safety or to protect property.



   (C)   The loading area is to be illuminated and lighting shall be
deflected away from the abutting residential site so as not to cause glare.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-266)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.167  COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   Off-street loading facilities shall be located on the same
site with the use for which the berths are required.



   (B)   At the time of initial occupancy, major alterations or
enlargement of a site, or of completion of construction of a structure or of
a major alteration or enlargement of a structure, there shall be provided by
the owner, a report of off-street loading berth requirements. The number of
loading berths provided for a major alteration or enlargement of a site or
structure shall be in addition to the number existing prior to the alteration
or enlargement.



   (C)   Space allocated to any off-street loading berth shall not be
used to satisfy the space requirements for any off-street parking facility.



   (D)   No regular repair work or servicing of vehicles shall be
conducted in a loading area.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-267)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



PART 8.  ADDITIONAL HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS AND EXPECTATIONS



§ 150.168  HEIGHT.



   Walls, fences and hedges shall not exceed a height of six feet within
all required yards, setbacks and open space areas with the following
exceptions:



   (A)   Walls, fences and hedges shall not exceed a height of three
feet within the following areas:



      (1)   All required front yards, except that 40% of the
required front yard for primary uses in the R1-18 zone may be completely
enclosed by a wall, fence or hedge not exceeding seven feet in height,
subject to § 150.169.



      (2)   All required frontage open space.



   (B)   In the R1-18 zone, the six feet adjacent to any street.



   (C)   In the MFR zone, the ten feet adjacent to any street.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-281)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.169  SIGHT TRIANGLE.



   (A)   At street intersections in all zones and as an aid to permit
safe movement of vehicles at or near street intersections, and in order to
promote more adequate protection for the safety of children, pedestrians,
operators of vehicles and for property, for proposed construction hereafter,
there shall be limitations on the height of fences, walls, gateways,
ornamental structures, hedges, shrubbery and other fixture construction and
planting as follows.



   (B)   The barriers to clear, unobstructed vision at corners of
intersecting streets shall be limited to a height of not over two feet above
the established elevation of the nearest street line, for a distance of 25
feet along both the front and side lot lines, measured from the point of
intersection of the intersecting property lines.







 



   (C)   Within the isosceles triangle formed as required in §
150.168(A) by connecting the ends of the respective 25-foot distances, all
the fixtures, construction, hedges, shrubbery and other plantings shall be
limited to a height not over three feet above the elevation of the street
line level at the intersecting streets.



   (D)   Within the triangle, in cases where yards are terraced, the
ground elevation of the front yards shall not exceed two feet above the
established street line elevation at the intersecting streets.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-282)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.170  EXCEPTION TO HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.



   Chimneys, church steeples, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire
towers, monuments, stacks, stage towers or scenery lofts, tanks, water
towers, ornamental towers and spires or grain elevators may be erected to a
height not exceeding 100 feet in accordance with existing or hereafter
adopted Codes of this municipality or this Development Code.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-283)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.171  STRUCTURES NEAR AIRPLANE RUNWAY OR LANDING STRIP.



   No building or structure or any portion thereof which exceeds a height
of 20 feet shall be erected or structurally altered within 500 feet of the
projected centerline of an existing or proposed runway or landing strip for a
distance of 1,000 feet from the end of the existing or proposed runway or
landing strip. No building or structure or any portion thereof shall be
erected to exceed a height that would interfere with the takeoff or landing
of a plane with a glide angle of one foot vertical for every 40 feet
horizontal, the glide angle to be computed as beginning at a point on the
extended centerline of the runway 200 feet beyond and at the same elevation
as the end of the runway pavement or, if runway pavement is not provided, 100
feet beyond and at the same elevation as the end of the landing strip.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-284)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006) 
Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.172  EXCEPTION TO MINIMUM PROPERTY SIZE, LOT SIZE AND LOT WIDTH
REQUIREMENTS.



   If a parcel of land or a lot of record in separate ownership has less
area or width than required for a particular zone in this Development Code,
and that parcel or lot has been lawfully established, recorded and so zoned
prior to July 19, 2006, the parcel or lot may be used for any purpose
permitted in its zone, subject to all other requirements of this Development
Code.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-286)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.173  ADJUSTMENT OF FRONT YARD REQUIREMENTS IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS.



   The front yards established in this Development Code shall be adjusted
in the following cases:



   (A)   Where 40% or more of the frontage on one side of a street
between two intersecting streets is developed with buildings that have
observed a front yard that has a variation of no more than five feet, the
minimum front yard for new buildings shall be the average front yard so
established by the existing buildings.



   (B)   Where 40% or more of the frontage on one side of a street
between two intersecting streets is developed with buildings whose front
yards have a variation of more than five feet, then:



      (1)   Where a building is to be erected on a parcel of land
that is within 100 feet of existing buildings on both sides, the minimum
front yard shall be a line drawn between the 2 closest front corners of the
adjacent buildings on the 2 sides; and



      (2)   Where a building is to be erected on a parcel of land
that is within 100 feet of an existing building on one side only, the
building may be erected as close to the street as the existing adjacent
building.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-287)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.174  ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.



   Accessory buildings shall be established according to the regulations
for main buildings within a zone and in accordance with the following
provisions and exceptions:



   (A)   No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot unless
the construction of the main building has been actually commenced, and no
accessory building shall be used for dwelling purposes other than by domestic
servants employed on the premises.



   (B)   Accessory buildings used as a garage or carport having access
from an alley shall not be located closer than 15 feet to the centerline of
the alley.



   (C)   A distance of at least ten feet shall be maintained between an
accessory building and any other building with the following exceptions:



      (1)   A shade structure with two or more open sides, one of
which is adjacent to another building, may be built to within six feet of
that building.



      (2)   Accessory buildings may be constructed directly abutting
a mobile home provided all setbacks from abutting properties are maintained
as required in the zone regulations.



      (3)   Accessory buildings shall not be constructed closer than
five feet to any property line.



      (4)   Accessory buildings shall not be constructed within any
required setback adjacent to a street.



      (5)   Accessory buildings shall not exceed 15 feet in height
when located within a required setback.



      (6)   The minimum distance between an accessory building and
any other building can be reduced to five feet where all structures comply
with all applicable building and fire codes.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-288)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006; Am.
Ord. 570-12, passed 3-5-2012)



§ 150.175  PROJECTIONS INTO REQUIRED YARDS.



   Yards shall be open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky except
for the following:



   (A)   Front yards.  Frontage open space or setbacks adjacent to
streets.



      (1)   Sills, belt courses, cornices, eaves and ornamental
features may project two feet into the required yard;



      (2)   Terraces, uncovered porches, platforms and ornamental
features which do not extend more than three feet above the adjacent natural
ground level may project into the required yard provided these projections be
distant at least two feet from the adjacent side lot line;



      (3)   Balconies, stairs, covered porches may project four feet
into the required yard;



      (4)   Canopies and awnings projecting over windows may extend
into the required yard three feet; however, a canopy extending from the main
entrance to the sidewalk and not wider than the entrance may project to the
front property line; and



      (5)   Chimneys may project two feet into the required yard.



   (B)   Side yards.  Side yards or any setbacks other than those
adjacent to streets, or rear yards in the R1-18 and NO and PO zones.



      (1)   Sills, belt courses, cornices, eaves and ornamental
features may project two feet into the required yard.



      (2)   Terraces, uncovered porches, platforms and ornamental
features which do not extend more than three feet above the adjacent natural
ground level may project into the required yard provided these projections be
distant at least two feet from the adjacent side lot line.



      (3)   Balconies and stairs may project two feet into the
required yard, but not nearer than two feet to the adjacent side property
line.



      (4)   Canopies and awnings projecting over windows may extend
into the required yard three feet.



      (5)   Chimneys may project two feet into the required yard.



   (C)   Rear yards.



      (1)   Sills, belt courses, cornices, eaves and ornamental
features may project two feet into the required yard.



      (2)   Terraces, uncovered porches, platforms and ornamental
features which do not extend more than three feet above the adjacent natural
ground level may project into the required yard provided these projections be
distant at least two feet from the adjacent side lot line.



      (3)   Balconies and stairs may project four feet into the
required yard.



      (4)   Covered porches may project into the required yard
provided they are not nearer than ten feet to the rear property line.



      (5)   Canopies and awnings projecting over windows may extend
into the required yard three feet.



      (6)   Chimneys may project two feet into the required yard.



      (7)   Mechanical equipment such as air conditioners may be
constructed in the rear yard provided the blower system is not directed
toward the adjacent property, and provided the mechanical equipment shall not
be closer than 14 feet to any main living area on an adjacent lot.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-289)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.176  ACCESS.



   All individually owned or recorded parcels shall have access to a
dedicated street, either directly or by means of a duly recorded access
easement.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-290)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.177  MAINTENANCE OF COMMON AREAS.



   When a development is to be subdivided for sale to numerous individual
owners and there are to be some areas commonly owned, maintenance of the
areas shall be by a homeowners' association or some similar agreement. Proof
of the agreement shall be provided the municipality prior to the issuance of
a building permit.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-291)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.178  REQUIRED SCREENING.



   (A)   All storage and commercial and industrial operations shall be
conducted within a completely enclosed building or within an area completely
enclosed, except for access points, by a solid wall or fence at least six
feet in height.



   (B)   No objects shall be stacked higher than the wall or fence so
erected.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-292)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.179  SPECIAL USES.



   (A)   The Council may grant permission for the following special
uses to be conducted (in any zone unless specifically limited), provided they
are satisfied that there will be no detrimental effect upon the subject
property and/or surrounding properties and uses.



   (B)   The Council may impose restrictions or time limits that it
feels are necessary in order to prevent the detrimental effects.



      (1)   Permanent or temporary.  Outdoor sales display areas,
only within zones that permit sales of the same merchandise indoors.



      (2)   Temporary.



         (a)   Circus, carnival or amusement enterprise;



         (b)   Extraction of earth products, clay, gravel, sand,
stone and topsoil, provided the site is restored to its natural state; and



         (c)   Roadside stands, only within zones that permit the
sale of the same merchandise indoors.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-293)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



PART 9.  WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES



§ 150.180 PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish general requirements for
the installation of wireless communications facilities, including towers and
antennas. The goals of this subchapter are to:



   (A)   Minimize the adverse visual effects of towers through careful
design, siting, and screening, while preserving the rights of wireless
telecommunications providers;



   (B)   Encourage the location of towers in non-residential areas;



   (C)   Minimize the total number of towers throughout the community;



   (D)   Strongly encourage the joint use (co-location) of new and
existing tower sites as a primary option rather than construction of
additional single-use towers;



   (E)   Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the
extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is
minimal;



   (F)   Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a
way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas
through careful design, siting, screening, and innovative camouflaging
techniques;



   (G)   Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications
services to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and
efficiently; and



   (H)   Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower
failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures.



(Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006; Ord. 662-18, passed 8-20-2018)



§ 150.181  ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW AND APPROVAL.



   The following wireless communications facilities may be approved
administratively by the Planning Director or designee upon satisfactory
review by the Technical Advisory Committee through the design review and
building permit process, unless otherwise specified herein:



   (A)   Facilities comprised of panel antennas mounted on or against
an existing structure, or antennas attached to a 69kV or higher power line
tower or pole which does not raise the height of the tower or pole more than
15 feet above its original height when not located within a town-owned right-
of-way;



   (B)   New antennas attached to an existing, conforming wireless
communications tower which does not raise the height of the tower more than
15 feet above its original height when not located wtihin a town-owned
right-of-way; or



   (C)   Small wireless communications facilities located within
town-owned rights-of-way shall be subject to the town’s Small Wireless
Facility Terms and Conditions, Wireless Facility License Agreement, and
permit requirements (see Chapter 120 of this code).



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-317)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006; Ord.
662-18, passed 8-20-2018)



§ 150.182  REQUIRED INFORMATION.



   (A)   Site plan approval is required.



   (B)   At the time of request the applicant shall also submit:



      (1)   A current map, or update to an existing map on file
showing locations of applicant's antenna(e) and facilities and all other
known existing and proposed wireless communications towers within a one mile
radius of the proposed tower and the following accompanying information:



         (a)   Report from a structural Engineer registered in
the state showing the tower antenna capacity by type and number, and a
certification that the tower and attached equipment is designed to withstand
winds in accordance with ANSUEIA/TIA 222 (latest revision) standards;



         (b)   Complete names and addresses of the owners of all
antennae and equipment to be located at the site as of the date of
application;



         (c)   Written authorization for the use from the site
owner; and



         (d)   Provide the town with a plan for the total
build-out in the town. This allows the town to coordinate tower locations
with other applicants.



      (2)   Proof that:



         (a)   Reasonable measures have been taken to assure that
the proposed structure will be placed in a location which will minimize the
visual impact on the surrounding area;



         (b)   The proposed antenna and equipment could not be
placed on a preexisting facility under control of the applicant and function
under applicable regulatory and design requirements without unreasonable
modification;



         (c)   If the application is for siting in a residential
area, the area cannot be adequately served by a facility placed in a
non-residential area; and



         (d)   A new tower is designed to accommodate the
applicant's potential future needs, is of suitable construction and should be
adapted to allow the co-location of additional antennae.



      (3)   A written agreement that:



         (a)   The tower and/or antenna shall be removed within
180 days of cessation of use, and to return the area to its condition prior
to the construction of the tower;



         (b)   The applicant's service is subordinate to
essential public communications services and agreement to suspend use of any
site which may be in conflict with the services, regardless of the reason for
the conflict, until the conflict is resolved; and



         (c)   All applicable health, nuisance, fire and safety
codes are met. If upon inspection, the town determines that a wireless
communications facility fails to comply with the agreements or applicable
codes, the owner of the facility will have 30 days to bring the facility into
compliance. Failure to bring the facility into compliance within 30 days will
constitute grounds for the removal of the facility at the owner's expense.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-318)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006; Ord.
662-18, passed 8-20-2018)



§ 150.183  DESIGN CRITERIA.



   (A)   Physical appearance.  To the extent possible, materials,
colors, textures and landscaping shall be designed to blend in with the
surrounding setting. A tower shall be finished or painted so as to minimize
visual obtrusiveness and shall not be illuminated unless otherwise required
by state or federal regulations. Panel antennae and their associated cables
and hardware mounted on or against an existing structure shall be
architecturally integrated and painted to match the existing facade or be
otherwise camouflaged to reduce their visual impact.



   (B)   Signs and communications tower.  A sign identifying operator
and/or provider contact information, restricting trespass, warning of life
safety risks, and other similar notification is required. No other signage
shall be allowed on an antenna or communications tower.



   (C)   Distance. A tower and attached appurtenances must be set back
from all nonresidential lot lines a minimum distance equal to the height of
the tower and from all residential lot lines a minimum distance equal to the
height of the tower plus 20%.



   (D)   New communications towers.  No new communications tower shall
be located within 1,320 feet of an exiting tower unless the existing tower
does not meet the structural specifications or technical requirements
necessary for additional antenna co-location, or unless a co-location
agreement could not be obtained at commercial reasonable terms and
conditions, including price. Communications towers used to support athletic
field lighting or parking lot lighting, and communications towers which are
camouflaged to disguise the presence of commercial antennas shall be exempt
from this requirement.



   (E)   Height.  In all districts, towers, antennae and all related
wireless communication facilities mounted on buildings, water tanks or
collocated on other structures other than freestandingand  guyed
communications towers must not extend more than ten feet above the highest
part of the structure. Refer to division (F) for freestanding tower height
restrictions.



   (F)   Freestanding and guyed towers.  New freestanding lattice or
guyed towers are not permitted. Monopoles and camouflaged or stealth tower
applications may be located in all zoning districts and subject to the
following height limitations, unless express waiver is granted by Town
Council with an approved Conditional Use Permit.



   (G)   All districts.  Monopole and camouflaged or stealth towers
height shall not exceed ten feet above the maximum height permitted in the
specified district and shall not exceed a maximum of 50 feet in height.



   (H)   Wind loading. Anticipated wind load shall not exceed 25% of
the yield strength of the monopole or utility pole base material.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-319)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006; Ord.
662-18, passed 8-20-2018)



§ 150.184  REPLACEMENT AND/OR REBUILDING OF WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS TOWERS.



   Pre-existing nonconforming wireless communications towers which have
been destroyed or structurally damaged shall be replaced with towers meeting
the requirements as provided in this Development Code.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. IV, § 4-320)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006; Ord.
662-18, passed 8-20-2018)




SUBDIVISIONS




PART 1.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 150.200  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for the orderly growth and
harmonious development of the municipality, to ensure adequate traffic
circulation through coordinated street systems with relation to major
thoroughfares, adjoining subdivisions and public facilities, to achieve
individual property lots of reasonable utility and livability, to secure
adequate provisions for water supply, drainage, sanitary sewerage and other
health requirements, to ensure consideration for adequate sites for schools,
recreation areas and other public facilities, to promote the conveyance of
land by accurate legal description and to provide logical procedures for the
achievement of this purpose.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-336)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.201  INTENT.



   In its interpretation and application, the provisions of this
subchapter are intended to provide a common ground of understanding and
equitable working relationship between public and private interests to the
end that both independent and mutual objectives can be achieved in the
subdivision of land.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-337)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.202  COMPLIANCE.



   No person shall sell or offer for sale any lot, piece or parcel of land
which is within a subdivision without first having recorded a plat thereof in
accordance with the provisions of this Development Code, or followed its
other provisions.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-338)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006) 
Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.203  MODIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Where, in the opinion of the Council, there exist
extraordinary conditions of topography, land ownership or adjacent
development, or other circumstances not provided for in this Development
Code, the Council may, upon investigation and recommendation by the Planning
Department, modify the regulations in this Development Code in such manner
and to the extent as it may deem appropriate to the public interest.



   (B)   In the case of a plan and program for a complete community or
a complete neighborhood, the Council may, upon recommendation by the Planning
Department, modify these regulations in the manner as appears necessary and
desirable to provide adequate space and improvements for the circulation,
recreation, light, air and service needs of the tract when fully developed
and populated, including dedications of property to the municipality for
sites for schools, recreational facilities, public safety facilities and
other necessary public facilities, and which also provide the protective
covenants, deed restrictions or other legal provisions as will assure
conformity to and achievement of the plan.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-339)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



PART 2.  PLATTING PROCEDURES



§ 150.204  SUBDIVISION APPLICATION PROCEDURES.



   (A)   In general.  Every land division shall conform to the goals
and objectives of the general plan, Code, other ordinances adopted by the
Town Council and laws of the state that specifically relate to subdivisions
and the development of land.



   (B)   Applications.  Applications may only be signed and submitted
by property owners or their authorized representatives. The Planning Director
may require proof of ownership and/or agency prior to accepting an
application.



   (C)   Zoning.  The subdivision shall be designed to meet the
specific requirements for the zoning district within which it is located.
However, in the event that an amendment of zoning is deemed necessary, the
re-zoning shall be initiated by the property owner or authorized agent, heard
and approved by the town.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-356)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.205  OUTLINE OF PROCEDURES.



   The preparation, submittal, review and approval of all subdivision
plats located inside the limits of the municipality shall proceed through the
following progressive stages:



   (A)   Stage I.  Pre-application conference;



   (B)   Stage II.  Preliminary plat;



   (C)   Stage III.  Technical review; and



   (D)   Stage IV.  Final plat.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-357)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



STAGE I.  PRE-APPLICATION



§ 150.206  PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE.



   The pre-application conference stage of the subdivision planning
process is an exploratory period preceding actual preparation of plats and
improvement plans by the developer. During this time, developers make their
intentions known informally to the town, are advised of specific public
objectives related to the subject tract and are given detailed information
regarding platting procedures and requirements.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-366)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.207  ACTIONS BY DEVELOPER.



   The developer shall meet informally with the Site Plan Review Committee
to present a general outline of the proposal, including, but not limited to:



   (A)   Sketch plans and ideas regarding land use, street and lot
arrangements, tentative lot sizes and zoning.



   (B)   Tentative proposals regarding water supply, sewage disposal,
surface drainage and street improvements.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-367)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.208  ACTIONS BY THE SITE PLAN REVIEW COMMITTEE.



   (A)   The Site Plan Review Committee shall discuss the proposal with
the developer and advise the developer of procedural steps, design and
improvement standards and general plat requirements.



   (B)   Then, depending upon the scope of the proposed development,
the Site Plan Review Committee shall proceed with the following
investigations:



      (1)   Check existing zoning of the tract and make
recommendations if a zoning change is necessary or desirable;



      (2)   Determine the adequacy of existing or proposed schools,
parks and other public spaces; and



      (3)   Inspect the site or otherwise determine its relationship
to major streets, utility systems and adjacent land uses and to determine any
unusual problems such as topography, utilities, flooding and the like.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-368)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.209  NOTICE TO PROCEED.



   Within five working days of the pre-application meeting and based on
the recommendation of the Committee, the Planning Director may issue the
appropriate notice to proceed according to one of the following procedures:



   (A)   Subdivision.  If the sketch plat involves a subdivision only,
the Planning Director will issue a written notice advising the developer to
proceed with the preparation of a preliminary plat to be considered by the
Planning Commission and the Town Council.



   (B)   Planned unit development (PUD).  The Site Plan Review
Committee may determine that a PUD is required if any of the following
applies:



      (1)   The tract is sufficiently large to comprise an entire
neighborhood;



      (2)   If the tract is to be developed in multiple phases; and



      (3)   The tract initially proposed for platting is only a
portion of a larger land area, the development of which is complicated by
unusual topographic, utility, land use, land ownership or other conditions.



   (C)   PUD procedure.  The PUD process shall comply with § 150.069.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-369)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.210  RESERVATION OF CERTAIN AREAS.



   (A)   Where a tract to be subdivided contains all or any part of a
park, school, flood control facility or other area shown on the general plan
as a public area, or required by Town Council as a public area, the site
shall be dedicated to the public or reserved for acquisition by the public
within a specified time period. The developer and the appropriate public
agency shall reach an agreement regarding the acquisition prior to
consideration of final plat by Town Council.



   (B)   The town may reserve land within a proposed subdivision for
public schools and parks, recreational facilities, public safety facilities,
open space, water and wastewater facilities and public safety annexes,
subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   The required reservations are in accordance with
principles and standards adopted by Town Council, which standards include the
policies for open space set forth in the general plan.



      (2)   The land reserved shall be of such a size and shape as
to permit the remainder of the land area of the subdivision within which the
reservation is located to develop in an orderly and efficient manner.



      (3)   The public agency for whose benefit an area has been
reserved shall have a period of one year after the recording of the final
subdivision plat to enter into an agreement to acquire the reserved land area.



      (4)   If the public agency for whose benefit an area has been
reserved does not exercise the reservation agreement set forth in this
section within a one year period or the extension of time as may be mutually
agreed upon by the public agency and the developer, the reservation of the
area shall terminate.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-370)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



STAGE II.  PRELIMINARY PLAT



§ 150.211  APPLICATION.



   No later than 120 days after the date of a notice to proceed, an
applicant shall apply for a preliminary plat.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-386)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.212  PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS.



   The preliminary plat stage of land subdivision includes detailed
subdivision planning, submittal, review and approval of the preliminary plat.
To avoid delay in processing the application, the developer should carefully
provide the Planning Department with all information essential to determine
the character and general acceptability of the proposed development.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-387)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.213  INFORMATION REQUIRED.



   (A)   Form of presentation.  The information hereinafter required
as part of the preliminary plat submittal shall be shown graphically or by
note on plans, or by letter and may comprise several sheets showing various
elements of required data. All mapped data for the same plat shall be drawn
at the same standard engineering scale, the scale having not more than 50
feet to an inch. Whenever practical, the scale shall be adjusted to produce
an overall drawing measuring 24 inches by 36 inches.



   (B)   Identification and descriptive data.



      (1)   Proposed name of the subdivision and its location by
section, township and range, a descriptive tie, including dimensions and
bearing, to an acceptable government corner with full description of the
corner, including accessories;



      (2)   Name, address and phone number of developer;



      (3)   Name, address and phone number of Engineer, surveyor,
landscape architect or land planner preparing plat;



      (4)   Scale, north point and date of preparation including
dates of any subsequent revisions; and



      (5)   A vicinity map which shall show the relationship of the
proposed subdivision to main traffic arterials and any other facilities which
might help to locate the subdivision. This map may be on the preliminary
plat, but if this is not practical, then a separate map showing title, scale,
north point and date shall be provided.



   (C)   Existing conditions data.



      (1)   Topography by contours or spot elevations related to
USGS survey datum, or other datum approved by the Town Engineer shown on the
same map as the proposed subdivision layout. Contour interval shall be such
as to adequately reflect the character and drainage of the land.



      (2)   Location of all existing water wells, streams, canals,
irrigation laterals, private ditches, washes, lakes or other water features,
direction of flow, location and extent of areas subject to inundation,
whether the inundation be frequent, periodic or occasional.



      (3)   Location, widths and names of all platted streets,
utility right-of-way of public record, public areas, permanent structures to
remain, including water wells and municipal corporation lines within or
adjacent to the tract. Three copies of a preliminary title report showing the
above shall be submitted.



      (4)   Name, book and page numbers of any recorded adjacent
subdivisions having common boundary with the tract.



      (5)   By note, the existing zoning classification of the
subject tract and adjacent tracts.



      (6)   By note, the acreage of the subject tract.



      (7)   Boundaries of the tract to be subdivided shall be fully
dimensioned.



   (D)   Proposed conditions data.



      (1)   Street layout including location, width and proposed
names of public streets, alleys and pedestrian ways, connections to adjoining
platted tract.



      (2)   Typical lot dimensions (scaled), approximate dimensions
of all corner lots and lots on curvilineat, sections of streets, each lot
numbered individually, total number of lots.



      (3)   Designation of all land to be dedicated or reserved for
public use with use indicated.



      (4)   If plat includes land for which multi-family, commercial
or industrial use is proposed, the areas shall be clearly designated together
with existing zoning classifications and status of zoning change, if any.



      (5)   Three  copies of any proposed restrictive covenants
(deed restrictions) within five days after the preliminary plat is filed.



   (E)   Proposed utility methods.



      (1)   Sewage disposal.  It shall be the responsibility of the
developer to furnish the municipality the evidence as the municipality may
require to its satisfaction as to design and operation of sanitary sewage
facilities proposed. A statement as to the type of facilities proposed shall
appear on the preliminary plat.



      (2)   Water supply.  Evidence of adequate volume and quality
satisfactory to the Water Department and the Engineering Department and
substantiated by letter from the Water Department and Engineering Department
or from a private water company, if appropriate.



      (3)   Stormwater drainage and disposal.  Preliminary drainage
calculations and layout of proposed system and location of outlets, all
subject to approval by the Town Engineer. Two copies of the drainage reports
shall be submitted to the Town Engineer for review and approval.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-388)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.214  SUBMITTAL.



   (A)   Fifteen copies of the preliminary plat not exceeding two feet
by three feet in size and required supporting data prepared in accordance
with requirements set forth in § 150.015, shall be filed with the Planning
Department at least 45 days prior to the Commission meeting at which the
developer desires to be heard. Copies of the preliminary plat shall be
reproduced in the format of blueline or blackline prints on a white
background. One eight and one-half-inch by 11-inch transparent film positive
reproduction and twenty eight and one-half-inch by 11-inch (copies) of the
preliminary plat shall also be filed within five days of the date upon which
the preliminary plat was filed. Scheduling of the case for the Commission
hearing shall be dependent upon adequacy of data presented and completion of
processing.



   (B)   The submittal shall be checked by the Planning Department for
completeness and assigned a case number, if incomplete as to those
requirements set forth in § 150.015, the submittal shall be rejected and the
developer notified of the reasons for the rejection within five days of the
date the preliminary plat was received.



   (C)   The preliminary plat must contain a compliance agreement
whereby the developer agrees to comply with the Uniform Standard
Specifications for Public Works Construction and Uniform Details for Public
Works Construction, sponsored, amended and distributed by the Maricopa
Association of Governments and approved by the Council as applicable to the
subdivision. If the compliance agreement does not accompany the submittal,
the preliminary plat submission will not be approved.



   (D)   A preliminary plat shows the approximate location of the
street system, the approximate size and configuration of each lot and tract,
and other information needed by the town to evaluate the proposed subdivision.



   (E)   At a minimum, the following information is required on all
preliminary plat submittals:



      (1)   All maps need to conform to the land survey requirements
shown in land survey minimum standards;



      (2)   Provide statements describing the existing zoning, gross
subdivision area in acres, number of lots, minimum lot size and average lot
size. A table is required on the plat showing all lot areas. Each tract, lot
or public rights-of-way must have a note indicating its approximate area, the
planned use and improvement, if any, and the agency responsible for
maintaining the tract;



      (3)   Show the location and size of all existing easements,
rights-of-way and manmade structures or facilities within the boundary of the
proposed subdivision;



      (4)   Show the topography of the area to be subdivided under
pre-development conditions. The portrayal of the topography must extend at
least 150 feet outside the boundaries of the proposed subdivision. Use
contour lines with the contour intervals listed below:



         (a)   Contours to be in one-foot intervals; and



         (b)   Within hillside areas (average cross-slope
exceeding 10%): five-foot intervals.



      (5)   Indicate by arrows the location, direction and amount of
flow of all natural washes and existing or planned manmade drainage channels
which flow through, adjacent to or begin with the proposed development; and



      (6)   Show all lots, tracts and street rights-of-way planned
within the subdivision. Number all lots sequentially and identify all tracts
by letter, provide dimensions to indicate the sizes of all lots and tracts.
Show required setback lines and proposed building envelopes (if used).



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, §§ 4-389 and 4-390)  (Ord. 432-06, passed
6-19-2006)



§ 150.215 GUIDANCE FOR CORNER LOTS.



   (A)   A corner lot should not be so small or narrow as to prohibit
building a house comparable to others within the subdivision.



   (B)   Corner lots will have an eight foot public utility easement
adjacent to the property line in the front yard as well as the yard facing
the side street. Fences and walls cannot be constructed within these
elements. It is also recommended that mailboxes and other above ground
utility structures be located outside these easements.



   (C)   Lots may need to be larger if they have drainage easements,
are located on adverse terrain or where substantial cut or fill occurs, or
along subdivision perimeters.



   (D)   Where a corner lot abuts a key lot, the height and location of
walls and fences in the yard facing the side street must conform to the front
yard requirements for walls and fences.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-391)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.216  EASEMENTS.



   (A)   Utility easements.  Utility easements along side or rear lot
lines must be entirely within a lot (i.e. not split with part on one lot and
the remaining portion on an adjacent lot), and must be at least 12 feet wide.
Utility easements along the front of lots and tracts must be at least eight
feet wide.



   (B)   Surface drainage easements.  Surface drainage easements may
be split so that a portion lies on one lot and the remaining portion lies on
the adjacent lot.



   (C)   Information for development approval.  If development
approval requires a wash be retained in its natural state, then submit
supporting hydrologic and hydraulic calculations with the preliminary plat to
demonstrate:



      (1)   The easement or tract set aside for drainage is of
sufficient width to carry the peak 100 year flow without endangering life or
property outside the easement or tract; and



      (2)   The easement or tract set aside will accommodate usual
maintenance equipment.



   (D)   Home owners association.  If a development will have a
property owners association, then land set aside for surface drainage should
be in tracts owned and maintained by the property owners association and not
in an easement (where maintenance responsibility would be split among several
property owners).



   (E)   Identify areas to be used for storm drainage retention or
detention.  These areas will be tracts owned and maintained by a property
owners association. Sufficient dimensions and other information must be
provided owners association. Dimensions and other information must be
provided to describe the size of the area, the approximate depth and the
slope of the sides.



   (F)   Layout for water and sewer lines.  Show the proposed layout
of water and sewer lines for the development. Indicate the size of the lines
and direction of flow.



   (G)   Street drainage pattern.  Show the street drainage pattern
and direction by arrows and indicate those points where concentrated flow is
added or removed from the street.



   (H)   Bikeways and multi-use trails.  Show proposed locations of
bikeways and multi-use trails within the plat boundaries and that must
conform to the town's general plan.



   (I)   Notification of property owner’s association.  If the
subdivision will have a property owner's association, indicate this on the
plat with an appropriate statement as it relates to the duties and
requirements as outlined in the CC&R's i.e. the ownership and maintenance of
tracts.



   (J)   Notification of private street.  If street will be private,
indicate this with a note on the plat, and state that the property owner's
association will maintain streets and any street lights located within the
private rights-of-way.



   (K)   Indicate any temporary cul-de-sacs, infrastructure lines,
valves and the like.  If the developer intends to have one recorded plat for
the entire subdivision, but plans to phase the improvements, the plat must
have a statement indicating this and suitable markings showing the proposed
phasing.



   (L)   Submit master plan.  Submit a master plan for large parcel of
land that will be subdivided with several recorded plats over a period of
time.



   (M)   Submit preliminary plat.  Submit a preliminary plat for only
the first phase that the developer intends to secure a recorded plat. Submit
subsequent preliminary plats that conform to the approved subdivision or PUD.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-392)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.217  BASIC DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   As a prerequisite of preliminary plat review by the Planning
Department, the developer shall have informed all utilities which will be
impacted or have an interest in the proposed subdivision of the tentative
plans and learned the general requirements for sewage disposal, water supply,
electric transmission, grading and drainage as applied to the project
location.



   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the developer to provide
with preliminary plat submittal, letters of intent to serve by all utility
companies serving the town and/or project area.



   (C)   In addition, approval of every preliminary and final plat by
the Council is conditional upon compliance by the developer with:



      (1)   Rules as may be established by the State Department of
Transportation relating to provisions for the safety of entrance upon and
departure from abutting state primary highways;



      (2)   Rules as may be established by a county flood control
district relating to the construction or prevention of construction of
streets in land established as being subject to periodic inundation;



      (3)   Rules as may be established by the State Department of
Environmental Quality and the State Department of water resources relating to
the provision of domestic water supply and sanitary sewage disposal; and



      (4)   Obtaining a certificate of assured water supply from the
Director of Water Resources unless the subdivision is located within an area
designated as having an assured water supply by the Director of Water
Resources pursuant to A.R.S. § 45-576(A), (B) and (E). It shall be noted on
the face of the preliminary plat that a certificate of assured water supply
has been submitted with the plat or that the proposed subdivision is within
an area designated as having as assured water supply, pursuant to A.R.S. §
45-576(A), (B), (E) and (I).



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-393)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.218  REVIEW.



   (A)   Upon receipt of the preliminary plat, the Planning Department
shall perform its review of the proposed street systems, street plans and
compliance with municipal street standards, tentative determination of street
and drainage improvements and maintenance requirements and water and sewage
disposal proposals.



   (B)   Upon preliminary review, the Planning Department shall make
the determination as to distribution of the preliminary plat and may include,
but not be limited to the following departments and/or agencies:



      (1)   The Town Engineer for review of drainage and flood
control measures and street improvements;



      (2)   The Planning Director for compliance with public
objectives, giving special attention to design principles and standards as
set forth in this Development Code, streets and thoroughfares as related to
the streets and highway plans and to neighborhood circulation, utility
methods and systems, existing and proposed zoning and land use of the tract
and its environs and land required for schools, parks and other public
facilities;



      (3)   The Parks and Recreation Department for recommendations
regarding parks and recreation spaces;



      (4)   The Police Department and Fire Chief for review of
features of proposed development relating to their respective areas of
operation;



      (5)   The Manager for review of sewage disposal and water
supply proposals;



      (6)   The Superintendent of the town school district for
information;



      (7)   Where the land abuts a state highway, to the State
Department of Transportation for recommendations regarding right-of-way and
intersection design;



      (8)   The United States Postmaster in the municipality; and



      (9)   Letters of certification and/or signed copies of the
proposed preliminary plat from appropriate agencies and utility companies
approving the proposed preliminary plat and confirming availability of
services.



   (C)   The reviewing offices shall transmit their recommendations to
the Planning Department in writing within 15 days of receipt of the
preliminary plat. The Planning Department receives and summarizes the
reviewing office recommendations, prepares a report and presents it to the
Commission.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-394)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.219  APPROVAL.



   (A)   If the Planning Department report indicates that the
requirements of this Development Code have been met, the Commission shall
consider the preliminary plat at a regular meeting within 45 days of the date
of filing the preliminary plat application.



   (B)   The Commission shall approve, disapprove or conditionally
approve the preliminary plat. Upon the Commission's determination of the
preliminary plat, it shall notify the subdivider and Town Council of its
decision. If conditions are attached to its approval, the subdivider and Town
Council shall be informed of the conditions. No preliminary plat may be
continued (tabled) for more than two consecutive meetings.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-395)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.220  SIGNIFICANCE OF PRELIMINARY APPROVAL.



   (A)   Approval of the preliminary plat constitutes authorization for
the developer to proceed with preparation of the final plat and the
engineering plans and specifications for public improvements.



   (B)   Preliminary plat approval is based upon the following items:



      (1)   The basic conditions under which approval of the
preliminary plat is granted will not be substantially changed prior to
expiration date;



      (2)   Approval is valid for a period of 12 months from the
date of Commission approval. A 6-month extension of the preliminary plat
approval may be granted by the Commission upon receipt of a letter requesting
the action from the developer prior to the expiration date; and



      (3)   Preliminary plat approval in itself does not assure
final acceptance of streets for dedication nor continuation of existing
zoning requirements for the tract or its environs, nor constitute
authorization to record the plat.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-396)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



STAGE III.  TECHNICAL REVIEW



§ 150.222  SUBMITTAL.



   The developer must provide the Planning Director with a complete set of
engineering plans and specifications prepared by a Civil engineer who is
currently registered in the state. The plans and specifications must be
designed based upon the approved preliminary plat and may be prepared prior
to or in conjunction with the final plat.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-411)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.223  APPROVAL.



   The final plat will not be considered by the Town Council until all
engineering plans for water, sanitary sewer, streets, grading and drainage
and all other improvements have been approved by the Town Engineer, Public
Works Director and other applicable review agencies. When applicable, for
water and sewer mainline extensions, the developer must furnish State
Department of Environmental Quality (ADEQ) and the Public Works Director the
evidence as the ADEQ may require regarding the adequacy of the design and
operation of the proposed potable water and sanitary sewerage facilities.
Applications for plan review by ADEQ may only be made with written
authorization of the Public Works Director.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-412)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.224  ENGINEERING PLAN AND SPECIFICATION SUBMISSION.



   (A)   Utility improvement plan (UIP).  In conjunction with the
other engineering plans prescribed in this Development Code, the developer
must provide a UIP that illustrates the physical relationship of all proposed
utility improvements for the proposed subdivision. The intent of this plan is
to cumulatively index all proposed utility improvements for easy reference
and to provide for a coordinated development effort.



   (B)   UIP requirements.  At a minimum, the UIP should depict the
proposed location and separation of all public improvements and how they
relate to the lots or blocks of the subdivision. The UIP should provide
approximate distances and measurements of all proposed rights-of-way,
easements, 100-year floodplain limits for regulatory flows, utility
placements, edge of pavement, curb, gutter and sidewalk (if required),
drainage structures and the building footprint. The UIP should be overlaid on
a topographic map with a contour interval of not less than five feet. The
topographic mapping should extend 50 feet beyond the subdivision boundaries.
Spot elevations for the proposed grading should be provided at various
locations to assist in determining the suitability of topography to the
proposed subdivision. Finally, if the project is to be phased, the phase
lines must be shown on the UIP. The criteria and requirements for streets,
drainage, water and sewer may be found in § 150.239.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-413)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



STAGE IV.  FINAL PLAT



§ 150.225  SCOPE.



   The final plat stage includes the final design of the subdivision,
engineering of public improvements and submittal of the plat and plans by the
developer, for review and for action by the Council.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-426)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.226  PREPARATION.



   The final plat shall be prepared in accordance with requirements set
forth below, and shall be in substantial conformance with the approved
preliminary plat and all appropriate town codes and ordinances. The applicant
is responsible to fulfill any and all requirements whether or not referenced
or stated in this manual. Final plat must meet all requirements included on
the final plans submittal requirements sheet of the preliminary plat
stipulation package.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-427)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.227  INFORMATION REQUIRED.



   (A)   Method and medium of presentation. The recorded plat shall be
drawn in India ink on linen or other durable material and on a sheet or
sheets two feet by three feet in size, to a scale of one inch to 100 feet. In
certain unusual instances, as where the area to be subdivided is of unusual
size or shape, the Planning Department may permit a variation in the scale of
the final plat. If more than two sheets are required for the drafting of the
final plat, an index sheet of the same dimensions shall be filed, showing the
entire subdivisions on one sheet and the portion thereof contained on each of
the other sheets. Three copies of the recorded plat shall be reproduced in
the form of blueline or blackline prints on a white background.



The final plat shall be drawn from an accurate survey.



   (B)   Identification data required.



      (1)   A title which includes the name of the subdivision and
its location by number of section, township range and county;



      (2)   Name, address and registration number of seal of the
registered civil engineer or registered land surveyor preparing the plat; and



      (3)   Scale, north arrow and date of plat preparation.



   (C)   Survey data required.



      (1)   Boundaries of the tract to be subdivided shall be fully
balanced and closed, showing all bearings and distances, determined by an
accurate survey in the field. All dimensions shall be expressed in feet and
decimals thereof.



      (2)   Any excepted parcels within the plat boundaries shall
show all bearings and distances determined by an accurate survey in the
field. All dimensions shall be expressed in feet and decimals thereof.



      (3)   Location and description of cardinal points to which all
dimensions, angles, bearings and similar data on the plat shall be
referenced. Each of two corners of the subdivision traverse shall be tied by
course and distance to separate survey monuments approved by the Town
Engineer.



      (4)   Location of all physical encroachments upon the
boundaries of the tract shall be shown.



   (D)   Descriptive data required.



      (1)   Name, right-of-way lines, center lines, courses, lengths
and widths of all public streets, alleys, pedestrian ways and utility
easements, radii, points of tangency and central angles of all curvilinear
streets and alley, radii of all rounded street line intersections.



      (2)   Private streets require tracts separate from the lots
with dimensions equal to the rights-of-way standard unless approved by the
Town Council. Easements for private streets are unacceptable. Plats must have
a note stating the following:



   “Private streets are to be owned and maintained by the property
owners association. Normally, after this plat is recorded, the town will not
accept dedication of the streets to the public in order to relieve the
property owners association of street maintenance responsibilities unless all
street improvements and rights-of-way meet current applicable town
standards”.



      (3)   Private streets require controlled access to the public
street system. These controlled access entrances to the subdivision private
streets must provide adequate turnaround areas as prescribed by the Town
Engineer.



      (4)   All drainage ways shall be shown on the plat. The
right-of-way of all major drainage ways, as designated by the Municipal
Engineer, shall be dedicated to the public.



      (5)   All easements for rights-of-way provided for public
services or utilities and any limitations of the easements. Construction
within the easements shall be limited to utilities and wood, wire or
removable section-type fencing.



      (6)   Location and all dimensions of all residential lots:



         (a)   All residential lots shall be numbered by
consecutive numbers throughout the plat. Exceptions, tracts and private parks
shall be so designated, lettered or named and clearly dimensioned. A table
showing the square footage for all lots is required on the final plat;



         (b)   Locations, dimensions, bearings, radii, arcs and
central angles of all sites to be dedicated or sold to the public with the
use clearly indicated;



         (c)   Location of all adjoining subdivisions with date,
book and page number of recordation noted or if unrecorded or undivided, so
marked; and



         (d)   Any deed restrictions or restrictive covenants to
be imposed upon the plat or any part thereof pertaining to the intended use
of the land shall be submitted five days prior to final plat filing. Deed
restrictions shall in no way be less restrictive than zoning regulations
imposed by the town.



   (E)   Dedication and acknowledgment.



      (1)   Dedication.  Statement of dedication of all streets,
alleys, drainage ways, pedestrian ways and easements for public use signed by
the person holding titles of record, by persons holding titles as vendees
under land contract and by spouses of the parties. Dedication statements must
describe the ownership, the formation of lots, streets, tracts and easements
and include maintenance responsibilities and rights conveyed to the public or
private rights conveyed to future or adjacent property owners. If lands
dedicated are mortgaged, the mortgagee shall also sign the plat. Dedication
shall include a written location by section, township and range of the tract.
If the plat contains private streets, the public utilities shall be reserved
the right to install and maintain utilities in the street rights-of-way,
including refuse collection.



      (2)   Acknowledgment of dedication.  Execution of dedication
acknowledged and certified by a notary public, as set forth in the state
statutes, must acknowledge the signature of the owner.



      (3)   Ratification by lien holders.  If any property is
encumbered by a deed of trust, a mortgage, and/or an agreement, the lender
must ratify (confirm and/or consent to and approve) the plat. The
ratification must reference the date the lien was recorded and the docket and
page in which the instrument was recorded by the Pinal County Recorder's
office. A notary public or other authorized officer, as set forth in the
state statutes, must acknowledge the signature of the lien-holder.



         (a)   If the lender is a corporation, submit a certified
copy of the resolution identifying the individual authorized to sign on
behalf of the corporation with the plat to the town for recording.



         (b)   If a partnership and/or a joint venture is
involved, submit a copy of the partnership or the joint venture agreement to
the town for review. If either agreement does not designate an individual to
sign on behalf thereof, include a resolution defining this responsibility. A
notary public must acknowledge the lender's signature.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-428)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.228  CERTIFICATION.



   The following certifications are required:



   (A)   Certifications by the registered civil engineer or registered
land surveyor making the plat that the plat is correct and accurate and that
the monuments described in it have either been set or located as described.
All maps shall contain the seal of a registered civil engineer or land
surveyor.



   (B)   Certification by the Municipal Engineer that the final plat
substantially conforms to the preliminary plat approved by the Council, and
that all engineering conditions and requirements of this Development Code
have been complied with.



   (C)   Certification by the Town Clerk of the date the map was
approved by the Council.



   (D)   Certificate of recordation by the Pinal County Recorder.



   (E)   A final plat, in recordable form, on disk in digital format
compatible with the town computer database to facilitate the inclusion of the
final plat into the town parcel database. Typically, the form of these files
will be in DXF, DWG or other similar industry standards digital file
developed in AutoCAD R13 or greater.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-430)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.229  ZONING.



   Zoning of the tract upon which a subdivision is proposed shall permit
the proposed use.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-431)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.230  EASEMENTS.



   It shall be the responsibility of the developer to provide on the final
plat, prior to plat recordation, the easements in the location and width as
required for utility purposes. The following notation shall be placed upon
all final plats:



   “Construction within easements, except by public agencies and utility
companies, shall be limited to utilities and wood, wire or removable
section-type fencing”.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-432)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.231  SUBMITTAL.



   (A)   The developer shall file with the Planning Department three 24
inches by 36 inches mylar transparencies and fifteen 24 inches by 36 inches
true copies thereof, together with a letter of transmittal and recordation
fee, at least 20 days prior to the Council meeting at which consideration is
desired.



   (B)   The developer shall submit with the copies required in this
Development Code a filing fee in the amount determined by the Council.



   (C)   The developer shall file a landscape plan with the final plat
indicating the requirements of §§ 150.131 through 150.146 have been
fulfilled.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-433)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.232  REVIEW.



   (A)   The Planning Department, upon receipt of the final plat
submittal, shall immediately record receipt and date of filing and check it
for completeness. If complete, the Planning Department shall review the plat
for substantial conformity to the approved preliminary plat and refer copies
of the submittal to the following reviewing offices who shall make known
their recommendations in writing addressed to the Council:



      (1)   Planning Director, for approval of the final plat and
landscaping if appropriate;



      (2)   Parks and Recreation Department, when applicable;



      (3)   Town Engineer for approval of street improvements,
drainage and flood control measures;



      (4)   Town Manager for approval of sewage disposal, water
supply and fire safety plans;



      (5)   State Department of Transportation, for approval when
the plat abuts a state highway; and



      (6)   Interested utility companies, for utility easements.



   (B)   The departments shall assemble the recommendations of the
various reviewing offices, prepare a concise summary of recommendations and
submit the summary together with the reviewer's recommendations to the
Council for consideration. In the event that the Planning Department finds
that the final plat does not substantially conform to the preliminary plat,
as approved by the Commission, then the final plat shall be resubmitted to
the Commission for review and recommendations prior to submittal to the
Council.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-434)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.233  APPROVAL.



   (A)   Upon receipt of a request for Council action from the Planning
Department, the Town Clerk shall place the case on the agenda of the next
regular Council meeting, whereupon the Council shall approve or deny the plat.



   (B)   If the Council rejected the plat for any reason whatsoever,
the reasons therefore shall be recorded in the minutes.



   (C)   If the Council approves the plat, the Town Clerk shall
transcribe a certificate of approval upon the plat, first making sure that
the other required certifications have been duly signed, that required
easements for utility purposes have been included on the plat, and that the
Town Engineer has approved the engineering plans.



   (D)   When the certificate of approval by the Council has been
transcribed on the plat, the Town Clerk shall record the approved final plat
in the office of the County Recorder.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-435)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.234  PERFORMANCE CONTRACT.



   (A)   In order to ensure proper installation of subdivision
improvements, the developer shall designate the type of assurance in a form
and method acceptable to the Town Attorney and approved by Town Council in
conjunction with review of the final plat.



   (B)   A final copy of the assurance shall be submitted to staff
within 90 days of Council approval, and prior to the recordation of any final
plat approved by the Town Council. The amount of the assurance shall be based
on a cost estimate prepared by a registered civil engineer in an amount to
cover 120% of the complete installation of the improvements. This assurance
shall provide for its forfeiture to the town in the event the improvements
are not accepted by the town by the declared completion date due to the
default of the developer. Any portion of the forfeiture in excess of the
expenses incurred by the town in connection with the installation of the
improvements shall be returned to the developer. The owner must provide the
town with one of the following types of financial assurances for the
completion of the construction of the improvements required for the
development of the subdivision:



      (1)   Cash or surety bond.  The developer shall deposit with
the Town Clerk cash or a surety bond. The surety bond shall be executed by
the developer with a corporation duly licensed and authorized to transact
surety business in the state, as surety. The bond shall be in favor of the
town, shall be continuous in form and shall require that the total aggregate
liability of the surety for all claims shall be limited to the face amount of
the bond, regardless of the number of years the bond is in force and shall
provide that:



         (a)   The bond or cash shall be released upon
satisfactory performance of the work and its acceptance by the Town Council;



         (b)   Progress payments may be made to the developer
upon request from any cash deposit made. The progress payments shall be made
in accordance with standards established by the Town Engineer;



         (c)   The bond may be cancelled by the developer upon 30
days written notice to the town, provided that other security satisfactory to
the town has been deposited which will cover the obligations of the developer
which remain to be performed; and



         (d)   Any work abandoned or not completed by the
developer may be completed by the town, which shall recover the construction
costs from the developer or the bonding agent.



      (2)   Assurance of construction through loan commitment.  In
lieu of providing assurance of construction in the manner provided above, the
developer may provide assurance of construction of all required utility and
infrastructure improvements, by delivering to the town in a manner described
above, an appropriate agreement acceptable to the Town Attorney between an
approved lending institution and the developer which provides a statement
that funds sufficient to cover the entire cost of installing the required
improvements, including engineering and inspection costs and the cost of
replacement or repairs of any existing streets or improvements demanded by
the town in the course of development of the subdivision have been deposited
with the approved lending institution by the developer. The agreement shall
provide that the funds in the approved amount are specifically allocated and
will be used by the developer, or on their behalf, only for the purpose of
installing the subdivision improvements. The town shall be the beneficiary of
the agreement or the developer's rights shall be assigned to the town, and
the Town Engineer shall approve each disbursement of the funds. The agreement
may also contain terms, conditions and provisions normally included by the
lending institutions in loan commitments for construction funds, or as may be
necessary to comply with statutes and regulations applicable to the lending
institutions.



      (3)   Alternative assurances.  In lieu of providing a surety
bond or an agreement between the subdivision developer and an approved
lending institution, the Town Attorney may approve and recommend to Town
Council the alternative assurances that it deems sufficient to guarantee and
assure construction of the required improvements, including a contractual
agreement by an approved lender guaranteeing the performance of the
subdivision developer, or a performance deed of trust, in first lien
position, or the other assurances as the Town Council shall deem sufficient
and appropriate.



      (4)   Assurance of warranty.  The developer shall warranty
all work against defective workmanship or materials for a period of one year
from the date of its final acceptance.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-436)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.235  LAND SURVEY MINIMUM STANDARDS.



   (A)   Compliance with the public land survey system established by
the general land office and currently administered by the Bureau of Land
Management, is required when performing any land boundary survey.



   (B)   Compliance with state statutes regarding land surveying and
mapping, together with the state boundary survey minimum standards
administered by the Board of Technical Registration, must be reflected on
mapping products submitted by the land surveyor.



   (C)   The land surveyor must comply with the requirements of the
Pinal County Recorder regarding recording standards prior to submittal of
mapping products to the town.



   (D)   The town minimum standards for mapping and platting include
the above minimum standards along with proper research, filed examination,
measurements, analysis, calculations and presentation, and as follows. A land
boundary survey of the subject property must be performed in accordance with
“Minimum Standards of the Arizona Land Boundary Survey” (effective
February 2002 by the State Board of Technical Registration), which includes
but is not limited to the following:



      (1)   The map or plat must be presented on a format acceptable
for recording with the office of Pinal County Recorder on a 24 inches by 36
inches sheet size;



      (2)   Submit survey field notes, raw data and coordinate files
(electronically) from the actual field survey conducted by the surveyor
submitting the plat or map;



      (3)   Submit the closure and area calculations for the parent
parcel, and parcels resulting from a land division, a land assemblage or a
property line adjustment and any easements being created or of record;



      (4)   Show and describe all monuments controlling the boundary
of the subject property;



      (5)   Show all measured and recorded distances (bearings if
necessary);



      (6)   Basis of bearing;



      (7)   Show property boundary line with heavy solid line.
BOUNDARY is defined as contained in title report legal description. Include
the easements for the gross property area;



      (8)   Show all previous property divisions with case and
recording numbers;



      (9)   Show all easements that appear in title report, citing
width, dimensions (bearings and distances) and recorded instrument number;



      (10)   Show easements that may appear in the patent deed in
small tract act areas;



      (11)   Show all existing improvements that are affected by
zoning district restrictions with distances from property line;



      (12)   Show zoning district building setback lines with
dimensions;



      (13)   Show existing septic tank and disposal site and its
post-approval disposition with distance from property line and structures;



      (14)   Show existing wells, if any;



      (15)   Show legal access to property;



      (16)   Show names of adjacent property owners or assessor
parcel numbers;



      (17)   Show area, in square feet and dimensions of each new
lot with lot number;



      (18)   Show a vicinity map;



      (19)   Show existing roadway names;



      (20)   Show north arrow and scale;



      (21)   Show pertinent references per State Board of Technical
Registration minimum standards; and



      (22)   Show significant land features.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-437)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.236  MAP REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The survey map, prepared on a recordable format, will be the
only document to be produced by the applicant's registered land surveyor.



   (B)   New lots, street dedications and easements required for
various purposes will be shown on the plat. Special conditions of the
request, a town representative will recommend specific elements necessary to
show on the specific plat.



      (1)   Provide a name of survey map, such as “Land Survey Map
for JOHNSON PROPERTIES” in the title caption on the cover sheet;



      (2)   Brief description in the title stating at a minimum the
quarter section, section, township, range, meridian, county and state. The
title may need more specific information depending on particulars of the
parent description;



      (3)   Complete legal description as appears in subject current
title report;



      (4)   Legal descriptions of new lots are not necessary as the
lot and name of plat will be sufficient for conveyance;



      (5)   Dedication and/or declaration and/or agreement and
acknowledgment;



      (6)   Ratification by beneficiaries, if applicable and
acknowledgment;



      (7)   Land surveyors certification;



      (8)   Consultants name and address;



      (9)   Town approval by Planning and Development Department;



      (10)   Legend;



      (11)   North arrow and scale;



      (12)   List of pertinent references;



      (13)   Show existing easements, recording references,
dimensions (bearings and distances) and purposes;



      (14)   Case number; and



      (15)   Stipulations as required on the staff approval.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-438)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



PART 3.  DESIGN STANDARDS



§ 150.237  GENERALLY.



   (A)   Every subdivision shall conform to the applicable objectives
of any comprehensive general plan or neighborhood plan as adopted by the
Commission and the Council. Every subdivision shall also conform to this
Development Code, and to other ordinances and regulations of the town and to
the state statutes.



   (B)   Where the tract to be subdivided contains all or any part of
the site of a park, school, flood control facility or other public area as
shown in the general plan or other adopted plan or as recommended by the
Commission, the site shall be dedicated to the public or reserved for
acquisition by the public under the provisions of § 150.209.



   (C)   Land which is subject to periodic flooding, land which cannot
be properly drained or other land which, in the opinion of the Commission, is
unsuitable for subdivision use shall not be subdivided; except that the
Commission may approve subdivision of the land upon receipt of evidence from
the Town Engineer that the construction of specific improvements can be
expected to render the land suitable; thereafter, construction upon the land
shall be prohibited until the specified improvements have been planned and
construction guaranteed.



   (D)   Where the tract to be subdivided is located in whole or in
part in terrain having an average cross-slope exceeding 10%, design and
development may, at the discretion of the Planning Department and Town
Engineer, follow the standards and requirements of § 150.243.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-451)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.238  STREET LOCATION AND ARRANGEMENT.



   (A)   Whenever a tract to be subdivided embraces any part of a
street designated in the municipality's adopted streets and highways master
plan, the street shall be platted in conformance therewith.



   (B)   Street layout shall provide for the continuation of the
streets as the Site Plan Review Committee may designate.



   (C)   Whenever a tract to be subdivided is located within an area
for which a neighborhood plan has been approved by the Commission, the street
arrangement shall conform substantially to the plan.



   (D)   Certain proposed streets, as designated by the Site Plan
Review Committee, shall be extended to the tract boundary to provide future
connection with adjoining unplatted lands.



   (E)   Local streets shall be so arranged as to discourage their use
by through traffic.



   (F)   Where a proposed subdivision abuts or contains an existing or
proposed arterial route, the Site Plan Review Committee may require access or
frontage streets, or reverse frontage combined with a one-foot non-access
easement abutting the arterial route, or the other treatment as may be
justified for protection of residential properties from function of the
arterial route.



   (G)   Where a subdivision abuts or contains the right-of-way of a
limited access highway or an irrigation canal or abuts a commercial or
industrial land use, the Site Plan Review Committee may recommend location of
a street approximately parallel to and on each side of the right-of-way at a
distance suitable for appropriate use of the intervening land. The distance
shall be determined with due regard for approach grades, drainage, bridges or
future grade separations.



   (H)   Streets shall be so arranged in relation to existing
topography as to produce desirable lots of maximum utility and streets of
reasonable gradient and to facilitate adequate drainage.



   (I)   Alleys may be required in all commercial and industrial
subdivisions. The Site Plan Review Committee may recommend waiver of
requirements in certain districts because of topography, open area provided
or service access provided in some other manner acceptable to the Committee.



   (J)   Half streets shall be discouraged except where necessary to
provide right-of-way by the streets and highways plan, to complete a street
pattern already begun or to ensure reasonable development of a number of
adjoining parcels. Where there exists a platted half street abutting the
tract to be subdivided and the half street furnishes the sole access to
residential lots, the remaining half shall be platted within the tract.



   (K)   If half streets are platted, they shall be four feet wider in
right-of-way and pavement width for local streets for the first half street,
or this 4 feet may be obtained from the adjoining property, if possible.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-452)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.239  ADOPTION OF PUBLIC WORKS STANDARDS, SPECIFICATIONS AND
REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Public work improvements.  The Public Works Director shall
recommend for Council adoption, standards, specifications and regulations
regarding public works improvements, which may be adopted by the Town Council
for reference. Three copies of any documents adopted by Town Council by
reference shall be kept on file by the Town Clerk for use and reference by
members of the public. In the event there is a conflict between or among any
of the standards, specifications and regulations adopted herein by reference,
a town standard, specification or regulation shall prevail over any standard,
specification or regulation prepared by another entity. Irrespective of the
designations contained in any standards, details or specifications adopted by
reference, enforcement procedures and inspections provided for shall be the
responsibility of the Public Works Director. The Public Works Director and/or
designee may approve alternate materials or methods of construction provided
he or she finds the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the
intent of the adopted standard, detail or specification and the proposed
material is for the purpose intended, and at least the equivalent of that
prescribed in the adopted standard, detail or specification, in quality,
strength, effectiveness, durability and safety.



   (B)   M.A.G.; Uniform Standard Specifications and Details; adopted
with certain modifications.  Certain documents on file with the Town Clerk,
marked, known and designated as “1999 Uniform Standard Specifications and
Details for Public Works Construction” (M.A.G. standard specification and
details) published by Maricopa Association of Governments, Arizona, is hereby
adopted by reference and made a part hereof as though set forth at length
herein but subject to the following modifications.



      (1)   In the event any standard specification or detail
contained in the M.A.G. standard specifications and details conflicts with
any standard specification, detail technical design manual or other manual or
construction contract prepared and adopted by the town, then the conflicting
M.A.G. standard is hereby amended to conform with town provisions.



      (2)   The M.A.G. specifications and details are modified as
follows: the Town Engineer is authorized to increase standard street cross
sections, both pavement and right-of-way widths, as necessary to maintain
required traffic service levels when a traffic analysis indicates the need
for additional lanes of traffic.



   (C)   Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and
Highways (MUTCD).  Certain document on file with the Town Clerk marked known
and designated as The Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets
and Highway (MUTCD). Millennium edition, approved by the Federal Highway
Administration as the national standard is hereby adopted by reference and
made a part of hereof as though set forth at length herein.



   (D)   Policy of geometric design of highway and streets.  That
certain document on file with Town Clerk marked, known and designated as
“The Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets” marked 2001
edition published by the American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of
hereof as though set forth at length herein.



   (E)   Manuals.  That certain documents to be known and recommended,
and designated as Town of Florence Standards and Design Manuals, Numbers 1
through 8 entitled:



      (1)   Town of Florence Standard Details and Specifications;



      (2)   Design Manual No. 1: Water System Design;



      (3)   Design Manual No. 2: Wastewater and Reclaimed Water
System Design;



      (4)   Design Manual No. 4: Storm Drainage System Design;



      (5)   Design Manual No. 5: Street Design and Access Control;



      (6)   Design Manual No. 6: Streetlight Design;



      (7)   Design Manual No. 7: Traffic Barricade Design; and



      (8)   Design Manual No. 8: Landscape and Irrigation Design of
Rights-of-Ways, Retention Basins and Parks.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-453)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.240  BLOCK DESIGN.



   (A)   The maximum length of blocks, measured along the centerline of
the street and between intersecting street center lines, shall be 1,500 feet,
except that in a development with lot areas averaging one-half acre or more
where conditions warrant, this maximum may be exceeded by 500 feet. Blocks
shall be as long as reasonably possible under the circumstances within the
above maximum in order to achieve depth and possible street economy and to
reduce the expense and safety hazard arising from excessive street
intersections.



   (B)   The minimum length of blocks, as measured above, shall be 600
feet.



   (C)   The maximum length of cul-de-sac streets shall be 400 feet,
measured from the intersection of right-of-way lines to the extreme depth of
the turning circle along the street centerline. Exceptions may be made where
topography, adjacent platting or other unusual conditions justify such. No
exception shall be made merely because the tract has restrictive boundary
dimensions, wherein provisions should be made for extension of street pattern
to the adjoining unplatted parcel and a temporary turnaround installed.



   (D)   Pedestrian ways with a right-of-way width of eight feet may be
required where essential for circulation or access to schools, playgrounds,
shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities. Pedestrian
ways may be used for utility purposes, if utility easement is dedicated on
the final plat.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-454)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.241  LOT PLANNING.



   The general design standards for lot planning in any proposed
subdivision shall be as follows:



   (A)   Lot width, depth and area shall comply with the minimum
requirements of §§ 150.045et seq. and shall be appropriate for the location
and character of development proposed, and for the type and extent of street
and utility improvements being installed.



   (B)   Where steep topography, unusual soil conditions, drainage
problems, abrupt changes in land use or heavy traffic on adjacent streets
prevail, the Site Plan Review Committee may make special lot width, depth and
area requirements which exceed the minimum requirements of the particular
zoning district.



   (C)   Proposed streets shall be arranged in close relation to
existing topography. Where steep topography prevails, as in the platting of
hillside subdivisions, and where street grades must, of necessity reach or
exceed the standard requirements, the requirements of § 150.242 may be
followed.



   (D)   The depth-to-width ratio of the usable area of the lot shall
not be greater than 3:1.



   (E)   Minimum front building lines shall conform to the minimum
requirements of §§ 150.045et seq.



   (F)   Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or
radial to street lines, except where other treatment may be justified in the
opinion of the Site Plan Review Committee.



   (G)   Every lot shall abut upon an improved public street furnishing
satisfactory access thereto, unless the subdivision has been approved for
private streets.



   (H)   Single-family residential lots extending through the block and
having frontage on two parallel streets shall not be encouraged in most
cases; back of lots to arterial routes shall be encouraged except in cases
where not justified in the opinion of the Site Plan Review Committee.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-455)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.242  EASEMENT PLANNING.



   Easements for utilities in a proposed subdivision shall be provided as
follows:



   (A)   Where alleys are provided, four feet for aerial overhead on
each side of alley shall be provided by dedication.



   (B)   Along side lot lines, six feet on each side of the side lot
lines for distribution facilities and one foot on each side of the side lot
lines for street lighting, as may be designated, shall be provided.



   (C)   Guy and anchor easements, one foot wide on each side of the
side lot lines, or two feet wide on one side of the side lot line and
approximately 35 feet in length measured from the rear lot line, as
designated, shall be provided.



   (D)   For local streets with 40 feet of right-of-way, a six-foot
utility easement on each side of the right-of-way shall be provided.



   (E)   For lots facing on curvilinear streets, utility easements or
alleys may consist of a series of straight lines with points of deflection
not less than 120 feet apart. Points of deflection should always occur at the
junction of side and rear lot lines on the side of the exterior angle.
Curvilinear easements of alleys may be provided, providing that the minimum
radius for the alley or easement shall be not less than 800 feet except that
450 feet radii curves may be allowed where there are adequate provisions for
utilities.



   (F)   Where a stream or important surface drainage course abuts or
crosses the tract, dedication of a public drainage easement of a width
sufficient to permit widening, deepening, relocating or protecting the
watercourse shall be required.



   (G)   Land within a public street or drainage easement or land
within a utility easement for major power transmission (tower) line or
pipelines shall not be considered a part of the minimum required lot area
except where lots exceed one-half acre in area. This shall not be construed
as applicable to land involved in utility easements for distribution or
service purposes.



   (H)   Except where alleys are provided, lots shall have the rear
eight feet recorded as a utility easement, if any utilities are to be located
along the rear lot line, subject to approval of the Town Engineer.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-456)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.243  HILLSIDE SUBDIVISIONS.



   (A)   Planning, platting and development of hillside subdivisions
involves special problems and requires special handling by the developer and
project Engineer and by the Site Plan Review Committee, staff and reviewing
officials. These problems are preservation of scenic beauty for the benefit
of the general public, safe construction of public improvements commensurate
with lower density and lesser public use and safe construction of private
improvements related to sewage disposal, water supply, storm drainage and
foundation bearing.



   (B)   Lot width and area shall be closely related to the terrain,
drainage, percolation factors or construction of sanitary sewers, with
emphasis placed on selection of homesites and the access to the homesites.



   (C)   Special design standards for hillside subdivisions.



   (D)   Street grades shall not exceed 15%.



   (E)   Street grades exceeding 10% shall have a maximum length of 600
feet.



   (F)   Minimum dedicated street right-of-way shall be 50 feet.



   (G)   T-or Y-type turning-and-backing cul-de-sac may be substituted
for circular turnarounds.



   (H)   Panhandle, double frontage and other unorthodox lots shall be
permitted so long as it can be adequately demonstrated that no lot will be
adversely affected by any other lots so arranged.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-457)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.244  SPECIAL PRELIMINARY PLAT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Topography by two foot contour interval showing location of
major and minor washes.



   (B)   Road profiles, cross sections and proposed grading plans may
be required at the discretion of the Town Engineer.



   (C)   Percolation test and test boring logs in accordance with the
requirements of the County Health Department should be taken at the proposed
subdivision prior to the submittal of the preliminary plat.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-458)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.245  PLAT PROCESSING TIME.



   Due to special problems requiring special field and office review by
the County Health Department, Engineer and staff, developers should expect
processing time for hillside plats to exceed that otherwise required for
normal plats.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-459)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.246  LANDSCAPING.



   All common public areas shall be landscaped per §§ 150.131 through
150.146 at the developer's expense.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-460)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



PART 4.  REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS



§ 150.248  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this division to establish, in outline form,
minimum acceptable standards for improvement of streets and utilities, to
define the responsibility of the developer in the planning, constructing and
financing of public and private improvements and to establish procedures for
review and approval of engineering plans.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-476)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.249  IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS.



   All improvements required in streets, alleys or easements which are
required as a condition of plat approval shall be the responsibility of the
developer; provided, however, that the developer may be allowed to meet the
requirements by participation in an improvement district approved by the town.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-477)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.250  ENGINEERING PLANS.



   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the developer to have
prepared by a civil engineer, registered in the state, a complete set of
engineering plans and specifications satisfactory to the Town Engineer for
construction of required improvements. The plans and specifications shall be
based on the approved preliminary plat and be prepared in conjunction with
the final plat.



   (B)   Engineering plans shall be approved by the Town Engineer prior
to recordation of the final plat.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-478)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.251  CONSTRUCTION AND INSPECTION.



   (A)   All relocation, filling and reconstruction of irrigation
facilities shall be constructed to standards of the owning utility and the
Town Engineer.



   (B)   All improvements in the public right-of-way shall be
constructed under the inspection and approval of Town Engineer, Public Works
Department and/or utility company having jurisdiction. Construction shall not
be commenced until a permit has been issued for the construction by the Town
Engineer, and if the town has placed a stop work order against the developer
for any reason, the developer shall not resume work until after notifying the
town of his or her intent and a the town has released the order to stop work.



   (C)   All underground utilities to be installed in streets shall be
constructed prior to the surfacing of the street. Service stubs to platted
lots within the subdivision for underground utilities shall be placed to the
length as not to necessitate disturbance of street improvements when service
connections are made.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-479)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.252  STORM DRAINAGE.



   Proper and adequate provision shall be made for disposal of stormwater;
this shall apply equally to grading of private properties and to public
streets. Existing major watercourses shall be maintained and dedicated as
drainage ways. The type, extent, location and capacity of drainage facilities
shall be approved for the individual subdivision by the Town Engineer based
on an approved drainage study and shall be constructed in accordance with
approved municipal standards.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-480)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.253  SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL.



   Public sanitary sewers shall be installed in accordance with plans,
profiles and specifications approved by the County and State Health
Departments and the Town Engineer and a private water company, if applicable.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-481)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.254  WATER FACILITIES REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Each lot or building unit shall be supplied with potable water
in sufficient volume and pressure for domestic use and fire protection
purposes. Design and construction of any and all facilities relating to the
supply, storage, transmission, treatment and distribution of potable water
within or outside of any subdivision must meet the written approval of the
Manager or a private water company. All design and construction must meet all
applicable Town and State Department of Health Services, or private water
company if applicable, specifications and requirements in force at the time
of plan review and approval. If it is necessary for the municipality to apply
specifications or requirements not in force at the time of plan review, but
necessary to achieve the orderly and proper development of any portion of any
water system, either public or private, the municipality reserves the right
to enforce the specifications and requirements to ensure and protect the
public welfare.



   (B)   The municipality assumes no liability for providing water to
any proposed or actual subdivision requiring public water service until the
time as all necessary facilities are built in accordance with the Water
Department specifications and meet with the written approval of the Manager.



   (C)   The municipality reserves the right to participate in any or
all phases of any development of any water facilities aforementioned in any
subdivision requiring public water service. Conversely, the municipality
reserves the right not to participate in any or all phases of the development
of any water facilities aforementioned in these subdivisions.



   (D)   Ultimately, Water Department specifications and requirements
relating to fire protection are established by the Fire Chief. All other
specifications and requirements of the Water Department are established by
the Town Manager. Any specifications or requirements for subdivisions
requiring public water service may be subject to change based on the final
design of the subdivision, and changes or revisions in the plat, or actual
construction of facilities within the subdivision having requirements greater
than those for which the water facilities were designed.



   (E)   Any specifications or requirements established by the Town
Manager for subdivisions requiring public water service shall be considered
null and void unless they are written in form and signed by the Town Manager.
The specifications and requirements of the municipality regarding the public
water systems are subject to change at any time and will be enforced from the
date of change.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-482)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.255 GARBAGE DISPOSAL.



   (A)   The developer shall furnish sufficient automated containers
which meet municipal standards to provide service to each increment of a
subdivision as it is constructed.



   (B)   These containers will be provided at the developer's expense
and shall become the property of the municipality.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-483)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.256  FIRE HYDRANTS.



   Fire hydrants shall be installed at locations designated by the Site
Plan Review Committee, upon advice by the Fire Chief and shall be installed
in accordance with municipal standards and specifications.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-484)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.257  MONUMENTS.



   Permanent monuments shall be installed in accordance with current
municipal standards at all corners, angle points and points of curve and at
all intersections. After all improvements have been installed, a registered
land surveyor or civil engineer shall check the location of monuments and
certify their accuracy.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-485)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.258  LOT CORNER.



   Iron pipe or round reinforced steel bars not less than one-half inch in
diameter shall be set at all corners, angle points and points of curve for
each lot within the subdivision prior to the recording of the plat except
that the Site Plan Review Committee may approve delay where topographic
conditions make it necessary.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-486)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.259  STREET LIGHTS.



   (A)   Street lights shall be installed on all streets within the
subdivision, or streets developed in conjunction with the subdivision, in
accordance with municipal standards.



   (B)   All lights shall be installed on metal standards, fixtures and
standards to be approved by the Planning Department and in a layout approved
by the Town Engineer.



   (C)   Lighting for streets within the subdivision shall be at a
level no less than 75% of the intensity recommended in current I.E.S.
standards, and on perimeter streets, at a level no less than 50% of I.E.S.
standards.



   (D)   All of the above improvements shall be installed at the
expense of the developer.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-487)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.260  UTILITIES, ELECTRIC AND TELEPHONE.



   All electric lines, except those of a greater than 69 KVA capacity, and
all telephone lines shall be installed underground unless, upon
recommendation of the Site Plan Review Committee, the Council finds that, due
to subsurface soil conditions, it is impractical to do so. The developer
shall be responsible for the requirements of this section and shall make the
necessary arrangements with each of the public utility companies involved for
the installation of under-ground facilities. Letters from each of the public
utility companies indicating that the arrangements have been made shall be
submitted to the Planning Department at the time the final subdivision plat
is filed.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-488)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.261  TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS.



   All traffic control signs shall be in accordance with the manual on
foregoing, and all stop signs shall be installed at the locations recommended
by the Town Engineer.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-489)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.262  STREET NAMING.



   The developer shall propose the names of streets in a proposed
subdivision subject to approval by the Site Plan Review Committee and the
Police and Fire Departments at the preliminary plat stage.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-490)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.263  AS-BUILT DRAWINGS.



   As-built plans shall be submitted by a registered civil engineer
certifying that all work within the subdivision was constructed in accordance
with the plans and specifications approved by the Council.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-491)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.264  PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS.



   (A)   Local streets.  Local streets within a planned unit
development (PUD) may be either public or private. If they are private, they
shall be built to the following standards:



 


Minimum Width

 

Paving Standards




14 feet 1-way *

 

2 inch AC or double chip over 4 inches ABC or 6 inches DG




24 feet 2-way *

 





* Distance measured from curb-face to curb-face.



 



      (1)   Curbs. As approved by the Council, shall be either
ribbon curb (M.A.G. specifications 220B), single curb (M.A.G. specifications
222 A or B) or roll-type (M.A.G. 220C) map or plat for record, sell any part
of a subdivision or proceed with any improvement or other work on same.



      (2)   Sidewalks.  As required and approved by the Council
shall be built to M.A.G. standard detail 230 if required.



      (3)   Right-of-way width.  Shall be negotiated between the
Commission and the Council but in no case less than eight feet wider than the
pavement width.



   (B)   Public streets.  The following minimum specifications for
public streets shall be applicable:



 




 

Minimum Width

 

Paving Standards




Local streets

 

32 feet *

 

3 inches AC over 8 inches ABC




Collector and/or arterial

 

38 feet *

 

4 inches AC over 10 inches ABC



* Distance measured from curb-face to curb-face.



 



      (1)   Curbs. Roll curb M.A.G. standard detail 220C.



      (2)   Collector and arterial streets.  Vertical curb M.A.G.
standard detail 220A.



   (C)   Sidewalks.  Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of all
public streets.



      (1)   Local streets. Four feet wide, built to M.A.G. standard
detail 230, except the sidewalks may be waived for subdivisions with all lots
of 14,000 square feet or more.



      (2)   Collector and arterial streets.  Five feet wide, except
that a four foot meandering sidewalk may be allowed as approved by the Site
Plan Review Committee, the Commission and the Council.



      (3)   Exception.  These provisions shall not apply in
industrial zoned areas.



      (4)   Improvements.  Where there are existing streets
adjacent to the subdivision, subdivision streets shall be improved to the
intercepting paving line of the existing streets. Temporary dead-end streets
serving more than four lots shall be provided a graded and surfaced temporary
turning circle.



   (D)   Pedestrian ways.  Pedestrian ways shall be constructed with
decomposed granite or similar surface and walk through blocks shall be
constructed to a line and grade approved by the Town Engineer if required.
These pedestrian ways shall be eight feet wide.



   (E)   Street name signs.  Signs shall be placed at all street
intersections and be in place by the time the street pavement is ready for
use. Specifications for design, construction, location and installation shall
be in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for
Streets and Highways as published by the United States Department of
Transportation, Federal Highway Administration and all street name signs
shall be approved by the Town Engineer.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-492)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.265  LOT SPLITS NOT REQUIRING A SUBDIVISION.



   (A)   Lot splits creating three parcels or less, do not require the
submission and approval of preliminary and final plats under this chapter,
provided that:



      (1)   The applicant has met with the Planning Director prior
to submitting and application for a lot split to verify that the proposed lot
split complies with all town regulations;



      (2)   All parcels meet the minimum parcel size of the current
zoning;



      (3)   The proposed lot splits do not create or increase any
new non-conforming structures related to building setbacks;



      (4)   A legal, 25-foot wide access easement, serving three or
fewer parcels has been created, if necessary;



      (5)   The applicant provides all information required by the
town, and has paid all required fees.



   (B)   The Planning Director shall make the determination as to
administrative approval of the lot split application or refer the application
to the planning and zoning commission for approval, approval with conditions,
or denial.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-493)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.266  MINOR SUBDIVISION.



   (A)   Approval of subdivision required.  Until a preliminary plat
and final plat of a subdivision shall have been approved in accordance with
this subchapter, no person proposing a subdivision within the town shall
subdivide or file a record of survey, map or plat for record, or sell any
part of a subdivision, or proceed with any improvement or other work on same.



   (B)   Duties of subdivider.  While a subdivision is in the
preliminary planning stage, the subdivider shall consult the Planning and
Zoning Administrator to determine conformity to the general plan, the
applicable specific plans, the zoning regulations and compliance with the
provisions of these regulations and the requirements for the design and
installation of public improvements as required by the town.



   (C)   Preliminary plat and engineering drawings.  The subdivider
shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision and
other exhibits as specified herein. The Planning and Zoning Department shall
review the preliminary plat and submit its recommendations to the Commission
as specified herein. The Zoning Administrator, or his or her designee, may
administratively approve the preliminary plat if they find that the minor
subdivision meets all requirements of this chapter. If for any reason the
Zoning Administrator, or his or her designee, decides not to administratively
approve the minor subdivision, the approval of the minor subdivision will
follow the same process as approval of a preliminary plat for a major
subdivision.



   (D)   Final plat approval and recording. The subdivider shall cause
to be prepared a final plat as specified in §§ 150.131 through 150.146
which shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved. The
Zoning Administrator, or his or her designee, may administratively recommend
approval of the final plat, and forward the final plat on to Council for its
consideration and approval. If for any reason the Zoning Administrator or his
or her designee decides not to administratively recommend approval of the
final plat, the approval of the final plat will follow the same process as
approval of a final plat for a major subdivision. The approved and executed
copy shall be recorded in the Pinal County Recorder's office after full
compliance with these regulations, and one copy shall be filed with the
Development Services Department and one with the Town Engineer.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-494)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



§ 150.267  SPECIAL SUBMISSION CONDITIONS FOR MINOR SUBDIVISIONS.



   The Zoning Administrator, or his or her designee, may waive certain
submission requirements for minor subdivisions, when, in their judgement, the
unique circumstances of the site do not require the submission of the data
for the accurate review of the minor subdivision, provided; however, that the
Zoning Administrator, or his or her designee, may reduce any requirements for
physical improvements required by this chapter.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. V, § 4-495)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)



DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES



§ 150.280  DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES.



   (A)   Title.  This section shall be known as the Development Impact
Fee Ordinance of the Town of Florence and may be cited herein as “this
section.”



   (B)   Intent and purpose.  This section is adopted for the purpose
of promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the
town by:



      (1)   Requiring new development to pay its proportionate share
of the costs incurred by the town that are associated with providing
necessary public services to new development.



      (2)   Setting forth standards and procedures for creating and
assessing development impact fees consistent with the requirements of A.R.S.
§ 9-463.05.



      (3)   Setting forth procedures for administering the
development impact fee program.



   (C)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different means.  Singular terms shall include their plural.



      APPLICANT.  A person who applies to the Town for a building
permit.



      APPURTENANCE.  Any fixed machinery or equipment, structure or
other fixture, including integrated hardware, software or other components,
associated with a capital facility that are necessary or convenient to the
operation, use, or maintenance of a capital facility, but excluding
replacement of the same after initial installation.



      AQUATIC CENTER.  A facility primarily designed to host
non-recreational competitive functions generally occurring within water,
including, but not limited to, water polo games, swimming meets, and diving
events.  The facility may be indoors, outdoors, or any combination thereof,
and includes all necessary supporting amenities, including but not limited
to, locker rooms, offices, snack bars, bleacher seating, and shade structures.



      BUILDING PERMIT.  Any permit issued by the town that authorizes
vertical construction, increases square footage, authorizes changes to land
use, or provides for the addition of a residential or non-residential point
of demand to a water or wastewater system.



      CAPITAL FACILITY.  An asset having a useful life of three or
more years that is a component of one or more categories of necessary public
service provided by the town.  A capital facility may include any associated
purchase of real property, architectural and engineering services leading to
the design and construction of buildings and facilities, improvements to
existing facilities, improvements to or expansions of existing facilities,
and associated financing and professional services.  Wherever used herein,
INFRASTRUCTURE shall have the same meaning as CAPITAL FACILITIES.



      CATEGORY OF NECESSARY PUBLIC SERVICE.  Any one of the following
types of capital facilities for which the town assesses development impact
fees: road facilities, water facilities, wastewater facilities, park
facilities, library facilities, fire facilities and police facilities.



      CATEGORY OF DEVELOPMENT.  A specific category of residential,
commercial, or industrial land use against which a development impact fee is
calculated and assessed.  The town assesses development impact fees against
the following categories of development: single-family, multi-family.
commercial, institutional and industrial.



      COMMERCIAL LAND USE.  A nonresidential use other than
institutional or industrial as herein defined.  Typical uses include
shopping centers, office buildings, medical offices, banks, hotels, discount
stores, supermarkets, home improvement stores, pharmacies, restaurants, bars,
nightclubs, automobile sales and service, movie theaters, amusement arcades,
bowling alleys, barber shops, laundromats, funeral homes, private vocational
or technical schools, dance studios, health clubs, gasoline station stations,
convenience stores, recording and broadcasting studios, veterinarian clinics
and kennels, and business offices of private companies, utility companies,
trade associations, unions and nonprofit organizations.



      CREDIT.  A reduction in an assessed development impact fee
resulting from developer contributions to, payments for, construction of, or
dedications for capital facilities included in an Infrastructure Improvements
Plan.



      DEVELOPER.  An individual, group of individuals, partnership,
corporation, limited liability company, association, municipal corporation,
state agency, or other person or entity undertaking land development
activity, and their respective successors and assigns.



      DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT.  An agreement prepared in accordance with
the requirements of A.R.S. § 9-500.05, and any applicable requirements of
the Town Code.



      DWELLING UNIT.  A room or group of rooms in a residential
building intended for occupancy as separate living quarters by a person or
household, complete with cooking facilities.



      EQUIPMENT.  Machinery, tools, materials, and other supplies, not
including vehicles, that are needed in conjunction with a capital facility to
provide services, but excluding replacement of the same after initial
development of the capital facility.



      EXCLUDED LIBRARY FACILITY.  Library facilities for which
development impact fees may not be charged pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05,
including that portion of any library facility that exceeds 10,000 square
feet, and equipment, vehicles or appurtenances associated with library
operations.



      EXCLUDED PARK FACILITY.  Park and recreational facilities for
which development impact fees may not be charged pursuant to A.R.S. §
9-463.05, including amusement parks, aquariums, aquatic centers, auditoriums,
arenas, arts and cultural facilities, bandstand and orchestra facilities,
bathhouses, boathouses, clubhouses, community centers greater than 3,000
square feet in floor area, environmental education centers, equestrian
facilities, golf course facilities, greenhouses, lakes, museums, theme parks,
water reclamation or riparian areas, wetlands, or zoo facilities.



      FEE REPORT.  A written report developed pursuant to this section
that identifies the methodology for calculating the amount of each
development impact fee, explains the relationship between the development
impact fee to be assessed and the net cost per service unit calculated in the
Infrastructure Improvements Plan, and which meets other requirements set
forth in A.R.S. § 9-463.05(E).



      FINANCING OR DEBT.  Any debt, bond, note, loan, interfund loan,
fund transfer, or other debt service obligation used to finance the
development or expansion of a capital facility.



      FIRE FACILITIES.  A category of necessary public services that
includes fire stations, fire equipment, fire vehicles and all appurtenances
for fire stations, as well as fire department administrative facilities. 
FIRE FACILITIES does not include vehicles or equipment used to provide
administrative services, or helicopters or airplanes.  FIRE FACILITIES does
not include any facility that is used for training firefighters from more
than one station or substation.



      GENERAL PLAN.  Refers to the overall land use plan for the town
establishing areas of the town for different purposes, zones and activities.



      GROSS FLOOR AREA.  The total area of all floors of a structure
measured from the outside surface of exterior walls, including for example
halls, stairways, and elevator shafts, but excluding enclosed vehicle parking
areas.



      GROSS IMPACT FEE.  The total development impact fee to be
assessed against a subject development on a per unit basis, prior to
subtraction of any credits.



      INDUSTRIAL LAND USE.  An establishment primarily engaged in the
fabrication, assembly or processing of goods, or in the display, storage and
sale of goods to other firms for resale, as well as activities involving
significant movement and storage of products or equipment.  Typical uses
include manufacturing plants, welding shops, wholesale bakeries, dry cleaning
plants, bottling works, wholesale distributors, storage warehouses, moving
and storage firms, trucking and shipping operations and major mail processing
centers.



      INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS PLAN.  A document or series of
documents that meet the requirements set forth in A.R.S. § 9-463.05 to cover
any category or combination of categories of necessary public services.



      INSTITUTIONAL LAND USE.  A governmental, quasi-public or
institutional use, or a non-profit recreational use, not located in a
shopping center.  Typical uses include elementary, secondary or higher
educational establishments, day care centers, hospitals, mental institutions,
nursing homes, assisted living facilities, fire stations, city halls,
courthouses, civic or convention centers, post offices, jails, libraries,
museums, places of religious worship, military bases, airports and bus
stations.



      LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS.  Projections of changes in land uses,
densities, intensities and population for a service area over a period of at
least ten years.



      LEVEL OF SERVICE.  A quantitative and/or qualitative measure of
a category of necessary public service that is to be provided by the town to
development in a particular service area, defined in terms of the
relationship between the capacity or cost of capital facilities and the
demand for those capital facilities.



      LIBRARY FACILITIES.  A category of necessary public services in
which literary, musical, artistic, or reference materials are kept (materials
may be kept in any form of media such as electronic, magnetic, or paper) for
non-commercial use by the public in a facility.  Libraries do not include
excluded library facilities, although a library may contain, provide access
to, or otherwise support an excluded library facility.



      MULTI-FAMILY.  A residential building containing two or more
other dwelling units.



      NECESSARY PUBLIC SERVICES.  Shall have the meaning prescribed in
A.R.S. § 9-463.05(T)(5).



      NET COST PER SERVICE UNIT.  The maximum amount that may be
charged per service unit in a service area for a category of necessary public
services, based on the existing or planned level of service less offsets, as
determined in the Infrastructure Improvements Plan.



      NONRESIDENTIAL LAND USE.  A commercial, institutional or
industrial land use, as herein defined.



      OFFSET.  An amount that is subtracted from the cost per service
unit of providing necessary public services to account for those capital
components of infrastructure, associated debt or existing deficiencies that
will be paid for by a development through taxes, fees (except for development
impact fees) and other revenue sources.



      PARK FACILITIES.  A category of necessary public services
including but not limited to parks, swimming pools and related facilities and
equipment located on real property not larger than 30 acres in area, as well
as up to 30 acres of larger park facilities.  PARK FACILITIES do not include
excluded park facilities, although park facilities may contain, provide
access to, or otherwise support an excluded park facility.



      POLICE FACILITIES.  A category of necessary public services,
including vehicles and equipment, that are used by law enforcement agencies
to preserve the public peace, prevent crime, detect and arrest criminal
offenders, protect the rights of persons and property, regulate and control
motorized and pedestrian traffic, train sworn personnel, and/or provide and
maintain police records, vehicles, equipment, and communications systems. 
POLICE FACILITIES do not include vehicles and equipment used to provide
administrative services, or helicopters or airplanes.  POLICE FACILITIES do
not include any facility that is used for training officers from more than
one station or substation.



      QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL.  Any one of the following:



         (a)   A professional engineer, surveyor, financial
analyst or planner, or other licensed professional providing services within
the scope of that person's education or experience related to town planning,
zoning, or impact development fees and holding a license issued by an agency
or political subdivision of the state;



         (b)   A financial analyst, planner, or other
non-licensed professional that is providing services within the scope of the
person's education or experience related to town planning, zoning, or impact
development fees; or



         (c)   Any other person operating under the supervision
of one or more of the above.



      RESIDENTIAL LAND USE.  A single-family or multi-family use, as
herein defined.



      ROAD FACILITIES.  A category of necessary public services
consisting of town-owned arterial and major collector streets, including
associated traffic signals, rights-of-way, bridges, culverts, storm drains
and other necessary appurtenances.



      SERVICE AREA.  A specified area within the boundaries of the
town or the area served by the town's water or wastewater system within which
the town will provide a category of necessary public services to development
at a planned level of service.  Some or all of the capital facilities
providing service to a service area may be physically located outside of that
service area.



      SERVICE UNIT.  A standardized measure of the demand generated
for a category of necessary public service.



      SINGLE-FAMILY.  A dwelling unit that is not attached to any
other dwelling unit.



      SUBJECT DEVELOPMENT.  A contiguous land area linked by a unified
plan of development.



      SWIMMING POOL.  A public facility primarily designed and/or
utilized for recreational non-competitive functions generally occurring
within water, including, but not limited to, swimming classes, open public
swimming sessions, and recreational league swimming/diving events.  The
facility may be indoors, outdoors, or any combination thereof, and includes
all necessary supporting amenities.



      TOWN.  The Town of Florence, Arizona.



      USEFUL LIFE.  The period of time in which an asset can
reasonably be expected to be used under normal conditions, whether or not the
asset will continue to be owned and operated by the town over the entirety of
such period.



      VEHICLE.  Any device, structure, or conveyance utilized for
transportation in the course of providing a particular category of necessary
public services at a specified level of service, excluding helicopters and
other aircraft.



      WASTEWATER FACILITIES.  A category of necessary public services
consisting of those facilities necessary to provide wastewater service,
including but not limited to sewers, lift stations, reclamation plants,
wastewater treatment plants, and all other facilities for the collection,
interception, transportation, treatment and disposal of wastewater, and any
appurtenances for those facilities, but excluding lines less than ten inches
in diameter.



      WATER FACILITIES.  A category of necessary public services
consisting of those facilities necessary to provide for potable water
service, including the acquisition, supply, transportation, treatment,
purification and distribution of water, and any appurtenances for those
facilities, but excluding water meters and lines of 12 inches in diameter or
less.



   (D)   Applicability.



      (1)   Service areas.  Except as otherwise provided herein,
this section shall apply to all new development within any service area. 
The following service areas are hereby established.



         (a)   The service areas for road, fire, police and
library development impact fees shall each encompass all of the territory
within the corporate limits of the town, as those boundaries may be amended
in the future through annexation.



         (b)   The service area for park development impact fees
shall be the area shown in the figure below.







 



         (c)   The two service areas for the water development
impact fees shall be the areas north and south of the Gila River, shown in
the figure below, as those areas may be expanded in the future through the
extension of town water service.







 



         (d)     The two service areas for the wastewate r
developm ent impact fees shall be the areas north and south of the Gila
River, shown in the figure below, as those areas may be expanded in the
future through the extension of town wastewater service.







 



      (2)   Administration.  The Town Manager or his or her
designee is authorized to make determinations regarding the application,
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this section.



   (E)   Authority.



      (1)   Fee report and implementation.  The town may assess and
collect a development impact fee for costs of necessary public services,
including all professional services required for the preparation or revision
of land use assumptions, Infrastructure Improvements Plan, fee report,
development impact fee, and required reports or audits conducted pursuant to
this section.  Development impact fees shall be subject to the following
requirements:



         (a)   The town shall develop and adopt a fee report that
analyzes and defines the development impact fees to be charged in each
service area for each capital facility category, based on the Infrastructure
Improvements Plan and the net cost per service unit.



         (b)   No development impact fee shall exceed the net
cost per service unit for any category of necessary public services for any
category of development.



         (c)   No development impact fees shall be charged, or
credits issued, for any capital facility that does not fall within one of the
categories of necessary public services for which development impact fees are
assessed by the town.



         (d)   Costs for necessary public services made necessary
by new development shall be based on the same level of service provided to
existing development in the same service area.  Development impact fees may
not be used to provide a higher level of service to existing development or
to meet stricter safety, efficiency, environmental, or other regulatory
standards to the extent that these are applied to existing capital facilities
that are serving existing development.



         (e)   Development impact fees may not be used to pay the
town's administrative, maintenance, or other operating costs.



         (f)   Projected interest charges and financing costs can
only be included in development impact fees to the extent they represent
principal and/or interest on the portion of any financing or debt used to
finance the construction or expansion of a capital facility identified in the
Infrastructure Improvements Plan.



         (g)   All development impact fees charged by the town
must be included in a fee schedule prepared pursuant to this section.



         (h)   All development impact fees shall meet the
requirements of A.R.S. § 9-463.05.



      (2)   Net cost per service unit.  The fee report shall
summarize the costs of capital facilities necessary to serve new development
on a per service unit basis as defined and calculated in the Infrastructure
Improvements Plan, less any required offsets, and shall recommend a
development impact fee structure for adoption by the town.  The actual
impact fees to be assessed shall be adopted in the form of impact fee
schedules.



   (F)   Administration.



      (1)   Separate accounts.  Development impact fees collected
pursuant to this section shall be placed in separate, interest-bearing
accounts for each capital facility category within each service area.



      (2)   Limitations on use of fees.  Development impact fees
and any interest thereon collected pursuant to this section shall be spent to
provide capital facilities associated with the same category of necessary
public services in the same service area for which they were collected,
including costs of financing or debt used by the town to finance such capital
facilities and other costs authorized by this section that are included in
the Infrastructure Improvements Plan.



      (3)   Time limit.  Development impact fees collected after
July 31, 2014 shall be used within ten years of the date upon which they were
collected for all categories of necessary public services except for water
and wastewater facilities.  For water facilities or wastewater facilities
collected after July 31, 2014, development impact fees shall be used within
15 years of the date upon which they were collected. Any funds not so used
shall be subject to refund pursuant to § 150.280(O).  Whether fees paid by
a particular development have been spent shall be determined on a first-in,
first-out basis.



   (G)   Land use assumptions.  The Infrastructure Improvements Plan
shall be consistent with the town's current land use assumptions for each
service area and each category of necessary public services as adopted by the
town pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05.  Prior to the adoption or amendment of
an Infrastructure Improvements Plan, the town shall review and evaluate the
land use assumptions on which the Infrastructure Improvements Plan is to be
based to ensure that the land use assumptions within each service area
conform to the general plan.



   (H)   Infrastructure Improvements Plan.  The Infrastructure
Improvements Plan shall be developed by qualified professionals and may be
based upon or incorporated within the town's Capital Improvements Plan.  The
Infrastructure Improvements Plan shall:



      (1)   Specify the categories of necessary public services for
which the town will impose a development impact fee.



      (2)   Define and provide a map of one or more service areas
within which the town will provide each category of necessary public services
for which development impact fees will be charged.



      (3)   Identify and describe the land use assumptions upon
which the Infrastructure Improvements Plan is based in each service area.



      (4)   Analyze and identify the existing level of service
provided by the town to existing development for each category of necessary
public services in each service area.



      (5)   Identify the level of service to be provided by the town
for each category of necessary public services in each service area.



      (6)   Estimate the total number of existing and future service
units within each service area based on the town's land use assumptions and
projected new service units in each service area.



      (7)   Analyze and identify the projected utilization of any
available excess capacity in existing capital facilities, and the new or
expanded capital facilities that will be required to provide and maintain the
planned level of service in each service area for each category of necessary
public services, resulting from projected new service units for a period not
to exceed ten years.  Nothing in this division shall prohibit the town from
additionally including in its Infrastructure Improvements Plan projected
utilization of, or needs for capital facilities for a period longer than ten
years, provided that the costs of such capital facilities are excluded from
the calculation of the net cost per service unit.



      (8)   Forecast the revenues from taxes, fees, assessments or
other sources that will be available to fund the new or expanded capital
facilities identified in the Infrastructure Improvements Plan, which shall
include estimated state-shared revenue, highway users revenue, federal
revenue, ad valorem property taxes, construction contracting or similar
excise taxes and the capital recovery portion of utility fees attributable to
development based on the approved land use assumptions.



   (I)   Adoption and modification procedures.



      (1)   Adopting or amending the infrastructure improvements
plan.  The Infrastructure Improvements Plan shall be adopted or amended
subject to the following procedures:



         (a)   Major amendments.  Except as provided in division
(b) below, the adoption or amendment of an Infrastructure Improvements Plan
and underlying land use assumptions shall occur according to the following
schedule:



            1.   At least 60 days before the public hearing
regarding a new or updated Infrastructure Improvements Plan, the town shall
provide public notice of the hearing and post the Infrastructure Improvements
Plan and the underlying land use assumptions on its website: the town shall
additionally make available to the public the documents used to prepare the
Infrastructure Improvements Plan and underlying land use assumptions and the
amount of any proposed changes to the net cost per service unit.



            2.   The town shall conduct a public hearing on
the Infrastructure Improvements Plan and underlying land use assumptions.



            3.   Following the public hearing, the town may
amend the Infrastructure Improvements Plan and underlying land use
assumptions,  provided that town  shall  post the amended



Infrastructure Improvements Plan and underlying land use assumptions on its
website and make them available to the public at least 14 days prior to
approval or disapproval.



            4.   The town shall approve or disapprove the
Infrastructure Improvements Plan and underlying land use assumptions at least
30 days, but no more than 60 days, following the public hearing.



         (b)   Minor amendments.  The town may update the
infrastructure improvements plan and/or its underlying land use assumptions
without a public hearing if all of the following apply:



            1.   The changes in the Infrastructure
Improvements Plan and/or the underlying land use assumptions will not add any
new category of necessary public services to any service area.



            2.   The changes in the Infrastructure
Improvements Plan and/or the underlying land use assumptions will not
increase the level of service to be provided in any service area.



            3.   Based on an analysis of the fee report and
the town's adopted development impact fee schedules, the changes in the
Infrastructure Improvements Plan and/or the underlying land use assumptions
would not, individually or cumulatively with other amendments undertaken
pursuant to this section, cause a development impact fee in any service area
to be increased by more than 5% above the development impact fee that is
provided in the current development impact fee schedule.



            4.   At least 30 days prior to the date that the
any amendment pursuant to this section is adopted, the town shall post the
proposed amendments on the town website.



      (2)   Amendments to the fees.  Any adoption or amendment of a
fee report and fee schedule shall occur according to the following schedule:



         (a)   The public hearing on the fees must be held at
least 30 days after the approval of the Infrastructure Improvements Plan as
provided in division (1) above.  The town must give at least 30 days notice
prior to the hearing, provided that this notice may be given on the same day
as the approval of the Infrastructure Improvements Plan.



         (b)   The town shall make the proposed fees available to
the public on the town's website 30 days prior to the public hearing
described in division (2)(a) above.



         (c)   The amended fees may be adopted by the town no
sooner than 30 days, and no later than 60 days, after the hearing described
in division (2)(a) above.



         (d)   The development fee schedules adopted pursuant to
this section shall become effective 75 days after adoption by the town.



   (J)   Required updates.



      (1)   Revising the Infrastructure Improvements Plan.  Except
as provided in division (2) below, not later than every five years the town
shall update the applicable land use assumptions.  Infrastructure
Improvements Plan and fee report related to each category of necessary public
services pursuant to the procedures outlined in division (I).  Such
five-year period shall be calculated from the date of the adoption of the
Infrastructure Improvements Plan.



      (2)   Determination of no changes.  Notwithstanding division
(1) above, if the town determines that no changes to an Infrastructure
Improvements Plan, underlying land use assumptions, or fee report are needed,
the town may elect to continue the existing Infrastructure Improvements Plan
and fee report without amendment by providing notice as follows:



         (a)   Notice of the determination shall be published at
least 180 days prior to the end of the five-year period described in division
(J)(1) of this section.



         (b)   The notice shall identify the Infrastructure
Improvements Plan and fee report that shall continue in force without
amendment.



         (c)   The notice shall provide a map and description of
the service area(s) covered by the Infrastructure Improvements Plan and fee
report.



         (d)   The notice shall identify an address to which any
resident of the town may submit, within 60 days, a written request that the
town update the Infrastructure Improvements Plan, underlying land use
assumptions, and/or fee report and the reasons and basis for the request. 
The town shall consider and respond within 30 days to any timely requests
submitted.



   (K)   Assessment and collection.



      (1)   Assessment.  Development impact fees shall be assessed
on new development according to the provisions of this section and the
following fee schedules.



         (a)   Non-utility fee schedule.  Road, park, fire,
police and library development impact fees shall be assessed according to the
following fee schedule.  Road and fire fees in columns labeled "CFD" apply
to development located within the Merrill Ranch Community Facilities
Districts No. 1 and No. 2.  Road and fire fees in columns labeled "non-CFD"
apply to development located within the town limits but outside the Merrill
Ranch Community Facilities Districts No. 1 and No. 2.  Park fees apply only
to development located within the park service area.  Police and library
fees apply town-wide. Residential land uses shall be assessed per dwelling
unit.  Nonresidential land uses shall be assessed per 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area.



 


 
Road
 

 
Fire
 

 




Land Use

 

non-CFD

 

in CFD

 

Park*

 

non- CFD

 

in CFD

 

Police

 

Library





Single-Family (unit)
 
$2,086
 
$614
 
$1,417
 
$917
 
$607
 
$607
 
$203


Multi-Family (unit)
 
$1,313
 
$403
 
$1,148
 
$743
 
$492
 
$492
 
$164


Commercial (1,000 sf)
 
$3,141
 
$964
 
$170
 
$660
 
$437
 
$437
 
$24


Institutional (1,000 sf)
 
$1,733
 
$532
 
$198
 
$605
 
$401
 
$401
 
$28


Industrial (1,000 sf)
 
$1,015
 
$312
 
$128
 
$202
 
$134
 
$134
 
$18


*applicable to new development in park service area only




 



         (b)   Utility fee schedule.  Water and wastewater
development impact fees shall be assessed according to the following fee
schedule.  Water and wastewater fees apply only to customers of the town's
water and wastewater systems located in the water and wastewater service
areas.  Water and wastewater fees shall not be assessed on property located
within the North Florence Improvement District.  Water and wastewater fees
are based on the size and type of the water meter.  For wastewater customers
that are not also water customers, the wastewater fee shall be based on the
water meter size and type that is appropriate for the customer, as determined
by the Town Engineer.



 


Meter Size

 

Type

 

Water

 

Wastewater






5/8" x 3/4"

 

Disc-Resid.*

 

$1,980

 

$2,140




5/8" x 3/4"

 

Disc-Other

 

$1,980

 

$2,782




1"

 

Disc

 

$4,950

 

$7,062




1 1/2"

 

Disc

 

$9,900

 

$14,338




2"

 

Disc

 

$15,840

 

$22,898




3"

 

Compound

 

$31,680

 

$45,582




3"

 

Turbine

 

$34,650

 

$49,862




4"

 

Compound

 

$49,500

 

$71,262




4"

 

Turbine

 

$59,400

 

$85,600




6"

 

Compound

 

$99,000

 

$142,738




6"

 

Turbine

 

$123,750

 

$178,262




8"

 

Turbine

 

$178,200

 

$256,800




10"

 

Turbine

 

$287,100

 

$413,662




12"

 

Turbine

 

$425,700

 

$613,538



*applicable rate for single-family customers




 



      (2)   Collection. Development impact fees, together with
administrative charges assessed pursuant to division (K)(2)(e) below, shall
be calculated and collected prior to issuance of permission to commence
development; specifically:



         (a)   Unless otherwise specified pursuant to a
development agreement adopted pursuant to this section, development impact
fees shall be paid prior to issuance of a building permit according to the
current development impact fee schedule for the applicable service area(s) as
adopted pursuant to this section, or according to any other development
impact fee schedule as authorized in division (K)(4).



         (b)   If a building permit is not required for the
development, but water or wastewater connections are required, any and all
development impact fees due shall be paid at the time the water service
connection is purchased.  If only a wastewater connection is required, the
development impact fees shall be paid prior to approval of a connection to
the sewer system.



         (c)   No building permit, water or sewer connection, or
certificate of occupancy shall be issued if a development impact fee is not
paid as directed in the previous paragraphs.



         (d)   If the building permit is for a change in the type
of building use, an increase in square footage, a change to land use, or an
addition to a residential or nonresidential point of demand to the water or
wastewater system, the development impact fee shall be assessed on the
additional service units resulting from the expansion or change, and
following the development impact fee schedule applicable to any new use type.



         (e)   For issued permits that expire or are voided,
development impact fees and administrative charges shall be as follows:



            1.   If the original permittee is seeking to renew
an expired or voided permit, and the development impact fees paid for the
development have not been refunded, then the permittee shall pay the
difference between any development impact fees paid at the time the permit
was issued and those in the fee schedule at the time the permit is reissued
or renewed.



            2.   If a new or renewed permit for the same
development is being sought by someone other than the original permittee, the
new permit applicant shall pay the full development impact fees specified in
the fee schedule in effect at the time that the permits are reissued or
renewed.  If the original permittee has assigned its rights under the
permits to the new permit applicant, the new permit applicant shall pay
development impact fees as if it were the original permittee.



      (3)   Exemptions.  Development impact fees shall not be owed
under either of the following conditions:



         (a)   Development impact fees have been paid for the
development and the permit(s) which triggered the collection of the
development impact fees have not expired or been voided.



         (b)   The approvals that trigger the collection of
development impact fees involve modifications to existing development that do
not result in an increase in the number of service units.



      (4)   Temporary exemption from fee increases.  New
developments in the town shall be temporarily exempt from increases in
development impact fees that result from the adoption of new or modified
development impact fee schedules, as follows.



         (a)   Single-family uses.  On or after the day that the
first building permit is issued for a single-family residential development,
the town shall, at the permittee's request, provide the permittee with an
applicable development impact fee schedule that shall be in force for a
period of 24 months beginning on the day that the first building permit is
issued, and which shall expire at the end of the first business day of the
25th month thereafter.  During the effective period of the applicable
development impact fee schedule, any building permit issued for the same
single-family residential development shall not be subject to any new or
modified development impact fee schedule.



         (b)   Nonresidential and multi-family uses.  On or
after the day of approval of a site plan, or if no site plan is required for
the development the approval of the final subdivision plat, for a
nonresidential or multi-family development, the town shall, at the permitee's
request. provide the permittee with an applicable development impact fee
schedule that shall be in force for a period of 24 months beginning on the
day that final development approval of a site plan or final subdivision plat
is given, and which shall expire at the end of the first business day of the
25th month thereafter.  During the effective period of the applicable
development impact fee schedule, any building permit issued for the same
development shall not be subject to any new or modified development impact
fee schedule.



         (c)   Changes to site plans and subdivision plats. 
Notwithstanding the other requirements of this section, if changes are made
to a development's final site plan or subdivision plat that will increase the
number of service units after the issuance of a grandfathered development
impact fee schedule, the town may assess any new or modified development
impact fees against the additional service units.



         (d)   Fee reductions provided.  If the town reduces the
amount of an applicable development impact fee during the period that a
grandfathered development impact fee schedule is in force, the town shall
assess the lower development impact fee.



   (L)   Credits and credit agreements.



      (1)   Eligibility of capital facility.  All development
impact fee credits must meet the following requirements.



         (a)   One of the following is true:



            1.   The capital facility, or the financial
contribution toward the capital facility, that will be provided by the
developer and for which a credit will be issued must be identified in an
adopted Infrastructure Improvements Plan and fee report as a capital facility
for which a development impact fee was assessed: or



            2.   The applicant must demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the town that, given the class and type of improvement, the
subject capital facility should have been included in the Infrastructure
Improvements Plan in lieu of a different capital facility that was included
in the Infrastructure Improvements Plan and for which a development impact
fee was assessed.  If the subject capital facility is determined to be
eligible for a credit in this manner, the town shall amend the Infrastructure
Improvements Plan to (i) include the subject replacement facility and (ii)
delete the capital facility that will be replaced.



         (b)   The subject development is located within the
service area of the eligible capital facility.



         (c)   Credits shall not be available for any
infrastructure provided by a developer if the cost of the infrastructure will
be repaid to the developer by the town through another agreement or
mechanism.  To the extent that the developer will be paid or reimbursed by
the town or an improvement district for any contribution, payment,
construction, or dedication from any town funding source, any credits claimed
by the developer shall be reduced by any amounts to be paid or reimbursed by
the town or improvement district.



      (2)   Calculation of credits.  Credit amounts will be based
on that portion of the costs for an eligible capital facility identified in
the adopted Infrastructure Improvements Plan for which a development fee was
assessed pursuant to the fee report.  If the gross impact fee for a
particular category of necessary public service is adopted at an amount lower
than the net cost per service unit, the amount of any credit shall be reduced
in proportion to the difference between the net cost per service unit and the
gross impact fee adopted.  A credit shall not exceed the actual costs the
applicant incurred in providing the eligible capital facility.  The amount
of the credit shall be determined by the Town Engineer.



      (3)   Application of credits.  Unless otherwise provided in a
development agreement, credits shall be applied to reduce the amount of the
development impact fees otherwise due for the subject development.  Credits
shall be applied on a first-come, first-served basis until the amount of the
credit has been exhausted or the subject development has been completed. 
Credits shall not be transferable to another development.



      (4)   Effective date of credits.  Unless otherwise provided
in a development agreement, credits shall become effective when the amount of
the credit has been determined by the Town Engineer and the improvement,
dedication or financial contribution has been accepted by the town.  Prior
to credits becoming effective, development impact fees for the subject
development shall be due and payable in full, but shall be refunded to the
fee paver in whole or part, as applicable, after the credits become effective.



      (5)   Issuance of credits.  Credits may be issued and applied
toward the gross impact fees due from a development, subject to the following
conditions.



         (a)   Credits issued for an eligible capital facility
may only be applied to the development impact fee due for the applicable
category of necessary public services, and may not be applied to any fee due
for another category of necessary public services.



         (b)   Credits, once issued, may not be rescinded or
reallocated to another permit or parcel, except that credits may be released
for reuse on the same subject development if a building permit for which the
credits were issued has expired or been voided and is otherwise eligible for
a refund under this section.



      (6)   Life of credits.  Unless otherwise provided in a
development agreement, credits must be used within ten years from their
effective date.



   (M)   Development agreements.  Development agreements containing
provisions regarding development impact fees, development impact fee credits,
and/or disbursement of revenues from development impact fee accounts shall
comply with the following provisions.



      (1)   Development agreement required.  A development
agreement is required to authorize any of the following:



         (a)   To issue credits prior to the town's acceptance of
an eligible capital facility, provided that the development agreement
specifically states the form and value of the security (i.e. bond, letter of
credit, and the like) to be provided to the town prior to issuance of any
credits.  The town shall determine the acceptable form and value of the
security to be provided.



         (b)   To transfer credits to a parcel that is within the
same service area but outside the subject development.



         (c)   To reimburse the developer of an eligible capital
facility using funds from development impact fee accounts.  Funds reimbursed
to developers from impact fee accounts for construction of an eligible
capital facility must be utilized in accordance with applicable law for the
use of town funds in construction or acquisition of capital facilities,
including A.R.S. §§ 34-201 et seq.



         (d)   To allocate different credit amounts within a
subject development in a manner other than first-come, first-served.



         (e)   To allow development impact fees for a
single-family residential development to be paid at a later time than the
issuance of a building permit, provided that a development impact fee may not
be paid later than the 15 days after the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy for that dwelling unit. The development agreement shall provide for
the value of any deferred development impact fees to be supported by
appropriate security, including a surety bond, letter of credit, or cash bond.



         (f)   To waive development impact fees.  If the town
agrees to waive any development impact fees assessed on development in a
development agreement, the town shall reimburse the appropriate development
impact fee account for the amount that was waived.



         (g)   To allow the use of credits to extend beyond ten
years of their effective date.



      (2)   General requirements.  All development agreements shall
be prepared and executed in accordance with A.R.S. § 9-500.05 and any
applicable requirements of the Town Code.



      (3)   No obligation.  Nothing in this section obligates the
town to enter into any development agreement or to authorize any type of
credit arrangement permitted by this section.



   (N)   Appeals.  A development impact fee determination by town
staff may be appealed in accordance with the following procedures:



      (1)   Limited scope.  An appeal shall be limited to disputes
regarding the appropriate land use category or other matters relating to the
determination of the number of new service units for a specific development,
or the amount of a credit.



      (2)   Form of appeal.  An appeal shall be initiated on such
written form as the town may prescribe, setting forth, with particularity,
the basis of the protest, the development impact fees involved and the relief
requested.  The appeal shall be filed within 30 days after the determination
was made, in writing and prior to paving the development impact fees.



      (3)   Decision.  The Town Manager shall approve or deny the
protest, in whole or in part, within 60 days after its submittal to the
town.  The Town Manager's determination shall be provided in writing to the
property owner and the Town Council and shall be final unless, within 30 days
after the Town Manager's determination, a majority of the Town Council votes
to hold a public hearing on the appeal. In such case, the Town Council shall
hold a public hearing and shall make a determination within 30 days after the
public hearing.  The decision of the Town Council shall be based on the
applicable provisions of this section, and shall be final.



      (4)   Fees during pendency.  Building permits may be issued
during the pendency of an appeal if the applicant (a) pays the full impact
fee calculated by the town at the time the appeal is filed or (b) provides
the town with financial assurances in the form acceptable to the Town Manager
or authorized designee equal to the full amount of the impact fee.  Upon
final disposition of an appeal, the fee shall be adjusted in accordance with
the decision rendered, and a refund paid if warranted.  If the appeal is
denied by the Town Council, and the applicant has provided the town with
financial assurances, the applicant shall deliver the full amount of the
impact fee to the town within ten days of the final decision on the appeal. 
If the applicant fails to deliver the full amount of the impact fees when
required by this section, the town may draw upon such financial assurance
instrument(s) as necessary to recover the full amount of the impact fees due
from the applicant.



   (O)   Refunds.



      (1)   Generally.  A refund (or partial refund) will be paid
to any current owner of property within the town who submits a written
request to the town and demonstrates that one of the following applies.



         (a)   The permit(s) that triggered the collection of the
development impact fee have expired or been voided prior to the commencement
of the development for which the permits were issued and the development
impact fees collected have not been expended, encumbered, or pledged for the
repayment of financing or debt; or



         (b)   The owner of the subject real property or its
predecessor in interest paid a development impact fee for the applicable
capital facility on or after August 1, 2014, and one of the following
conditions exists:



            1.   The capital facility designed to serve the
subject real property has been constructed, has the capacity to serve the
subject real property and any development for which there is reserved
capacity, and the service which was to be provided by that capital facility
has not been provided to the subject real property from that capital facility
or from any other infrastructure.



            2.   After collecting the fee to construct a
capital facility the town fails to complete construction of the capital
facility within the time period identified in the infrastructure improvements
plan, as it may be amended, and the corresponding service is otherwise
unavailable to the subject real property from that capital facility or any
other infrastructure.



            3.   For a category of necessary public services
other than water or wastewater facilities, any part of a development impact
fee is not spent within ten years of the town's receipt of the development
impact fee.



            4.   Any part of a development impact fee for
water or wastewater facilities is not spent within 15 years of the town's
receipt of the development impact fee.



            5.   The development impact fee was calculated and
collected for the construction cost to provide all or a portion of a specific
capital facility serving the subject real property and the actual
construction costs for the capital facility are less than the construction
costs projected in the infrastructure improvements plan by a factor of 10% or
more.  In this event, the current owner of the subject real property shall,
upon request, be entitled to a refund for the difference between the amounts
of the development impact fee charged for and attributable to the
construction cost and the amount the development impact fee would have been
calculated to be if the actual construction cost had been included in the fee
report.  The refund contemplated by this section shall relate only to the
costs specific to the construction of the applicable capital facility and
shall not include any related design, administrative, or other costs not
directly incurred for construction of the capital facility that are included
in the development impact fee as permitted by A.R.S. § 9-463.05.



      (2)   Earned interest.  A refund of a development impact fee
shall include any interest actually earned on the refunded portion of the
development impact fee by the town from the date of collection to the date of
refund.  All refunds shall be made to the record owner of the property at
the time the refund is paid.



      (3)   Refund to government.  If a development impact fee was
paid by a governmental entity, any refund shall be paid to that governmental
entity.



   (P)   Oversight.



      (1)   Annual report.  Within 90 days of the end of each
fiscal year, the town shall file with the Town Clerk an unaudited annual
report accounting for the collection and use of the fees for each service
area and shall post the report on its website in accordance with A.R.S. §
9-463.05(N) and (O), as amended.



      (2)   Biennial audit.  In addition to the annual report
described in division (1) above, the town shall provide for a biennial,
certified audit of the town's land use assumptions, Infrastructure
Improvements Plan and development impact fees.



         (a)   An audit pursuant to this section shall be
conducted by one or more qualified professionals who are not employees or
officials of the town and who did not prepare the Infrastructure Improvements
Plan.



         (b)   The audit shall review the collection and
expenditures of development fees for each project in the plan and provide
written comments describing the amount of development impact fees assessed,
collected, and spent on capital facilities.



         (c)   The audit shall describe the level of service in
each service area, and evaluate any inequities in implementing the
Infrastructure Improvements Plan or imposing the development impact fee.



         (d)   The town shall post the findings of the audit on
the town's website and shall conduct a public hearing on the audit within 60
days of the release of the audit to the public.



         (e)   For purposes of this section a certified audit
shall mean any audit authenticated by one or more of the qualified
professionals conducting the audit.



(Ord. 598-13, passed 9-16-2013)



TECHNICAL CODES



§ 150.300  CODES ADOPTED.



   (A)   The following publications are adopted by reference.



      (1)   International Building Code, 2006 Edition;



      (2)   International Residential Code, 2006 Edition;



      (3)   International Mechanical Code, 2006 Edition;



      (4)   International Plumbing Code, 2006 Edition;



      (5)   International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 Edition;



      (6)   International Fuel Gas Code, 2006 Edition;



      (7)   International Energy Conservation Code, 2006 Edition;



      (8)   National Electrical Code, 2005 Edition;



      (9)   International Accessible and Usable Buildings and
Facilities Code, 2003 Edition; and



      (10)   International Fire Code, 2006 Edition, including all
Appendices.



   (B)   Addendums and alternatives to International Residential Code,
2006 Edition.



      (1)   Under the authority of IRC Section 104.11, Alternative
Methods, the town will approve a written request to allow the use of the
provisions of the 2000 or 2003 IRC Section 401.3 for drainage designs.



      (2)   Under IRC Section N1103.2.1, the following table shall
be incorporated to allow for trade-off options:



 


Trade-off Options for R-8 Duct Insulation
AC, Insulation and Fenestration Requirements by Component (a)
(CMOD 060366)




Climate Zone 2

 

SEER Rating

 

Duct Insulation (R-Value)

 

Fenestration (c)

 

Insulation R-Value




Uncond Space

 

Floor Trusses (d)

 

U Factor

 

SHGC

 

Wall Cavity

 

Ceiling





IECC (b) Requirement
 
13
 
8
 
6
 
.75
 
.40
 
13
 
30


Option A
 
14
 
6
 
6
 
.75
 
.40
 
13
 
30


Option B
 
13
 
6
 
6
 
.64
 
.35
 
13
 
30


Option C
 
13
 
6
 
6
 
.75
 
.40
 
19
 
30


Option D
 
National energy efficiency programs such as Energy Star, Energy Star Plus,
Engineered for Life, and Environments for Living shall be deemed as meeting
the requirements for energy compliance.  Other methods shall be approved by
the Town Building Official through modification, as stated in Section 404.4
of the 2004 IECC.



Option E

 
13
 
6
 
6
 
Any other combination of fenestration and insulation R-Values where the
annual energy cost is less than or equal to the annual energy cost of the
IECC Requirement. (See IECC Section 404)


(a)   R-values are minimums. U-factors and SHGC are maximums. R-19 shall
be permitted to be compressed into a 2x6 cavity.


(b)   From Table 402.1 in the 2004 IECC Supplement and Table 402.1.1 in
the 2006 IECC.


(c)   The fenestration U-factor column includes skylights. The SHGC column
applies to all glazed fenestration.


(d)   Per the exception to 403.2.1, uninsulated ducts are permitted when
they are located completely inside the building envelope.


Application to existing approved standard plans:


• Plot plan applications must include which option will be utilized.  Town
will note option on permit to be posted on site.


• Options D and E require energy calculations attached to town approved
field set of plans.




 



   (C)   Addendums and alternatives to International Fire Code, 2006
Edition.



      (1)   Under IFC Section 903.2.7 Group R: An automatic fire
sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3 shall be provided
throughout all buildings with a Group R fire area, except this provision
shall not be mandatory for one and two family dwellings.



      (2)   Under IFC Section 903.2.7.1 Group R, Division 4: All
Group R Division 4 occupancies licensed by the Department of Health Services
for more than five residents or day care shall be required to install a
residential fire sprinkler system for the livable area of the building. If
any portion of the patio has livable space directly above the patio, the
patio space shall have fire sprinkler protection below the livable space.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. VII, § 4-556)  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006;
Ord. 475-07, passed 10-15-2007; Ord. 503-09, passed 3-16-2009; Am. Ord.
569-12, passed 1-17-2012)



§ 150.301  BOARD OF APPEALS.



   (A)   Creation, membership, purpose, filing deadline.



      (1)   In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions
or determinations made by the Building Official, or Fire Code Official,
relative to the application and interpretation of the town's adopted
technical codes, there shall be and is hereby created a Board of Appeals (the
"Board"). The Board shall consist of five voting members, who are qualified
by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to building
construction, who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters
pertaining to hazards of fire, explosions, hazardous conditions or fire
protections systems and the town's adopted technical codes. Members shall not
be employees of the town. Members may include persons who reside outside the
boundaries of the town. The Building Official and Fire Code Official shall be
ex officio members of the Board and shall act as secretary to the Board, but
they shall have no vote upon any matter before the Board.



      (2)   The Board is appointed by the Town Council and shall
hold office at the pleasure of the Town Council. The Board shall adopt rules
of procedure for conducting its business.



      (3)   An application for appeal by an aggrieved person shall
be based on a claim that the true intent of the relevant technical code or
the rules legally adopted by the town have been incorrectly interpreted, the
provisions of the code do not fully apply, an equally good or better form of
construction is proposed, or an equivalent method of protection or safety is
proposed. The Board shall provide a means by which aggrieved persons, after
having proceeded through the administrative appeal process, may have a method
by which to appeal said decision or regulations.



      (4)   The administrative appeal is the start of the appeal
process to the town's adopted technical codes. It is a weekly, no fee,
informal procedure in which the applicant and Building Official and/or Fire
Code Official meet to resolve the item under consideration.



      (5)   Appeals to the administrative appeal process or Board of
Appeals are to be made within 20 calendar days from receiving such notice of
a final decision by the Building Official or Fire Code Official, on the form
provided by the Building Official.



   (B)   Powers.



      (1)   The Board may approve the use of alternate materials or
methods of construction; provided the alternate is for the purpose intended
and the equivalent of that prescribed in the town's adopted technical codes
in suitability, strength, effectiveness, fire-resistance, durability, safety,
and sanitation.



      (2)   The Board on request or on its own motion, may provide
reasonable interpretation of the technical provisions of the adopted
technical codes in special cases when it appears that the provisions of the
code are inadequate and do not cover the point in question. TECHNICAL
PROVISIONS shall mean all provisions except the administrative provisions.



      (3)   Any person directly affected by a decision of the
Building Official or Fire Code Official applying to the technical provisions
of the adopted technical codes or to an alternate material or method of
construction may request to appear before the Board.



      (4)   The Board shall have no authority to waive requirements
of the technical codes.



      (5)   Any person directly affected by a decision of the
Building Official or Fire Code Official or a notice or order issued under the
technical codes shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Appeals,
provided that a written application to appeal is filed in the office of the
Town Clerk within 20 days after the decision, notice, or order was served.
Application for appeal shall be based on a claim that: the true intent of the
relevant technical code or the rules legally adopted by the town have been
incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of the code do not fully apply, an
equally good or better form of construction is proposed, or an equivalent
method of protection or safety is proposed. The Board shall have no authority
to waive the requirements of the technical codes.



      (6)   The Board may recommend new legislation to the Town
Council, provided such is consistent therewith.



   (C)   Meetings.



      (1)   General. Upon receipt, in proper form, of the notice of
appeal, the Board shall proceed to hold a public hearing upon the appeal at
which all persons whose property is directly affected and the general public
shall be given an opportunity to be heard.



      (2)   The Town Council will receive and file all minutes of
the Board in a public meeting. The Board's minutes will include all Board
proceedings, showing the vote of each member and all actions taken shall be
kept. Records of its examination, minutes, and other official actions shall
be filed in the office of the Town Clerk and shall be open to public
inspection except as otherwise specifically provided by law.



      (3)   The Board shall hold one regular meeting a month unless
otherwise directed by the Chairman. Special Board meetings may be called by
the Building Official, Fire Code Official, Chairman, or two members of the
Board.



      (4)   Quorum. Three members of the Board shall constitute a
quorum. The affirmative vote of the majority of members present shall be
required for the passage of any matter before the Board.



      (5)   Staying of proceedings. An appeal stays all proceedings
in the matter appealed from, unless the Building Official or Fire Code
Official certifies to the Board that, in his/her opinion by the facts stated
in the certificate, there is reasonable cause that a stay could cause a
hazard or is otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare. Upon
such certification, proceedings shall not be stayed, except by a restraining
order granted by a Court of Record on application and notice to the Building
Official and Fire Code Official.



   (D)   Appointment.



      (1)   General. The Board shall consist of five members
appointed by the Town Council. Members may be made up of qualified persons
serving on town boards or commissions or that may be otherwise qualified
through their profession. Members may include persons who reside outside the
boundaries of the town. Those persons who are currently Board members shall
continue to hold their positions pursuant to the terms and conditions of this
chapter.



      (2)   Officers. The Board shall elect a Chairman and
Vice-Chairman from among its members, neither of whom shall be an ex officio
member. The Chairman (or the acting Chairman in the Chairman's absence or
disqualification) shall have the power to administer oaths and take evidence.



      (3)   Membership of Board. The Board of Appeals shall consist
of five members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on
matters pertaining to building construction and property maintenance and who
are not employees of the town. The Building Official and Fire Code Official
shall be ex-officio members but shall not vote on any matters before the
Board.



      (4)   Term. The term of office of a member shall be staggered
and overlapping four years. The Chairman and Vice-Chairman shall serve for a
one-year period or until their successors are elected.



   (E)   Administrative appeal. Whenever an applicant wishes to appeal
the decision of the Building Official or Fire Code Official because of code
interpretation, unreasonable hardship, special circumstances/conditions that
are not self-imposed, or other acceptable reasons prior to the issuance of a
final Certificate of Occupancy, such no fee appeal may be made to be heard by
the Building Official or Fire Code Official as follows:



      (1)   The applicant shall file a written appeal fully
describing the situation, on or before 12:00 p.m. Friday of each week. The
application shall bear the name, address, and signature of the applicant,
along with a description of the matter in sufficient detail to provide
reasonable notice to the Building Official or Fire Code Official of the
issues to be presented.



      (2)   The appeal will be heard at a regular time to be
specified by the Building Official.



      (3)   The Building Official or Fire Code Official may use a
nonvoting hearing committee consisting of such staff or other technical
persons as she/he deems appropriate.



      (4)   If an appeal is disapproved, the applicant shall comply
with the final decision of the Building Official or Fire Code Official or
make application and pay the applicable fee to appear before the Board of
Appeals. Such application shall be made within 20 days after the Building
Official's, or Fire Code Official's final decision.



   (F)   Board calendar. The Board shall decide on any matter within 20
calendar days after the date of the hearing thereon and such decisions shall
be final.



   (G)   Court review. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Board
may at any time within 30 days after the Board's decision file an appeal with
the Pinal County Superior Court by the various methods of procedure as set
forth by the applicable state statutes.



   (H)   Reapplication. In the event that an appeal is denied or
technically denied by the Board, the Board shall reserve the right to refuse
to consider another appeal on the same subject matter under like
circumstances within one year from the date of hearing of the previous appeal.



   (I)   Executive sessions. Executive sessions of the Board of Appeals
may be held for only those reasons and pursuant to those conditions
authorized by state law, including the town's adopted technical codes. No
executive sessions may be held for the purpose of taking any final action or
making any final decision.



   (J)   Financial. The Board of Appeals shall not incur debts nor make
any purchases or enter into any contracts binding the town.



   (K)   Conflict of interest. Any member of this Board of Appeals who
has a conflict of interest in any matter brought before this Board of
Appeals, shall make known such interest in the minutes of the Board of
Appeals and shall refrain from voting upon or otherwise participating in any
manner in such matter. The existence of conflict of interest shall be
determined by reference to the state law and town codes.



   (L)   Fees. An application to appear before the Board shall be
accompanied by the necessary documents along with the prescribed
non-refundable application fee.



(Ord. 656-17, passed 3-27-2017)



§ 150.999  PENALTY.



   Any person convicted of violating any section of this Development Code
shall be punished by imposition of a fine not to exceed $500, or up to 30
days in jail, or both, unless another penalty is specified. Each day the
violation continues shall constitute a separate offence.



(Prior Code, Ch. 4, Art. I, § 4-5(a))  (Ord. 432-06, passed 6-19-2006)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2018 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




CHAPTER 151:  FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS



Section



   151.01   National Flood Insurance Program



 



   151.99   Penalty



§ 151.01  NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM.



   (A)   The Town Manager, or designee, is appointed as the Floodplain
Administrator for the town and will serve as the community point of contact
on National Flood Insurance Program issues.



   (B)   The special flood hazard areas identified by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled
"The Flood Insurance Study (F1S) for Pinal County, Arizona and Incorporated
Areas, dated December 4, 2007," with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps
(FIRMs) dated December 4, 2007, and all subsequent amendments and/or
revisions, are declared to be the minimum area of applicability of the
floodplain management regulations and may be supplemented by studies for
other areas as allowed in the regulations.



   (C)   The certain document, which is adopted by reference, entitled
"Floodplain Management Regulations for the Town of Florence, Arizona," dated
March 2016, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, shall be used to
manage and regulate the floodplains within the town.



(Ord. 463-07, passed 8-6-2007; Ord. 491-08, passed 11-17-2008; Ord. 645-16,
passed 3-7-2016)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.99  PENALTY.



   Violations of § 151.01 shall be punishable by a fine in the amount of
$2,500 plus assessments required by state law and up to six months in jail,
or both.



(Ord. 463-07, passed 8-6-2007; Ord. 491-08, passed 11-17-2008)



CHAPTER 152:  MEDICAL MARIJUANA



Section



   152.01   Legislative findings and purpose



   152.02   Definitions



   152.03   Conditional use permit and zoning clearance



   152.04   Distance separation requirements



   152.05   Security plan



   152.06   Dispensary hours of operation



   152.07   Additional conditions and standards



   152.08   Supplemental materials



   152.09   Prohibited activities: no non-conforming uses



   152.10   No town liability; indemnification



   152.11   Other laws remain applicable



§ 152.01  LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter are intended to acknowledge and
protect the rights of qualifying patients and their designated caregivers
under the provisions of A.R.S §§ 36-2801 et seq., while also protecting the
health, safety, and welfare of the public; through implementation of local
codes and regulations; and curtailing to the extent reasonably possible, the
possession, use, distribution, or cultivation of marijuana for unlawful
purposes by:



      (1)   Requiring that medical marijuana businesses, operations
and facilities be operated in a manner that minimizes potential health and
safety risks and mitigates the negative impacts that a medical marijuana
dispensary or cultivation operation might have on surrounding properties and
persons;



      (2)   Regulating the conduct of persons owning, operating and
using medical marijuana dispensaries and cultivation facilities in order to
protect the public health, safety and welfare; and



      (3)   Regulating the location and operation of medical
marijuana dispensaries, cultivation facilities and medical marijuana
operations.



   (B)   By adoption of this chapter, the Town Council does not intend
to authorize or make legal any act that is not permitted under federal or
state law.



(Ord. 554-11, passed 3-21-2011)



§ 152.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CULTIVATION.  The process by which a person grows a marijuana plant(s)
as allowed by A.R.S. §§ 36-2801 et seq., and the Department rules and
regulations.



   DEPARTMENT.  The Arizona Department of Health Services or its
successor agency.



   DEPARTMENT RULES AND REPUTATIONS.  The adopted regulations of the
Department relating to the provisions of Arizona Revised Statutes, A.R.S.
§§ 36-2801 et seq., currently in existence and as adopted in the future.



   DESIGNATED CAREGIVER.  A person, other than qualifying patient and the
patient’s physician, who, pursuant to A.R.S. §§ 36-2801 et seq. and the
Department rules and regulations, assists no more than five registered
qualifying patients with the medical use of marijuana.



   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT.  Any establishment having a fixed place of
business where massages are administered for pay, including but not limited
to massage parlors, sauna baths and steam baths. This definition shall not be
construed to include a hospital, nursing home, or the office of a physician,
surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, or duly licensed physical therapist or
barbershops or beauty salons in which massages are administered only to the
scalp, face, neck or shoulders.



   MEDICAL MARIJUANA.  Marijuana or cannabis, including all parts of any
plant of the genus cannabis whether growing or not, and the seeds of such
plant, approved under state law for treatment of persons suffering from
debilitating medical conditions as designated in A.R.S. §§ 36-2801 et seq.,
the Department rules and regulations, and other laws and regulations of the
State of Arizona.



   MEDICAL MARIJUANA DESIGNATED CAREGIVER CULTIVATION LOCATION.  An
enclosed, locked facility such as a closet, room, greenhouse or other
building that does not exceed 250 square feet of cultivation space where a
designated caregiver, as designated by A.R.S. §§ 36-2801 et seq..
Department rules and regulations, cultivates medical marijuana. A designated
caregiver cultivation location within a residential zoning district must be
an accessory use to the qualifying caregiver’s primary residence. Medical
marijuana cultivation as an accessory use to the qualifying caregiver’s
primary residence must not be detectable from the exterior of the building in
which the cultivation takes place. Medical marijuana cultivation as an
accessory use to the qualifying caregiver’s primary residence shall only be
permitted if the residence is located at least 25 miles from a medical
marijuana dispensary.



   MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY.  A building, dwelling, structure or
premises used to acquire, possess, cultivate, manufacture, deliver, transfer,
transport, sell, distribute, transmit, give, dispense or otherwise provide
medical marijuana in any manner to patients or designated caregivers pursuant
to the authority contained in A.R.S. §§ 36-2801 et seq., Department rules
and regulations, or other implementing state statutes and administrative
regulations. May be known also as dispensary within this chapter.



   MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY OFFSITE CULTIVATION LOCATION.  A
building, dwelling, structure, or premises used for the cultivation or
storage of medical marijuana that is the additional location where marijuana
is cultivated by a medical marijuana dispensary as designated in A.R.S. §§
36-2801 et seq. or Department rules and regulations.



   MEDICAL MARIJUANA INFUSION FACILITY.  A facility that incorporates
medical marijuana (cannabis) by the means of cooking, blending, or
incorporation into consumable/edible goods.



   MEDICAL MARIJUANA OPERATION.  Any person acting alone or in concert
with another person, whether for barter, reimbursement, profit or not for
profit, who cultivates, grows, harvests, processes, packages, transports,
displays, sells, dispenses or otherwise distributes the stalks, stems, roots,
seeds, leaves, buds or flowers of any plant of the genus cannabis, or any
mixture or preparation thereof, and medical marijuana for medical use as
authorized by A.R.S. §§ 36-2801 et seq. This definition shall be construed
to include, but is not limited to, the following: a) medical marijuana
dispensaries; b) medical marijuana offsite cultivation locations; c) medical
marijuana infusion facilities; and d) any other operation involving medical
marijuana registered with the Department: all as designated in A.R.S. §§
36-2801 et seq., the Department rules and regulations, or other implementing
state statutes and administrative regulations. This definition does not
include medical marijuana operations that may be exempt from local zoning
regulations per the Arizona Medical Marijuana Act.



   MEDICAL MARIJUANA PARAPHERNALIA.  All equipment, products and
materials of any kind, which is used, intended for use, or designed for use
in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing,
analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body
a controlled substance, including medical marijuana. May be known also as
paraphernalia within this chapter.



   MEDICAL MARIJUANA QUALIFYING PATIENT CULTIVATION LOCATION.  An
enclosed, locked facility such as a closet, room, greenhouse or other
building that does not exceed 50 square feet of cultivation space where a
qualifying patient, as defined in A.R.S. §§ 36-2801 et seq., or Department
rules and regulations, cultivates medical marijuana. The qualifying patient
cultivation location must be an accessory use to the qualifying patient’s
primary residence. Medical marijuana cultivation as an accessory use to the
qualifying patient’s primary residence must not be detectable from the
exterior of the building in which the cultivation takes place. Medical
marijuana cultivation as an accessory use to the qualifying patient’s
primary residence shall only be permitted if the residence is located at
least 25 miles from a medical marijuana dispensary.



   PARK.  Any public or private land available for recreational,
educational, cultural, or aesthetic use.



   PATIENT.  A person who has a debilitating medical condition as defined
in A.R.S. §§ 36-2801 et seq. and is a registered qualifying patient as
defined by state law and the Department rules and regulations.



   PERSON.  A natural person or business entity such as. without
limitation, a corporation, association, firm, joint venture, estate, trust,
business trust, syndicate, fiduciary, partnership or any group or combination
thereof.



   PLACE OF WORSHIP OR RELIGIOUS ASSEMBLY.  Buildings or facilities used
for the purpose of conducting religious services, worship and related
educational, cultural, and social activities.



   PREMISES.  The entire parcel of property upon which a medical
marijuana dispensary, medical marijuana cultivation facility or any other
medical marijuana operation is located.



   SCHOOL.  Any building, portion of building, or group of buildings
which is designed, constructed, or used for education or instruction in any
branch of knowledge, including tutoring centers, day care centers, and the
following types of schools:



      (1)   CHARTER SCHOOL.  A school operating under sponsorship
of a public school district governing board, the State Board of Education or
the State Board for Charter Schools and has been created pursuant to A.R.S.
§ 15-181.



      (2)   INSTRUCTIONAL SCHOOL.  A public or private school
providing domestic, recreational, and other types of instruction such as
dance, gymnastics, cooking, music, martial arts (without fitness center
equipment), and fine arts.



      (3)   PRIVATE SCHOOL.  Any building, portion of building, or
group of buildings used for elementary, secondary or higher education that
does not secure the major part of its funding from a governmental agency.



      (4)   PUBLIC SCHOOL.  Any building, portion of building, or
group of buildings used for elementary, secondary or higher education that
secures the major part of its funding from a governmental agency.



      (5)   VOCATIONAL SCHOOL.  An institution which teaches
trades, business courses, hairdressing and similar skills on a post-secondary
level.



   SENSITIVE USES.  Includes the following uses: school; public or
private recreation center; park; public library; place of worship; massage
establishment; sexually oriented business; or teen club.



   SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT.  Includes the following
Town Zoning Districts: R1-6, R-2, MHS, RV Overlay or any of the
aforementioned districts within the parameters of a PUD.



   TEEN CLUB.  An enclosed or unenclosed structure which is open to
persons from 15 through 20 years of age unaccompanied by adults at which
music is furnished for the purpose of social dancing, and at which a person
15 through 20 years of age pays an admission, membership dues, or a minimum
fee or cover charge, whether or not admission is limited to members only.
This definition shall be construed to include the enclosed or unenclosed
structure and the surrounding premises used for parking and any activity
related to the dancing operation.



   ZONING CLEARANCE.  The issuance of a permit, certificate or
authorization by the Zoning Administrator, or designee, indicating that a
proposed building, structure, or use of land for a medical marijuana
operation meets all of the standards, criteria, procedures, and requirements
contained in this chapter.



(Ord. 554-11, passed 3-21-2011)



§ 152.03  CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT AND ZONING CLEARANCE.



   (A)   Conditional use permit. All medical marijuana operations,
including medical marijuana designated caregiver cultivation locations,
medical marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation locations, medical marijuana
dispensaries and medical marijuana infusion facilities shall require the
approval of a conditional use permit as set forth in this chapter; applicable
Development Code sections § 150.047 District Use Regulations Tables, §
150.061 Highway Business Commercial (B-2) and § 150.065 Light Industrial
(Ll); and pursuant to additional criteria outlined in the Development Code,
including § 150.015 Conditional Use Permits.



   (B)   Zoning clearance. All medical marijuana operations, including
medical marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation locations, medical marijuana
dispensaries and medical marijuana infusion facilities shall require a zoning
clearance. Compliance with all applicable Town Code requirements. including
but not limited to: fees, timelines, submittal requirements, security plans
and site plans shall be considered in the zoning clearance process. An annual
zoning compliance certification signed by the owner of the premises and
responsible person for medical marijuana operations shall be required and
must be renewed prior to the anniversary date of the issuance of the original
conditional use permit. It shall be the owner/operator’s responsibility to
remain in compliance with all applicable requirements, including clearance
renewal requirements.



   (C)   Compliance with state law and department rules and
regulations. Failure to comply with A.R.S. §§ 36-2801 et seq., or
department rules and regulations or other implementing state statutes and
administrative regulations, shall be grounds for revocation of a conditional
use permit and zoning clearance.



(Ord. 554-11, passed 3-21-2011)



§ 152.04  DISTANCE SEPARATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All medical marijuana dispensaries, medical marijuana
dispensary offsite cultivation locations and medical marijuana infusion
facilities shall meet the following minimum location requirements:



      (1)   No medical marijuana dispensary, medical marijuana
dispensary offsite cultivation location or medical marijuana infusion
facility shall be operated or maintained within 2,640 feet of another medical
marijuana dispensary, medical marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation
location or medical marijuana infusion facility.



      (2)   No medical marijuana dispensary, medical marijuana
dispensary offsite cultivation location or medical marijuana infusion
facility shall be operated or maintained within 660 feet of any sensitive
uses within the corporate limits of Florence. This distance separation
provision is not applicable for cases where the aforementioned uses are
separated by a state highway, except as governed by the “Arizona Medical
Marijuana Act” and applicable state statutes.



      (3)   No medical marijuana dispensary, medical marijuana
dispensary offsite cultivation location or medical marijuana infusion
facility shall be operated or maintained within 660 feet of a boundary of a
single-family residential zoning district within the corporate limits of
Florence. This distance separation provision is not applicable for cases
where the aforementioned uses are separated by a state highway, except as
governed by the “Arizona Medical Marijuana Act” and applicable state
statutes.



   (B)   For purposes of this section, the distance limitations shall
be measured as the shortest horizontal line between the property lines of the
relevant properties involved. This measurement shall include any public
right-of-way that is adjacent and connected to the recorded lot lines of the
relevant properties involved in the measurement.



(Ord. 554-11, passed 3-21-2011)



§ 152.05  SECURITY PLAN.



   A security plan for all medical marijuana operations shall be submitted
to town incorporating and detailing the following elements.



   (A)   Exterior lighting.



   (B)   Security alarm system.



   (C)   Building security measures.



   (D)   Interior floor plan.



   (E)   Exterior site and parking plan.



   (F)   A secure storage area.



(Ord. 554-11, passed 3-21-2011)



§ 152.06  DISPENSARY HOURS OF OPERATION.



   Medical marijuana dispensary hours of operation shall be no earlier
than 8:00 a.m. and no later than 8:00 p.m.



(Ord. 554-11, passed 3-21-2011)



§ 152.07  ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS AND STANDARDS.



   The following provisions shall govern the issuance of conditional use
permits and zoning clearances for medical marijuana operations, including
medical marijuana designated caregiver cultivation locations, medical
marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation locations, medical marijuana
dispensaries, and medical marijuana infusion facilities by the Zoning
Administrator and Town Council.



   (A)   All activity related to medical marijuana operations shall be
conducted in compliance with 36 A.R.S. §§ 36-2801 et seq., Department rules
and regulations, and other implementing state statutes and administrative
regulations.



   (B)   All activity related to medical marijuana operations including
but not limited to cultivating, growing, processing, displaying, selling and
storage, shall be conducted indoors and in a permanent building and may not
be located in a trailer, cargo container or motor vehicle.



   (C)   Medical marijuana operations shall not be allowed as home
occupations.



   (D)   Medical marijuana operations shall not have drive-through
service.



   (E)   Sufficient measures and means of preventing smoke, odors,
debris, dust fluids and other substances from exiting a dispensary or
cultivation facility must be provided at all times. In the event that any
odors, debris, dust, fluids or other substance exit a dispensary or
cultivation facility, the owner of the premises shall be jointly and
severally liable for such conditions and shall be responsible for immediate,
full clean-up and correction of such condition.



   (F)   Offsite delivery of medical marijuana is prohibited.



   (G)   Consumption of marijuana on the premises is prohibited.



   (H)   Medical marijuana operations shall obtain and display current
applicable business licenses, certificates and registrations.



   (I)   Facilities shall not be larger than 2,500 square feet for a
dispensary and 3,000 square feet for a cultivation location.



   (J)   No retail sales of paraphernalia are permitted at a
dispensary, except as permitted by law to patients or registered designated
caregivers.



   (K)   Retail sales of medical marijuana are prohibited.



(Ord. 554-11, passed 3-21-2011)



§ 152.08  SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIALS.



   (A)   The minimum requirements of this subpart requiring
supplemental materials shall apply to all medical marijuana dispensary and
medical marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation uses located in any zoning
district.



   (B)   In addition to the other application reguirements. an
applicant for any medical marijuana dispensary or medical marijuana
dispensary offsite cultivation location conditional use permit shall provide
the following:



      (1)   A notarized authorization executed by the property
owner, acknowledging and consenting to the proposed use of the property as a
medical marijuana dispensary or medical marijuana dispensary offsite
cultivation location, as applicable;



      (2)   The legal name of the medical marijuana dispensary or
medical marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation location;



      (3)   If the application is for a medical marijuana dispensary
offsite cultivation location, the name and location of the medical marijuana
dispensary with which it is associated;



      (4)   The name, address, and birth dates of each officer and
board member of the nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary;



      (5)   The name, address, birth date, and valid registry
identification card for each nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary agent;



      (6)   A copy of the operating procedures adopted in compliance
with A.R.S. §§ 36-2801 et seq., and department rules and regulations;



      (7)   A notarized certification that none of the nonprofit
medical marijuana dispensary officers or board members has been convicted of
any of the following offenses:



         (a)   A violent crime as defined in A.R.S. §
13-901.03(B) that were classified as a felony in the jurisdiction where the
person was convicted;



         (b)   A violation of state of federal controlled
substance law that was classified as a felony in the jurisdiction where the
person was convicted except an offense for which the sentence, including any
term of probation, incarceration of supervised release, was completed ten or
more years or an offense involving conduct that would be immune from arrest,
prosecution or penalty under A.R.S. § 36-2811 except that the conduct
occurred before the effective date of that statute or was prosecuted by an
authority other than the state of Arizona; and



      (8)   A notarized certification that none of the non-profit
medical marijuana dispensary officers or board members has served as an
officer or board member for a medical marijuana dispensary that has had its
registration certificate revoked.



(Ord. 554-11, passed 3-21-2011)



§ 152.09  PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES; NO NON-CONFORMING USES.



   (A)   Any medical marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation location
not associated with a medical marijuana dispensary is prohibited, and only
one medical marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation location shall be
permitted for the single medical marijuana dispensary with which it is
associated.



   (B)   No medical marijuana operation or use which purports to have
cultivated or dispensed medical marijuana prior to the enactment of this
chapter shall be deemed to have been a legally established use under the
provisions of this chapter and such medical marijuana operation and use shall
not be entitled to claim legal non-conforming status.



   (C)   Medical marijuana dispensaries and cultivation operations may
not be co-located with facilities used to prepare, produce or assemble food,
whether for medical or non-medical purposes.



   (D)   No medical marijuana or paraphernalia shall be displayed or
kept in a dispensary or cultivation facility so as to be visible from outside
the premises.



   (E)   If the state prohibits medical marijuana dispensaries or
cultivation, any conditional use permit and zoning clearance shall be deemed
immediately revoked by operation of law.



(Ord. 554-11, passed 3-21-2011)



§ 152.10  NO TOWN LIABILITY: INDEMNIFICATION.



   (A)   By accepting a conditional use permit pursuant to this code,
the applicant waives and releases the town, its officers, elected officials,
employees, attorneys and agents from any liability for injuries, damages or
liabilities of any kind that result from any arrest or prosecution of
dispensary or cultivation owners, operators, employees, clients or customers
for a violation of state or federal laws, rules or regulations.



   (B)   By accepting a conditional use permit pursuant to this code,
all permit holders, jointly and severally if more than one, agree to
indemnify, defend and hold harmless the town, its officers, elected
officials, employees, attorneys, agents, insurers and self-insurance pool
against all liability, claims and demands on account of any injury, loss, or
damage, including, without limitation, claims arising from bodily injury,
personal injury, sickness, disease, death, property loss or damage or any
other loss of any kind whatsoever arising out of or are in any manner
connected with the operation of the medical marijuana operation that is the
subject of the conditional use permit.



(Ord. 554-11, passed 3-21-2011)



§ 152.11  OTHER LAWS REMAIN APPLICABLE.



   (A)   The issuance of any conditional use permit pursuant to this
chapter shall not be deemed to create an exception, defense or immunity to
any person in regard to any potential criminal liability the person may have
for the cultivation, possession, sale, distribution or use of marijuana.



   (B)   To the extent the state or department has adopted or adopts in
the future any additional or stricter law or regulation governing the sale or
distribution of medical marijuana, the additional stricter regulation shall
control the establishment or operation of any medical marijuana operation in
the town. Compliance with any applicable state law or regulation shall be
deemed an additional requirement for issuance or denial of any conditional
use permit or zoning clearance under this code, and noncompliance with any
applicable state law or regulation shall be grounds for revocation or
suspension of any conditional use permit or zoning clearance issued hereunder.



(Ord. 554-11, passed 3-21-2011)



