10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 1/240
PREFACE
This Town Code of the Town of Snowflake, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including
Ordinance 2018-01, passed August 7, 2018. Ordinances of the Town adopted after said ordinance
supersede the provisions of this Town Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent
therewith. Consult the Town office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code
has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
TOWN OF SNOWFLAKE ORDINANCE NO. 133
AN ORDINANCE OF THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF SNOWFLAKE,
ARIZONA, ADOPTING THE "TOWN OF SNOWFLAKE TOWN CODE" BY REFERENCE AND
PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF
ENACTMENTS:
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and Council of the TOWN OF SNOWFLAKE,
Arizona, as follows:
Section 1
The certain document known as the " Town of Snowflake Town Code", three copies of which are on
file in the office of the town clerk of the Town of Snowflake, Arizona, which document was made a
public record by Resolution No. 303 of the Town of Snowflake, Arizona, is hereby referred to, adopted
and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this ordinance.
Section 2
Unless otherwise specifically provided herein, any person found guilty of violating any provision of this
Code shall be guilty of a class one misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by
fine not to exceed $2,500.00, or by imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months or by both such fine
and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as
herein above described.
Section 3
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance or any part of
the Code adopted herein by reference, are hereby repealed.
Section 4
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 2/240
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this ordinance or any part of the
Code adopted herein by reference, is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the
decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions thereof.
Section 5
Whereas, it is necessary for the preservation of peace, health, and safety of the Town of Snowflake,
Arizona, an emergency is declared to exist and this ordinance shall be effective immediately upon its
passage and adoption.
PASSED AND ADOPTED this 26th day of August, 1997, by the Mayor and Council of the TOWN OF
SNOWFLAKE, Arizona.
Title 1
ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 1
OFFICIAL TOWN CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the Town Council, this Town Code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter
constitute the official Town Code of Snowflake, Arizona. This Town Code of ordinances shall be known
and cited as the SNOWFLAKE TOWN CODE and is hereby published by authority of the Town
Council and shall be supplemented to incorporate the most recent legislation of the Town as provided
in Section 1-1-3 of this Chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall be
understood to refer to the position of the same number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and
to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made
to this Town Code by title in any legal documents. (1997 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The Town Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof
in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this State as the ordinances of the Town of general and
permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in Section 1-2-1 of this Title. (1997
Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 3/240
Any ordinance amending the Town Code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the
section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory
requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this Town Code. All
such amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately inserted in their proper place in
each copy of this Town Code. Each such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be
inserted in each individual copy of the Town Code. (1997 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section
or any page of this Town Code in such a manner that the meaning of any phrase or order may be
changed or omitted. Replacement pages may be inserted according to the official instructions when so
authorized by the Town Council. (1997 Code)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
A. All general ordinances of the Town passed prior to the adoption of this Town Code are hereby
repealed, except such as are included in this Town Code or are by necessary implication herein
reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and
excluding the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances;
appropriation ordinances; assessment ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries, annexations
and dedications; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the
issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; fee ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or
vacating streets, alleys or other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances;
ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by
or from the Town; the continued existence and operation of any department, agency, commission
or office heretofore legally established or held; and all special ordinances.
B. The repeal of the ordinances as provided in subsection A of this Section, shall not affect any debt
or fee which is accrued, any duty imposed, any penalty incurred, nor any action or proceeding
commenced under or by virtue of the ordinances repealed or the term of office of any person
holding office at the time these ordinances take effect; nor shall the repeal of any ordinance have
the effect of reviving any ordinance heretofore repealed or superseded. (1997 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the
conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this
Town Code or by virtue of the preceding Section, excepting as the Town Code may contain provisions
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 4/240
for such matters, in which case, this Town Code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or
ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1997 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
A. No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance whether such former
ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense committed against such former ordinance
or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or
claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act
so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred or any right accrued
or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter
shall conform to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any provision of a new ordinance, such
provision may be, by consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the
new ordinance takes effect.
B. This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal
is in the ordinance making any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
C. Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or
by virtue of any general ordinance of the Town herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new
enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person,
firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the Town under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this Town Code. (1997 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
A. General: If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this
Town Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective
by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this Code, or any part thereof. The Town Council hereby declares that it
would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions,
paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective.
(1997 Code)
B. Conflicting Provisions: If the provisions of different chapters of this Code conflict with or contravene
each other, the provisions of each chapter shall prevail as to all matters and questions growing out
of the subject matter of such chapter. A particular provision shall prevail over a general provision
covering the same subject matter. (1986 Code § 1-4-3; 1997 Code)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 5/240
Chapter 3
DEFINITIONS
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
A. The rules and the definitions set forth in this Chapter shall be observed in the construction of this
Code and the ordinances of the Town, unless such construction would be inconsistent with either
the manifest intent of the Town Council, the context of this Code, or the ordinances of the Town.
(1986 Code § 1-2)
B. Whenever any word in any section of this Town Code importing the plural number is used in
describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any single matter, party or person shall
be deemed to be included, although distributive words may not have been used. When any subject
matter, party or person is referred to in this Town Code by words importing the singular number
only, or a particular gender, several matters, parties or persons and the opposite gender and
bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of construction shall
not be applied to any section of this Town Code which contains any express provision excluding
such construction or where the subject matter or context may be repugnant thereto.
C. The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the Town has been changed in the content of
this Town Code to "Title", "Chapter", "Section" and/or "subsection" or words of like import for
organizational and clarification purposes only. Such change to the Town's ordinances is not meant
to amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1997 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS1, GENERAL:
All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved
usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such
peculiar and appropriate meaning.
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall have such meanings herein
ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either expressly or by
implication.
CODE: The Town Code of the Town of Snowflake, Arizona, unless the context indicates otherwise.
COUNCIL: Unless otherwise indicated, the Town Council of the Town of Snowflake, Arizona.
DAY: The period of time between any midnight and the midnight following.
DAYTIME, NIGHTTIME: Daytime is the period of time between sunrise and sunset. Nighttime is the
period of time between sunset and sunrise.
DEPARTMENT, BOARD OR EMPLOYEE: Whenever any department, board, commission, office,
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 6/240
officer or employee is referred to, it shall mean a department, board, commission, office, officer or
employee of the Town, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
FEE: A sum of money charged by the Town for the carrying on of a business, profession or
occupation.
GENDER: A word importing either the masculine or feminine gender only shall extend and be applied
to the other gender and to persons.
IN THE TOWN, WITHIN THE TOWN: Shall mean and include all territory over which the Town now
has, or shall hereafter acquire, jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory
powers.
JOINT AUTHORITY: All words purporting to give a joint authority to three (3) or more Town officers or
other persons, shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other
persons, unless it shall be otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the authority.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
MONTH: A calendar month.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any act or activity
creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of inhabitants of the Town, or any activity
which by its perpetuation can reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a
person or persons within the community.
OATH: Includes affirmation or declaration.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or any
part of such building or land whether alone or with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of any act required by the
provisions of this Code.
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common,
joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, government
or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence
of rights in action and all written instruments by which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property
is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right
or interest therein.
PRECEDING, FOLLOWING: Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY: Shall include real and personal property.
REAL PROPERTY: Shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods,
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 7/240
merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other property.
SHALL HAVE BEEN: Includes past and future cases.
SHALL, MAY: Shall is mandatory and may is permissive.
SIGNATURE OR SUBSCRIPTION BY MARK: Includes a mark when the signer cannot write, such
signer's or subscriber's name being written near the mark by a witness who writes his own name near
the signer's or subscriber's name; but a signature or subscription by mark can be acknowledged or
can serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement only when two (2) witnesses so sign
their own names thereto.
STATE: The State of Arizona.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public squares, public places
and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or any
part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
TENSES: The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future includes the present.
TIME: A. Computation: The time within which an act is to be done as provided in this Code or in any
order issued pursuant to any ordinance, when expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the
first day and including the last, except that if the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or holiday it shall be
excluded; and when such time is expressed in hours, the whole of Saturday, Sunday or a holiday, from
midnight to midnight, shall be excluded.
B. Reasonable: In all cases where any section of this Code shall require any act to be done in a
reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, such reasonable time or notice shall be
deemed to mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of such duty
or compliance with such notice.
TOWN: The Town of Snowflake, Arizona.
WEEK: Consists of seven (7) consecutive days.
WHOLESALER: The terms "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this Code, unless
otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles
or things to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITING: Includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual
means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this Code, it
shall be made in writing in the English language unless it is expressly provided otherwise.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters,
but when the written signature of any person is required by law to any official or public writing or bond,
it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case such person is unable to write, by such
person's proper mark.
YEAR: A calendar year, except where otherwise provided. (1986 Code § 1-3; 1997 Code)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 8/240
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of the Town Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate
the content of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor be
deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions
of any division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any
of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. (1997 Code)
Footnote 1: State law reference: For definitions and construction of statutes generally, A.R.S. § 1-211
through 1-215.
Chapter 4
GENERAL PENALTY
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
A. Misdemeanor: Any person found guilty of violating any provisions of this Code, except as otherwise
provided in this Code, shall be guilty of a Class One misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof
shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) or by
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as hereinabove
described.
B. Petty Offense: A petty offense shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00).
C. Civil Traffic: Any violation of or failure or refusal to do or perform any act required by Title 6 of this
Code constitutes a civil traffic violation. Civil traffic violations are subject to the provisions of title
28, chapter 6, article 19 of the Arizona Revised Statutes and amendments thereto. (1986 Code
§ 1-8; 1997 Code)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. The penalty provided in this Chapter shall be applicable to every section of this Town Code the
same as though it were a part of each and every separate section.
B. In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or
sections of this Town Code, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not more
than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided, that the
revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any
other penalty being enforced.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 9/240
C. Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a breach of any section or
provision of this Town Code and there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such
breach, the provisions of this Chapter shall apply. (1997 Code)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this Town Code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so
construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine or penalty provided for a failure to
perform such duty, unless the intention of the Town Council to impose such fine or penalty on such
officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (1997 Code)
Chapter 5
MAYOR AND TOWN COUNCIL
1-5-1: COMPOSITION:
A. Membership; Terms1: The elected officers of the Town shall be seven (7) Councilmembers, one of
whom shall be designated as Mayor in accordance with subsection 1-5-4A1 of this Chapter. The
Mayor and Councilmembers shall constitute the Town Council and shall continue in office until
assumption of duties of office by their duly elected successors. The regular term of office shall be
determined by resolution. (1986 Code § 2-1-1)
B. Assumption Of Duties2: Councilmembers shall assume the duties of office at the regularly
scheduled Council meeting next following the date of the general election at which, or effective as
of the date of which, the Councilmembers were elected. (1986 Code § 2-1-3)
C. Vacancies3: The Town Council shall fill by appointment for the unexpired term any vacancy that
may occur for whatever reason. (1986 Code § 2-1-4)
1-5-2: MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS:
A. Primary Election4: Any candidate who shall receive at the primary election a majority of all the
votes cast shall be declared to be elected to the office for which he is a candidate, effective as of
the date of the general election, and no further election shall be held as to said candidate;
provided, that if more candidates receive a majority than there are offices to be filled, then those
equal in number to the offices to be filled receiving the highest number of votes shall be declared
elected. (1986 Code § 2-3-1)
B. Nonpolitical Ballot5: Nothing on the ballot in any election shall be indicative of the support of the
candidate. (1986 Code § 2-3-2)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 10/240
C. General Election Nomination6: If at any primary election held as above provided there be any office
or offices for which no candidate is elected, then as to such office or offices, said election shall be
considered to be a primary election for nomination of candidates for such office or offices, and the
second or general Municipal election shall be held to vote for candidates to fill such office or
offices. Candidates to be placed on the ballot at such second or general Municipal election shall be
those not elected at such first election, shall be equal in number to twice the number to be elected
to any given office or less than that number if there be less than that number named on the primary
election ballot. Persons who receive the highest number of votes for the respective offices at such
first election shall be the only candidates at such second election; provided, that if there be any
person who, under the provisions of this Section, would have been entitled to become a candidate
for any office, except for the fact that some other candidate received an equal number of votes
therefore, then all such persons receiving an equal number of votes shall likewise become
candidates for such office. (1986 Code § 2-3-3)
D. Election To Office7: The candidates equal in number to the persons to be elected who receive the
highest number of votes shall be declared elected. (1986 Code § 2-3-4)
E. Candidate Financial Disclosure8: Each candidate for the office of council member shall file a
financial disclosure statement when such candidate files a nomination paper. The statement shall
contain such information as required by resolution of the town council pursuant to state law. (1986
Code § 2-3-5)
1-5-3: REQUIREMENTS OF OFFICE:
A. Oath9: Immediately prior to assumption of the duties of office, each council member shall, in public,
take and subscribe to the oath of office. (1986 Code § 2-1-6)
B. Financial Disclosure Statement: Each member of the town council shall file a financial disclosure
statement in a form and with such information as provided by resolution of the town council and
pursuant to state law. (1986 Code § 2-1-8)
1-5-4: MAYOR:
A. Selection:
1. Direct Election Of The Mayor: Beginning with the election to be held on the first Tuesday in
March 2007, the mayor of the town of Snowflake shall be directly elected by the qualified
electors of the town of Snowflake. The term of office of the mayor shall be four (4) years. (Ord.
05-239, 1-11-2005)
2. Vice Mayor10: At the first regular meeting after their election, the town council shall designate
one of its members as vice mayor, who shall serve at the pleasure of the town council. The vice
mayor shall perform the duties of the mayor during his absence or disability. (1986 Code § 2-2-2;
amd. Ord. 05-239, 1-11-2005; Ord. 05-250, 7-12-2005)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 11/240
3. Acting Mayor: In the absence or disability of both the mayor and vice mayor, the town council
may designate another of its members to serve as acting mayor, who shall have all the powers,
duties and responsibilities of the mayor during such absence or disability. (1986 Code § 2-2-3;
amd. Ord. 05-250, 7-12-2005)
B. Powers And Duties11: The powers and duties of the mayor shall include the following:
1. Chief Executive Officer: He shall be the chief executive officer of the town.
2. Council Chairman: He shall be the chairman of the town council and preside over its meetings.
He may make and second motions and shall have a voice and vote in all its proceedings.
3. Enforce Code: He shall enforce the provisions of this code.
4. Execute Instruments: He shall execute and authenticate by his signature such instruments as
the town council or any statutes, ordinances, or this code shall require.
5. Recommendations And Suggestions: He shall make such recommendations and suggestions to
the town council as he may consider proper.
6. Declare Local Emergency: He may, by proclamation, declare a local emergency to exist due to
fire, conflagration, flood, earthquake, explosion, war, bombing or any other natural or manmade
calamity or disaster or in the event of the threat or occurrence of riot, rout or affray or other acts
of civil disobedience which endanger life or property within the town. After declaration of such
emergency, the mayor shall govern by proclamation and impose all necessary regulations to
preserve the peace and order of the town, including, but not limited to:
a. Imposition of a curfew in all or any portion of the town.
b. Ordering the closing of any business.
c. Closing to public access any public building, street or other public place.
d. Calling upon regular or auxiliary law enforcement agencies and organizations within or without
the political subdivision for assistance.
7. Other Required Duties: He shall perform such other duties required by state statute and this
code, as well as those duties required as chief executive officer of the town. (1986 Code § 2-2-4)
C. Absence Limited: The mayor shall not absent himself from the town for a greater period than fifteen
(15) days without the consent of the town council. (1986 Code § 2-2-5)
D. Failure To Sign Documents: If the mayor refuses or fails to sign any ordinance, resolution, contract,
warrant, demand or other document or instrument requiring his signature for five (5) days
consecutively, then a majority of the members of the town council may, at any regular or special
meeting, authorize the vice mayor or, in his absence, an acting mayor to sign such ordinance,
resolution, contract, warrant, demand or other document or instrument which, when so signed,
shall have the same force and effect as if signed by the mayor. (1986 Code § 2-2-6; amd. Ord. 05-
250, 7-12-2005)
1-5-5: COMPENSATION12:
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 12/240
The compensation of elective officers of the town shall be fixed from time to time by resolution of the
town council. (1986 Code § 2-1-5)
1-5-6: CORPORATE POWERS:
The corporate powers of the town shall be vested in the town council and shall be exercised only as
directed or authorized by law. All powers of the town council shall be exercised by ordinance,
resolution, order or motion. (1986 Code § 2-1-2)
1-5-7: MEETINGS; PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS:
A. Regular Meetings: The mayor and town council will hold regular council meetings as established by
resolution of the town council. (Res. 216, 3-23-1993; amd. 1997 Code)
B. Special Meetings: The mayor upon his own motion, the mayor or the town clerk upon the written
request of three (3) members of the town council, or the town council upon motion at any lawfully
convened council meeting, may convene the town council at any time by notifying the members of
the date, hour and purpose of such special meeting. Notice of such meeting shall be made
pursuant to state law. (1986 Code § 2-4-2; amd. 1997 Code)
C. Meetings To Be Public13: All proceedings of the town council shall be open to the public, except
that upon approval by a majority vote of the town council, the town council may meet in a closed
executive session pursuant to the provisions of state law. (1986 Code § 2-4-3)
D. Quorum; Attendance Requirement: A majority of the council members shall constitute a quorum for
transacting business, but a lesser number may adjourn from time to time and compel the
attendance of absent members. Council members who miss three (3) consecutive regular
meetings without approval of the mayor shall be removed from the town council. (1986 Code § 2-4-
4)
E. Agenda: Prior to each council meeting, or on or before a time fixed by the town council for
preparation and distribution of an agenda, whichever is earlier, the town manager shall collect all
written reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions, contracts and other documents to be
submitted to the town council, prepare an agenda according to the order of business and furnish
each council member, the mayor and the town attorney with a copy. (1986 Code § 2-4-5)
F. Order Of Business14: The mayor, vice mayor or acting mayor, in consultation with the town
manager, shall set the agenda and order of the meeting pursuant to state law. (1986 Code § 2-4-6;
amd. Ord. 05-250, 7-12-2005)
G. Voting:
1. The mayor shall vote as a member of the town council.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 13/240
2. A roll call vote of the ayes and nays upon any question shall be taken and entered in the
minutes, except in the case of a unanimous vote. (1986 Code § 2-4-8)
1-5-8: ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND CONTRACTS15:
A. Ordinance Requirements: Each ordinance should have but one subject, the nature of which is
clearly expressed in the title. Whenever possible, each ordinance shall be introduced as an
amendment to this code or to an existing ordinance, and, in such case, the title of the sections to
be amended shall be included in the ordinance. (1986 Code § 2-5-5)
B. Two Separate Readings: All ordinances, except emergency ordinances, shall have two (2) separate
readings, but the first and the second reading shall never be made on the same day. The first and
second reading may be by title only. (1986 Code § 2-5-4; amd. 1997 Code)
C. Same Day Passage Prohibited: No ordinance, except emergency ordinances, shall be put on its
final passage on the same day on which it was introduced. (1986 Code § 2-5-3)
D. Effective Date16: No ordinance, resolution or franchise shall become operative until thirty (30) days
after its passage by the town council and approval by the mayor, except measures necessary for
the immediate preservation of the peace, health or safety of the town, but such an emergency
measure shall not become immediately operative unless it states in a separate section the reason
why it is necessary that it should become immediately operative, and unless it is approved by the
affirmative vote of not less than three-fourths (3/4) of all the members elected to the town council,
taken by ayes and nays. (1986 Code § 2-5-6)
E. Signatures Required: Every ordinance passed by the town council shall, before it becomes
effective, be signed by the mayor and attested by the town clerk. (1986 Code § 2-5-7)
F. Publishing Required17: Only such orders, resolutions, motions, regulations or proceedings of the
town council shall be published as may be required by state statutes or expressly ordered by the
town council. (1986 Code § 2-5-8)
G. Posting Required18: Every ordinance imposing any penalty, fine, forfeiture or other punishment
shall, after passage, be posted by the town clerk in three (3) or more public places within the town
and an affidavit of the person who posted the ordinance shall be filed in the office of the town clerk
as proof of posting. (1986 Code § 2-5-9)
1-5-9: COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS:
The town council may create such boards, committees and commissions, standing or special, as it
deems necessary. They shall consist of as many members and shall perform such duties as the town
council may require and shall exist at the pleasure of the town council. (1986 Code § 2-4-7)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 14/240
1-5-10: SUSPENSION OF RULES:
Any of the provisions of sections 1-5-7 and 1-5-9 of this chapter may be temporarily suspended in
connection with any matter under consideration by a recorded vote of not less than three-fourths (3/4)
of the members present, except that this section shall not be construed to permit any action that is
contrary to state statutes. (1986 Code § 2-4-9)
Chapter 6
MUNICIPAL OFFICERS
1-6-1: OFFICERS; GENERALLY:
A. Offices Created; Appointment1: There are hereby created the offices of town manager, town clerk,
town marshal, town engineer, town attorney and town magistrate2 who shall be appointed by the
town council and who shall serve at the pleasure of the town council, with the exception of the
town magistrate, who shall serve a term of four (4) years and with the exception of the town
marshal who shall be appointed by the town manager and shall serve at the pleasure of the town
manager. (Ord. 05-252, 8-23-2005)
B. Additional Officers; Appointment And Removal3: The town council may appoint and remove from
time to time such other officers as it may deem necessary and that are not provided for in this code
or state statute. (1986 Code § 3-1-3)
C. Bond Requirements4: The town council may require each officer of the town to give bond for the
due discharge of his duties in such sums and with such security as it may direct and approve as
determined by resolution. The town shall pay the costs of such bond. (1986 Code § 3-1-4)
D. Powers And Duties: In addition to any powers and duties prescribed in this code, each officer shall
have such further powers, perform such further duties and hold such other office as may be
provided by the town council through ordinance, resolution or order. (1986 Code § 3-1-6)
E. Vacancies; Holding More Than One Office5: Any vacancy that shall occur in any town office shall
be filled by appointment by the town council; provided, that one person may hold more than one
office and at the discretion of the town council, the functions of a town official may be validly
performed and discharged by a deputy or another town official, or an otherwise qualified individual
not holding office but employed at the pleasure of the town council. (1986 Code § 3-1-5)
1-6-2: TOWN MANAGER6:
A. Office Created: There shall be created and established the office of the town manager.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 15/240
B. Appointment: The town manager shall be appointed by the town council wholly on the basis of his
administrative and executive ability and qualifications and shall hold office for and at the pleasure
of the town council.
C. Compensation: The town manager shall receive such compensation as the town council shall fix
from time to time.
D. Bond Required: The town manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond to be approved by the
town council in such sum as may be determined by the town council, and shall be conditioned
upon the faithful performance of the duties imposed upon the town manager as herein prescribed.
Any premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the town.
E. Removal From Office: The town manager may be removed from office by a majority vote of the
town council present and voting at any regularly scheduled meeting of the town council. A public
hearing on any removal shall be held at the request of the town manager so removed if requested
within thirty (30) days following notice of removal. During the period prior to any such public
hearing, the town council may suspend the town manager from duty but shall continue his salary
and, if the removal is confirmed, shall pay his salary for one month following the removal date.
F. Powers And Duties; Administrative: The town manager shall be the administrative head of the town
government under the direction and control of the town council, except as otherwise provided
herein. He shall be responsible to the town council for the proper administration of all affairs of the
town. In addition to his general powers as administrative head and not as a limitation thereof, the
town manager shall have the following additional powers and duties:
1. Budget Preparation: Prepare the town budget annually and submit it to the town council,
together with a message describing the important features contained therein. He shall also be
responsible for its administration after adoption.
2. Financial Report: Prepare and submit to the town council at the end of each fiscal year a
complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the town during the preceding
year.
3. Advise Council On Financial Condition: Keep the town council advised of the financial condition
and future needs of the town and make such recommendations as he may deem desirable.
4. Compensation Recommendations: Recommend to the town council the compensation for each
appointive office and position in the town service. He shall also authorize the payment of
overtime pay for such employees as may work in excess of a normal work period. All rates of
pay and periods of work shall be in conformance with wages and salaries enacted by the town
council.
5. Appoint, Suspend And Remove Officers And Employees: Appoint, and when necessary for the
good of the town, suspend and remove all officers and employees of the town not appointed by
the town council. He may authorize the head of a department or office to appoint, suspend or
remove subordinates in such office or department.
6. Recommend Necessary Measures: Recommend to the town council from time to time the
adoption of such measures which he may deem necessary or expedient for the health, safety or
welfare of the community or for the improvement and safeguard of administrative services and
functions.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 16/240
7. Consolidate Offices: Consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments or units under his
jurisdiction with the approval of the town council. The town manager may be the head of one or
more departments.
8. Attend Meetings: Attend all meetings of the town council, unless excused therefrom, and take
part in the discussion of all matters coming before the town council. He shall be entitled to
receive notice of all regular and special meetings of the town council. (1986 Code § 3-2-1; amd.
1997 Code)
9. Purchasing: Supervise and safeguard the purchase and use of all materials, supplies and
equipment for which funds are provided in the budget; let contracts necessary for operation or
maintenance of town services according to the guidelines set forth in chapter 8 of this title. The
town manager may issue such rules governing purchasing procedures within the administrative
organization as the town council shall approve, within the limits of chapter 8 of this title. (1986
Code § 3-2-1; amd. 1997 Code; Ord. 14-06, 7-12-2014)
10. Enforce Laws: See that all laws and ordinances are duly enforced.
11. Investigate Town Affairs: Investigate the affairs of the town and any department or division
thereof; investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the town
government and in regard to service maintained by the public utilities in the town, and see that
all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the town are faithfully observed.
G. Orders And Directions: The town council shall deal with the administrative services of the town only
through the town manager, except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the town council nor any
members thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the town manager. It shall be the
responsibility of the town council and its members to aid and assist in an advisory capacity any
department head, individually or collectively, on any phase of policy or public relations, such
association not to conflict with the administrative duties of the town manager.
H. Policymaking: The town manager shall not exercise any legislative function whatsoever, nor shall
he engage in policymaking or institute programs which require official action by the Town Council.
The policy making power of the Town Manager shall be implementative only. It is not intended by
this subsection to grant any authority to, or impose any duty upon the Town Manager which is
vested in or imposed by general law or Town ordinances on any other Town commission, board,
officer or employee, except as herein specifically set forth.
I. Public Relations: In the discharge of his duties as Town Manager, the person holding such position
shall endeavor at all times to exercise the highest degree of tact, patience and courtesy in his
contacts with the public and with all Town boards, departments and employees. The Town
Manager shall use his best efforts to establish and maintain a harmonious relationship between all
personnel employed in the government of the Town to the end that the highest possible standards
of public service shall be continuously maintained.
J. Perform Other Required Duties: The Town Manager shall perform such other duties as may be
required by the Town Council which are not inconsistent with State law or Town ordinances. (1986
Code § 3-2-1; 1997 Code)
1-6-3: TOWN CLERK7:
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 17/240
A. Records:
1. Maintenance: The Town Clerk shall keep a true and correct record of all business transacted by
the Town Council and any other records that either pertain to the business of the Town or that
the Town Council directs. The Town Clerk shall number, plainly label and file separately in a
suitable manner all resolutions, ordinances, notices, deeds, surveys, leases, paid and unpaid
vouchers, inventories, letters, orders and other documents of whatever nature. (1986 Code § 3-
2-2; 1997 Code)
2. Public Inspection: The Town Clerk shall keep convenient for public inspection all public records
and public documents under his control, as provided by State statute.
B. Minutes: The Town Clerk shall, prepare or cause to be prepared, all minutes of Town Council
proceedings and ensure their correctness and accuracy.
C. Ordinances, Resolutions, Budgets And Notices: The Town Clerk shall process, record, file, publish
and, if required by State statute, post all ordinances, resolutions, budgets and notices that may be
passed by the Town Council. (1986 Code § 3-2-2)
D. Election Official: The Town Clerk shall be the Town election official and perform those duties
required by State statute. (1986 Code § 3-2-2)
E. Administrative Duties: The Town Clerk shall perform those administrative responsibilities and duties
that are conferred upon him by the Town Council or Town Manager, in addition to those specified in
this Code. (1986 Code § 3-2-2)
1-6-4: TOWN MARSHAL8:
The Town Marshal shall be the Chief of Police and shall perform such duties as may be required of
him by law and as the Town Council or Town Manager may deem necessary. (1986 Code § 3-2-3)
1-6-5: TOWN ENGINEER9:
The Town Engineer shall have charge of the Town streets, sewers and waterworks and shall perform
such duties as may be required of him by law and such other duties as the Town Council or Town
Manager may deem necessary. (1986 Code § 3-2-4)
1-6-6: TOWN ATTORNEY:
The Town Attorney shall act as the legal counselor and advisor of the Town Council and other officials
and, as such, shall give his opinion in writing when requested. He shall draft all deeds, contracts,
conveyances, ordinances, resolutions and other legal instruments when required by the Town Council.
He shall approve as to form, in writing, all drafts of contracts and all official or other bonds before final
approval or acceptance thereof by the Town Council. He shall prosecute and defend all suits, actions
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 18/240
or causes where the Town is a party, and shall report to the Town Council, when required, the
condition of any suit or action to which the Town is a party. (1986 Code § 3-2-5)
1-6-7: FINANCE DIRECTOR:
A. Duties As Treasurer:
1. The Finance Director shall act as Town Treasurer, and perform all duties associated with the
collection and accounting of funds. (1986 Code § 3-1-2; 1997 Code)
2. The Finance Director shall receive and safely keep all monies that shall come to the Town and
pay out the same when authorized by the Town Council, or Town Manager, as authorized by the
Town Council. He shall keep a separate record and account of each different fund provided by
the Town Council, apportion the monies received among the different funds as prescribed by the
Town Council, and keep a complete set of books showing every money transaction of the Town,
the state of each fund, from what source the money in each fund was derived and for what
purpose expended. He shall make monthly reports to the Town Council of all receipts and
disbursements and the balance in each fund. (1986 Code § 3-2-2; 1997 Code)
B. Licenses: The Finance Director shall issue or cause to be issued all licenses that may be
prescribed by State statute, or this Code. (1986 Code § 3-2-2; 1997 Code)
Chapter 7
MAGISTRATE COURT
1-7-1: ESTABLISHED; JURISDICTION:
There is hereby established in the Town a Magistrate Court, which shall have jurisdiction of all
violations of this Code, and jurisdiction concurrently with justices of the peace of precincts in which the
Town is located of violation of laws of the State committed within the limits of the Town. (1986 Code
§ 5-1)
1-7-2: TOWN MAGISTRATE1:
The presiding officer of the Magistrate Court shall be the Town Magistrate, who shall be appointed by
the Town Council for a four (4) year term. The Town Magistrate shall perform those functions
necessary to the maintenance of the Magistrate Court as provided by State statute. (1986 Code §§ 3-
2-6, 5-2-1; 1997 Code)
1-7-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The powers and duties of the Town Magistrate shall include:
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 19/240
A. Prescribed By Law: The powers and duties set forth and conferred upon him under the provisions
of the State Constitution and statutes, this Code and the ordinances and resolutions of the Town.
B. Docket: The keeping of a docket in which shall be entered each action and the proceedings of the
Court therein.
C. Bonds And Bails: The responsibility for fixing and receiving all bonds and bails and receiving all
fines, penalties, fees and other monies as provided by law.
D. Payment Of Fees: Payment of all fees, fines, penalties and other monies collected by the Court at
least once each month to the Town Treasurer.
E. Monthly Report: Submitting a monthly report to the Town Council summarizing Court activities for
that month.
F. Traffic Violation Schedules:
1. Preparation of a schedule of traffic violations not involving the death of a person, listing specific
bail for each violation.
2. Preparation of a schedule of civil traffic violations listing a specific deposit for each violation. The
Town Magistrate shall designate a person, a specific location and the hours which such person
will be at the location to accept proper deposits for civil traffic violations for and on behalf of the
Court. (1986 Code § 5-2-2)
G. Designation Of Deputy: Designation of a deputy other than a law enforcement officer and a specific
location at which the deputy shall, during hours when the Court is not open, set the amount of bail
in accordance with the schedule established by the Court and collect such bail, or accept proper
bail bonds in lieu thereof, for and on behalf of the Court. (1986 Code § 5-2-2; 1997 Code)
1-7-4: HEARING OFFICERS:
The Town Council or Town Manager may appoint one or more hearing officers to preside over civil
traffic violation cases when, in his opinion, the appointment of such hearing officers are necessary to
assure prompt disposition of civil traffic violation cases. Hearing officers may hear and dispose of civil
traffic violation cases under supervision of the presiding officer of the Magistrate Court, which are
appealable to the Superior Court pursuant to title 22, chapter 2, article 4, Arizona Revised Statutes.
(1986 Code § 5-2-3)
1-7-5: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
A. Civil Or Criminal Violations; Commencement Of Action:
1. An action to prosecute a civil or criminal violation of a provision of this code may be commenced
by issuing an Arizona uniform traffic ticket and complaint ("ticket and complaint") or by filing a
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 20/240
summons and complaint in the magistrate court. Upon determining that probable cause exists to
believe that a defendant has committed or is responsible for a violation of this code, the town
manager, his authorized representative or any peace officer may issue a ticket and complaint
and serve the defendant as provided in this section.
2. The ticket and complaint shall direct the defendant to appear in magistrate court within thirty (30)
days after its issuance.
3. Service of the ticket and complaint or of a summons and complaint may be accomplished by the
following methods:
a. In the case of both civil and criminal violations:
(1) By having the defendant sign the ticket and complaint with a promise to appear in court
within thirty (30) days (no less than 5, not more than 30) of the issuance of the ticket and
complaint;
(2) By hand delivering a copy of the ticket and complaint or the summons and complaint to the
defendant;
(3) By mailing a copy of the ticket and complaint or the summons and complaint to the
defendant certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, at his or her last known
address. Service is complete upon filing the receipt with the court.
b. In the case of a civil violation only, by any means allowed by the Arizona rules of procedure
for the service of a summons.
c. In the case of criminal violation only, by any means allowed by the Arizona rules of criminal
procedure for the service of a summons.
B. Rules Of Procedure Of Civil Action:
1. At the request of either party, or on the court's own initiative, the court may order a pretrial
conference between the town prosecutor and the defendant.
2. The town prosecutor may file a standing notice of appearance for civil traffic cases. If such
notice is filed, the town is not required to give notice to the court and to the defendant of its
election to be represented by counsel for a civil traffic hearing, if a pretrial conference has been
previously held in the case.
3. The town magistrate may serve as the hearing officer for civil offenses of the magistrate court or
the town magistrate may appoint a separate hearing officer.
4. The hearing, rules of evidence, appeal, default and all matters associated with the violation will
be conducted in accordance for those for civil traffic offenses in the state of Arizona.
5. At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall determine whether a violation exists,
and if so, may impose civil penalties up to the maximum amount specified in Arizona Revised
Statutes section 9-240, as amended, and the town code for each day a violation exists beyond
the initial notice constituting a separate offense. The hearing officer may also order abatement of
the nuisance pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes section 9-499, as amended.
6. If the violator does not comply with the civil enforcement action the town may issue a criminal
ticket and complaint. A civil enforcement action is not a prerequisite to the filing of a criminal
action.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 21/240
7. A final decision of the hearing officer may be a appealed pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes
section 12-124, as amended.
8. Rules 64 and 64.1 of the Arizona rules of civil procedure shall apply to all civil violations cases.
9. Any matter not addressed by the Arizona rules of court for civil traffic violation, cases shall be
governed by the Arizona rules of civil procedure. In the event of an inconsistency between a
provision of this code and a provision of either of these sets of rules, this code shall take priority.
C. Collection Of Civil Sanctions And Judgments:
1. The town may collect a sanction of judgment entered in a civil violation case in any manner
provided by law for collecting a civil judgment. In the case of a judgment for the expenses of
correcting a violation, the town may file a lien against the property upon which the violation
existed.
D. Procedure For Criminal Violations:
1. All cases involving a criminal violation of this code shall be governed by the Arizona rules of
criminal procedure.
2. If the defendant in a case of criminal violation of this code fails to pay a fine or restitution as
ordered by the court the town may collect such fine or restitution in any manner provided by law,
including petitioning the court to issue an order to show cause to issue an arrest warrant and to
punish the defendant for contempt of court. (Ord. 05-254, 8-9-2005)
1-7-6: BAIL:
The defendant, at any time after arrest and before conviction, shall be admitted to bail, pursuant to
law. (1986 Code § 5-3-2)
1-7-7: TRIAL BY JURY:
A. Authority: The right of trial by jury shall be granted in all cases of such a nature as are triable before
a jury at common law and under the constitution and laws of the state.
B. Jurors; Fees Paid: Each juror for attendance in the magistrate court shall be paid by the town the
sum of twelve dollars ($12.00) for each day or any part thereof actually in attendance. (1986 Code
§ 5-3-3)
Chapter 8
PURCHASING POLICY
1-8-1: PURCHASING AGENT; AUTHORITY:
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 22/240
The town manager, or his designee, shall be the purchasing agent for the town. No purchase or
contract for services of any kind or description, payment for which is to be made from funds of the
town, shall be made by the purchasing agent or any officer, employee or agent of the town, except in
the manner set forth in this chapter. Whenever any budgeted purchase or contract for goods or
services is in excess of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00), such purchase or contract shall be
presented to the town council for approval. The town council may request that the purchasing agent
solicit bids in the manner set forth herein prior to the approval of any such purchase or contract. (Ord.
14-06, 7-12-2014)
1-8-2: BIDDING PROCEDURES:
When solicitation of bids is requested by the town council, or is required by applicable state law, or if
the purchasing agent determines that it is in the best interests of the town to solicit bids, the
purchasing agent shall conduct the bidding procedures in the following manner:
A. Notice Contents: All notices and solicitation of bids shall state the time and place for opening.
B. Submission: All bids shall be submitted sealed to the purchasing agent and shall be identified as
bids on the envelope.
C. Opening: All bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notice.
D. Tabulation; Posting: A tabulation of all bids received shall be posted in the town hall for public
inspection. (Ord. 126, 9-24-1996)
1-8-3: LOWEST RESPONSIBLE BIDDER DETERMINED:
The town council shall have the authority to reject any and all bids and parts of all bids and readvertise
or resolicit bids. Unless the town council exercises its right of rejection, the purchase or contract shall
be made from and with the lowest responsible bidder for the entire purchase or contract or for any part
thereof. In determining the lowest responsible bidder, the town council may consider:
A. Ability: The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service
required.
B. Timely Performance: Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the services promptly
or within the specified time, without delay or interference.
C. Quality Of Previous Contracts: The quality of performance of previous contracts.
D. Compliance With Laws: The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with the laws and
ordinances of the town.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 23/240
E. Financial Resources: The financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract.
F. Supplies; Services: The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or service. (Ord. 126, 9-
24-1996)
1-8-4: EMERGENCY PURCHASES:
In case of an emergency which requires immediate purchases of supplies or services and when time
is of the essence, the mayor shall be empowered to authorize the purchasing agent to purchase
goods or secure services without complying with the procedures of this chapter. A full report in writing
of the circumstances of any emergency purchase shall be filed by the purchasing agent with the town
council at its next meeting. (Ord. 126, 9-24-1996)
1-8-5: COOPERATIVE PURCHASING:
When solicitation of bids is requested by the Town Council or required by applicable State law, the
Purchasing Agent may make purchases or award contracts for services without a formal bidding
process whenever other governmental units have done so for the same item or service if a separate
bidding process is not likely to result in a lower price for such items or services. (Ord. 126, 9-24-1996)
1-8-6: PERFORMANCE BOND:
The Purchasing Agent shall have the authority to require a performance bond, in cash or otherwise,
for such amount as he may deem sufficient to secure the execution of the contract for the best interest
of the Town. (Ord. 126, 9-24-1996)
Title 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Chapter 1
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
2-1-1: ESTABLISHED:
The planning and zoning commission of the town is hereby established. (Ord. 111, 8-9-1994)
2-1-2: ORGANIZATION:
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 24/240
A. Composition: The planning and zoning commission shall be composed of a total of five (5)
members, who shall be residents of the town.
B. Appointment: The members of the planning and zoning commission shall be appointed by the
mayor, subject to the approval of the town council.
C. Terms; Termination: These appointments shall be for a period of three (3) years each, with the
terms of members so staggered that the terms of no more than three (3) members shall expire in
any one year. The initial appointments shall be for two (2) members with terms beginning on
October 1, 1994, and expiring on October 1, 1995 (1 year); for three (3) members with terms
beginning on October 1, 1994, and expiring on October 1, 1996 (2 years). Thereafter all members
shall be appointed for full three (3) year terms, except that in the event of death or resignation of a
member, the vacancy may be filled for the unexpired term. The term of all members shall extend
until their successors are qualified, provided however, three (3) successive unexcused or
unexplained absences from any regular or special meeting shall be grounds for termination at the
will and pleasure of the appointing authority, without the necessity of a hearing or notice and such
action shall be final. (Ord. 111, 8-9-1994)
D. Quorum: A majority of commission members shall constitute a quorum. The affirmative vote of a
majority of commission members shall be required for passage of any matter before the planning
and zoning commission. In this connection, the minutes of the meeting shall reflect the ayes and
nays cast on a particular measure and shall reflect the vote of each member present. A member
may abstain from voting only upon declaration that he or she has a conflict of interest, in which
case such member shall take no part in the deliberations on the matter in question. (Ord. 04-241,
11-16-2004)
E. Compensation: The compensation of members of the planning and zoning commission shall be
fixed from time to time by resolution of the town council. (Ord. 01-188, 4-24-2001)
2-1-3: ELECTION OF CHAIR AND VICE CHAIR:
The planning and zoning commission shall elect a chair and vice chair from among its own members,
who shall serve for one year and until their successors are elected and qualified. The chair shall
preside at all meetings and exercise all the usual rights, duties and prerogatives of the head of any
similar organization. The chair shall have the power to administer oaths and to take evidence. The
vice chair shall perform the duties of the chair in the latter's absence or disability. Vacancies created
by any cause shall be filled for the unexpired term by a new election. (Ord. 111, 8-9-1994)
2-1-4: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the planning and zoning commission to formulate, create and administer any
lawful plan duly adopted by the town council for the present and future growth of the town pertaining to
the use of land and buildings for any purpose, together with all incidental activities usually associated
therewith and commonly known as "planning and zoning"; to make or cause to be made a continuous
study of the best present and future use to which land and buildings shall be put within the town and in
cooperation with adjacent areas; to recommend to the town council revisions in such plans which, in
the opinion of the planning and zoning commission, are for the best interest of the citizens of the town;
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 25/240
to promulgate rules of procedure and to supervise the enforcement of rules so promulgated by the
planning and zoning commission and approved by the town council. (Ord. 111, 8-9-1994)
2-1-5: MEETINGS:
The planning and zoning commission shall provide in its rules for its meetings; provided, however, that
special meetings may be called by the chair or in his or her absence, the vice chair. In addition, any
three (3) members of the planning and zoning commission may make written request to the chair for a
meeting and in the event such meeting is not called, such members may call a special meeting in
such manner and form as may be provided in the planning and zoning commission rules. (Ord. 111, 8-
9-1994)
Title 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
BUSINESS PERMITS
3-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
BUSINESS: Any trade, calling, profession or occupation which regularly provides goods and/or
services within the corporate limits of the Town of Snowflake. "Business" does not include schools,
churches, athletic groups or nonprofit organizations.
PERMANENT BUSINESS: A business use which occurs for a period of more than six (6) months a
year.
PERSON: An individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation or any other group,
organization or entity acting as a unit in the plural as well as the singular number.
REGULARLY: At least once a month.
SPECIAL EVENT: An event which:
A. Is carried on in a temporary structure or outside.
B. Includes, but is not limited to, circuses, fairs, carnivals, festivals, religious revivals, political
rallies, vehicle shows and displays, swap meets, rodeos and similarly recognized temporary
activities.
C. Does not include wedding and funeral ceremonies, elections, private yard sales, car washes
and activities such as retail sales promotions that could otherwise be lawfully conducted in
accordance with the provisions of the zoning restrictions in the district where such promotion
takes place.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 26/240
D. Does not include minor fundraising activities of schools, churches, athletic groups or nonprofit
organizations which have a minimal impact on surrounding properties. "Minor" would not include
those activities listed in subsection B of this definition.
TEMPORARY BUSINESS: A temporary business use which occurs for a period of less than six (6)
months a year from a temporary location or structure. "Temporary business" shall include peddlers,
solicitors and transient merchants. (Ord. 129, 2-25-1997)
3-1-2: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the Town to enforce this Chapter. Police officers shall have
the duty and right:
A. Arrest: To make arrests for any violation of the provisions of this Chapter.
B. Demand Permit Exhibition: To enter, free of charge and at any reasonable time, any place of
business for which a business permit or temporary use permit is required by this Chapter and to
demand exhibition of the business permit or temporary use permit for the current period of time
from any person engaged or employed in carrying on any business at such place of business.
C. Criminal Complaints: To cause criminal complaints to be filed against any person who violates any
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 129, 2-25-1997)
3-1-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A. Annual Business Permit: It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on any business, either from a
permanent structure or a mobile structure or by personal solicitation or contact, or to conduct a
special event, without first having obtained an annual business permit from the town, or without
complying with any and all regulations specified in this chapter.
B. Temporary Permit: It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on or conduct a temporary business
or special event without first having obtained a temporary use permit. (Ord. 129, 2-25-1997)
3-1-4: GENERAL PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Separate Permit: A separate permit must be obtained for each branch establishment or location in
which any business is carried on.
B. More Than One Business:
1. When more than one business is carried on, transacted or practiced in the same location by the
same person, then only one permit shall be required for such person.
2. When more than one business is carried on, transacted or practiced in one location by a person
other than the primary person, a separate permit shall be obtained for each person conducting
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 27/240
such business. For example, for construction jobs, the general contractor and each
subcontractor will be required to obtain separate permits.
C. Special Events: For special events, only the sponsor of the primary event shall be required to
obtain a business permit and temporary use permit. The town council, however, may require all
vendors participating in the event to obtain a permit if it is deemed necessary for preserving the
general health, welfare and safety of the community. (Ord. 129, 2-25-1997)
3-1-5: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; FEE:
A. Form; Information Required:
1. It shall be the duty of the finance department to provide the appropriate application form and to
prepare and issue a business permit under this chapter for every person liable to obtain such a
permit hereunder. If the proposed use involves a temporary business or a special event, the
finance department shall also provide the applicant with a temporary use permit application.
2. The business permit application shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following
information:
a. Name of business.
b. Name of applicant and relationship to the business or entity.
c. Complete permanent and local addresses.
d. A brief description of the nature and type of the business.
e. If business is a corporation, the state where incorporated and the statutory agent.
f. List of officers/owners of the business, with their dates of birth and social security numbers.
g. The length of time for which the right to do business is desired.
h. The state sales tax number.
i. If applicable, contractor's license number. (Ord. 129, 2-25-1997)
B. Fee; Payment; Exemption:
1. Any person applying for a business permit under this chapter shall pay an annual processing
fee, as established by resolution of the town council. If the annual processing fee is not paid
within thirty (30) days of the anniversary date of the issuance of the business permit, the
business permit shall be null and void and a new permit and processing fee will be required.
(Ord. 04-235, 5-11-2004)
2. The Town may periodically send to business owners a form requesting updated information
relating to their respective business permits. If the form is not returned to the Town within thirty
(30) days, the business permit shall be null and void and a new permit and processing fee will be
required.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 28/240
3. Any new business permit fee shall become due and payable on or before the day of
commencement of the business or event for which a permit is required.
4. In special circumstances, the Town Treasurer may waive all or part of the fee requirement where
the fee would cause undue hardship on the person applying for the permit. (Ord. 129, 2-25-
1997)
3-1-6: INVESTIGATION; ISSUANCE:
Upon receipt of a completed business permit application, the Finance Department shall:
A. Police Department: Promptly notify the Police Department of the pending application, which may
conduct a check for any outstanding warrants on the applicant.
B. Zoning Requirements: Promptly forward the application to the Planning and Zoning Department,
which shall review it to verify that all zoning requirements are satisfied.
C. Time Limit For Issuance: Issue the permit within a period of forty eight (48) hours (2 working days).
(Ord. 129, 2-25-1997)
3-1-7: TEMPORARY USE PERMIT:
A. Application: The application for a temporary use permit shall include, but not necessarily be limited
to, the following information:
1. The length of time for which the permit is desired, including the hours of operation for each day.
2. The location of the proposed use or event.
3. A brief description of the proposed use or event.
4. A brief description of what sanitary facilities are available at the location of the proposed use.
5. If the proposed use involves peddlers, solicitors or transient merchants, the names of all
salespersons, with their dates of birth and social security numbers.
6. If the proposed use will be conducted on property not owned by the applicant, the applicant shall
provide a notarized statement from the owner of the property where the proposed use will take
place, indicating that the applicant has permission from the property owner.
B. Investigation And Review; Issuance: Upon receipt of a temporary use permit application, the
Finance Department shall promptly forward the application to the Planning and Zoning
Department, which shall then review the application to ensure compliance with this Chapter and all
applicable zoning requirements. If the requested permit will involve peddlers, solicitors, transient
merchants or vendors, the names of all salespersons listed on the application shall be forwarded to
the Police Department to check for outstanding warrants. If the application is approved by the
Planning and Zoning Department and there are no outstanding warrants on any individual involved
with the application, the permit shall be issued.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 29/240
C. Special Event: If the temporary use permit involves a special event, the applicant shall be provided
with an information sheet listing guidelines for special events. The Planning and Zoning
Department shall have the right to impose conditions on the permit, including but not limited to,
insurance, public safety, parking, health and sanitation.
D. Agricultural Produce: Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, a person who deals solely in the sale of
agricultural produce shall not be required to obtain a business permit or a temporary use permit.
This exception shall apply only if the person or business that is involved in the sale of agricultural
produce is selling the produce in the Town limits for not more than fifteen (15) days in any calendar
year. If the fifteen (15) day limit is exceeded, the person shall comply with all requirements under
this Chapter.
E. Fee: Any person applying for a temporary use permit shall pay a fee established by resolution of
the Town Council. Such fee shall be due and payable before the temporary use begins.
F. Validity: If a temporary use permit is issued, it shall indicate the time period for which it is valid. A
temporary use permit shall be valid for a period not to exceed six (6) months. (Ord. 129, 2-25-
1997)
3-1-8: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
A. Exhibition Of Permit:
1. Every permittee carrying on a business at a fixed place shall keep such permit posted and
exhibited, while in force, in some conspicuous part of the place of business. Every permittee not
having a fixed place of business, shall carry the permit with him at all times while carrying on that
business for which the same was granted.
2. Every sponsor of a special event shall post the business permit and the temporary use permit
required under this Chapter in a conspicuous location during all hours of the special event.
3. Every permittee shall produce and exhibit their permit whenever requested to do so by any
police officer or by any citizen. If the permittee or any person engaged or employed by the
permittee shall refuse or neglect to exhibit the permit, such person shall be guilty of a violation of
this Chapter.
B. Location Restrictions: No permittee hereunder shall have any exclusive right to any location in a
public street, nor shall the permittee be permitted to operate in any congested area where his
operations might impeded or inconvenience the public. For the purpose of this Chapter, the
judgment of a police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the
area is congested or the public is impeded or inconvenienced. No business activity shall be carried
on in any area of the Town where such business activity is prohibited by the Town's zoning
regulations.
C. Nontransferable: No permit granted or issued under the provisions of this Chapter shall be in any
manner assignable or transferable to any other person without permission from the Finance
Department.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 30/240
D. Change Of Place Of Business: No permit issued under the provisions of this Chapter shall apply to
any place of business other than that designate in such permit, unless a change of place of
permitted business shall be first approved by the Finance Department. (Ord. 129, 2-25-1997)
3-1-9: REFUSAL TO ISSUE; AUTHORITY:
The Finance Department shall have the power to refuse to issue a business and/or temporary use
permit if the person applying for the permit fails to comply with any of the requirements of this Chapter.
(Ord. 129, 2-25-1997)
3-1-10: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
A. Reasons Specified: Permits issued under the provisions of this Chapter may be revoked by the
Finance Department, after notice and hearing, for any of the following reasons:
1. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of applying for a permit;
2. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on the business;
3. Any violation of this Chapter;
4. Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
5. Conducting a business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of
the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public;
6. Failure to comply with any term or condition of approval as specified in the permit application,
such as, but not limited to, building permits, tent permits, signage schedules and development.
B. Notice And Hearing: If the Finance Department has reason to believe that a permittee is guilty of
any of the items listed above, it shall immediately suspend the permit and give the permittee notice
by certified mail of the suspension and of a hearing to be held within ten (10) days to determine
whether or not the permit should be revoked. The notice shall contain a statement of the purported
reason for the suspension. Within the next three (3) days after the hearing, if the Finance
Department determines that there is a good and sufficient reason for revocation of the permittee's
permit, the Finance Department shall enter an order revoking the permit effective immediately and
notify the permittee by certified mail. (Ord. 129, 2-25-1997)
3-1-11: APPEAL:
Within five (5) days, excluding weekends and legal holidays, an applicant for a permit or permittee
may appeal to the Town Manager from the refusal of the Finance Department to issue a permit under
this Chapter or from the revocation of any permit granted in accordance with this Chapter. The Town
Manager may designate a hearing officer to hear the appeal. (Ord. 129, 2-25-1997)
3-1-12: PENALTY:
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 31/240
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this Chapter, as amended, shall be guilty of a
Class One misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. Each day
that a violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as hereinabove provided. (Ord. 129,
2-25-1997)
Chapter 2
TAX CODE
3-2-1: CODE ADOPTED; EFFECTIVE DATE:
A. Town Tax Code: That certain document known as THE TOWN TAX CODE OF THE TOWN OF
SNOWFLAKE, ARIZONA, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the town clerk, which
document was made a public record by resolution 140, is hereby referenced to, adopted and made
a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, the provisions thereof to become effective
September 1, 1987.
B. Repeal: The repeal of sections 8-2 and 8-3 of the 1986 town code, effective as of September 1,
1987, does not affect the rights and duties that matured or penalties that were incurred, and
proceedings that were begun before the effective date of the repeal. (Ord. 80, 7-8-1987, eff. 9-1-
1987)
3-2-2: AMENDMENTS:
A. 1996 Amendments: That certain document known as THE 1996 AMENDMENTS TO THE TOWN
TAX CODE OF THE TOWN OF SNOWFLAKE, ARIZONA, three (3) copies of which are on file in
the office of the town clerk, which document was made a public record by resolution 279, is hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this subsection. The provisions of
this subsection and the public record adopted herein are effective from and after December 31,
1996. (Ord. 127, 11-26-1996, eff. 12-31-1996)
B. 1998 Amendments: That certain document known as THE 1998 AMENDMENTS TO THE TAX
CODE OF THE TOWN OF SNOWFLAKE, ARIZONA, three (3) copies of which are on file in the
office of the town clerk, which document was made a public record by resolution 319, is hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this subsection.
1. Except as provided in subsections B2 and B3 of this section, the provisions of this subsection B
and the public record adopted herein are effective from and after July 1, 1998.
2. The following provisions of the public record adopted by this subsection B are retroactive to April
1, 1987:
a. The definition of "construction contractor" as amended and the definition of "remediation" as
added to section 1. Section 8A-100. General Definitions.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 32/240
b. Subsection (a), paragraph (16) on "cleanrooms" as added to section 2. Section 8A-110.
Definitions: Income-producing capital equipment.
c. Section 9. Subsection (aa) of section 8A-465. Retail Sales: Exemptions.
d. Section 11. Regulation 8A-100.5 Remediation Contracting.
(Ord. 146, 6-9-1998)
3. The following provisions are effective from and after July 23, 1998:
a. Section 8A-445 of the tax code of the town of Snowflake is amended to read:
Sec. 8A-445. Rental, leasing, and licensing for use of real property.
(a) The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two percent (2%) of the gross income from the
business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in the business of leasing, or
renting real property located within the Town for a consideration, to the tenant in actual
possession, or the licensing for use of real property located within the Town for a consideration
including any improvements, rights, or interest in such property; provided further that:
(1) Payments made by the lessee to, or on behalf of, the lessor for property taxes, repairs, or
improvements are considered to be part of the taxable gross income.
(2) Charges for such items as telecommunications, utilities, pet fees, or maintenance are
considered to be part of the taxable gross income.
(3) However, if the lessor engages in telecommunication activity, as evidenced by installing
individual metering equipment and by billing each tenant based upon actual usage, such
activity is taxable under Section 8A-470.
(b) If individual utility meters have been installed for each tenant and the lessor separately
charges each single tenant for the exact billing from the utility company, such charges are
exempt.
(c) Charges by primary health care facilities to patients of such facilities for use of rooms or
other real property during the course of their treatment by such facilities are exempt.
(d) Charges for joint pole usage by a person engaged in the business of providing or
furnishing utility or telecommunication services to another person engaged in the business of
providing or furnishing utility or telecommunications services are exempt from the tax imposed
by this Section.
(e) Exempt from the tax imposed by this Section is gross income derived from the rental,
leasing, or licensing for use of real property to any non-profit primary health care facility,
except when the property so rented, leased, or licensed is for use in activities resulting in
gross income from unrelated business income as that term is defined in 26 U.S.C. Section
512.
(f) (Reserved)
(g) (Reserved)
(h) THE TAX PRESCRIBED BY THIS SECTION SHALL NOT INCLUDE GROSS INCOME
FROM THE RENTAL, LEASING, OR LICENSING OF LODGING OR LODGING SPACE TO
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 33/240
AN INDIVIDUAL WHO RESIDES THEREIN.
(i) (Reserved)
(j) Exempt from the tax imposed by this Section is gross income derived from the activities
taxable under Section 8A-444 of this code.
(k) (Reserved)
(l) (Reserved)
(m) (Reserved)
(n) Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 8A-200(b), the fair market value of one (1)
apartment, in an apartment complex provided rent free to an employee of the apartment
complex is subject to the tax imposed by this Section. For an apartment complex with more
than fifty (50) units, an additional apartment provided rent free to an employee for every
additional fifty (50) units is not subject to the tax imposed by this Section.
b. Regulation 8A-200.1 of the tax code of the town of Snowflake is amended to read:
Reg. 8A-200.1. When deposits are includable in gross income.
(a) Refundable deposits shall be includable as gross income of the taxpayer for the month in
which the deposits are forfeited by the lessee.
(b) (Reserved)
(Ord. 147, 6-23-1998, eff. 7-23-1998)
C. 1999 Amendments: That certain document known as THE 1999 AMENDMENTS TO THE TAX
CODE OF THE TOWN OF SNOWFLAKE, ARIZONA, three (3) copies of which are on file in the
office of the town clerk, which document was made a public record by resolution 339 of the town, is
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this subsection.
1. Except as provided in subsections C2 and C3 of this section, the provisions of this subsection C
and the public record adopted herein are effective from and after December 31, 1999.
2. The following provisions of the public record adopted herein are retroactive to January 1, 1999:
a. Subsection (b)(3) of section 29-10-415;
b. Subsection (c)(1)(A) of section 29-10-416;
c. Subsection (b)(1)(A) of section 29-10-417.
3. The following provisions of the public record are retroactive to May 5, 1999:
a. Subsection (c)(10) of section 29-10-450;
b. Subsection (kk) of section 29-10-465. (Ord. 165, 11-9-1999)
D. 2000 Amendments:
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 34/240
1. Section 8A-447 of the town tax code is amended to read:
Sec. 8A-447 (Reserved). RENTAL, LEASING, AND LICENSING FOR USE OF REAL
PROPERTY: ADDITIONAL TAX UPON TRANSIENT LODGING.
IN ADDITION TO THE TAXES LEVIED AS PROVIDED IN SECTION 8A-444, THERE IS
HEREBY LEVIED AND SHALL BE COLLECTED AN ADDITIONAL TAX IN AN AMOUNT
EQUAL TO TWO PERCENT (2%) OF THE GROSS INCOME FROM THE BUSINESS
ACTIVITY OF ANY HOTEL ENGAGING OR CONTINUING WITHIN THE TOWN IN THE
BUSINESS OF CHARGING FOR LODGING AND/OR LODGING SPACE FURNISHED TO ANY
TRANSIENT. "TRANSIENT" MEANS ANY PERSON WHO, FOR ANY PERIOD OF NOT MORE
THAN THIRTY (30) CONSECUTIVE DAYS, EITHER AT HIS OWN EXPENSE OR AT THE
EXPENSE OF ANOTHER, OBTAINS LODGING OR THE USE OF ANY LODGING SPACE IN
ANY HOTEL FOR WHICH LODGING OR USE OF LODGING SPACE A CHARGE IS MADE.
2. Regulation 8A-447.1 of the town tax code is amended to read:
Regulation 8A-447.1 (Reserved). GROSS INCOME FROM RENTAL, LEASING, AND
LICENSING FOR USE OF REAL PROPERTY AS LODGING OR LODGING SPACE TO
TRANSIENTS.
(a) IF THE CHARGE MADE BY A HOTEL TO A TRANSIENT INCLUDES ANY CHARGE FOR
SERVICES OR ACCOMMODATIONS IN ADDITION TO THAT OF LODGING AND/OR THE
USE OF LODGING SPACE, THEN SUCH PORTION OF THE TOTAL CHARGE AS
REPRESENTS ONLY THE CHARGE FOR THE USE OF THE ROOM AND/OR LODGING
SPACE SHALL BE DISTINCTLY SET OUT AND BILLED TO SUCH TRANSIENT BY SUCH
HOTEL AS A SEPARATE ITEM, OR THE ENTIRE CHARGE SHALL BE DEEMED CHARGE
FOR USE OF LODGING SPACE SUBJECT TO THE TAX IMPOSED BY SECTION 8A-447.
(b) A SEPARATELY ITEMIZED CHARGE FOR USE OF THE FURNISHINGS CONTAINED IN
LODGING OR LODGING SPACE RENTED, LEASED, OR LICENSED TO A TRANSIENT
SHALL BE DEEMED GROSS INCOME FROM THE BUSINESS OF RENTING, LEASING, AND
LICENSING LODGING TO A TRANSIENT. FURTHERMORE, IN REGARD TO SUCH
TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY, SUCH PERSON IS DEEMED NOT IN THE BUSINESS
OF RENTAL, LEASING, AND LICENSING OF TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY FOR ALL
PURPOSES OF THIS CHAPTER.
(c) COMPLIMENTARY FOOD AND DRINK. PERSONS ENGAGED IN THE BUSINESS OF
RENTAL, LEASING, AND LICENSING OF LODGING TO TRANSIENTS SHALL INCLUDE
CHARGES FOR COMPLIMENTARY FOOD AND DRINK AS GROSS INCOME FROM THE
BUSINESS OF RENTAL, LEASING, AND LICENSING OF LODGING TO TRANSIENTS, AND
SHALL NOT BE DEEMED IN THE RESTAURANT BUSINESS FOR ALL PURPOSES OF THIS
CHAPTER, UNLESS SUCH CHARGES:
(1) ARE MADE ONLY AT THE REQUEST OF THE TRANSIENT, OR AS SEPARATE,
OPTIONAL CHARGE FOR CONSUMING SPECIFIC FOOD OR DRINK (FOR EXAMPLE,
"ROOM SERVICE" CHARGES); AND
(2) ARE COMMENSURATE WITH CHARGES FOR LIKE QUANTITY AND TYPE OF FOOD
CONSUMED BY PATRONS OF PERSONS ENGAGED IN THE RESTAURANT BUSINESS.
(Ord. 169, 6-27-2000, eff. 10-1-2000)
E. 2001 Amendments:
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 35/240
1. That certain document known as SUPPLEMENTARY LOCAL AUDIT PROCEDURES FOR THE
TOWN TAX CODE OF THE TOWN OF SNOWFLAKE, ARIZONA, three (3) copies of which are
on file in the office of the town clerk, which document was made a public record by resolution 01-
383 of the town of Snowflake, Arizona, is hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as
if fully set out in this subsection. (Ord. 01-183, 2-13-2001, eff. 4-16-2001)
2. That certain document known as the 2001 AMENDMENTS TO THE TAX CODE OF THE TOWN
OF SNOWFLAKE, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the town clerk of the town
of Snowflake, Arizona, which document was made a public record by resolution 02-417 of the
town of Snowflake, Arizona, is hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set
out in this subsection. (Ord. 02-213, 6-11-2002, eff. 7-11-2002)
F. 2003 Amendments: Article V is repealed and replaced by that certain document known as ARTICLE
V OF THE TOWN TAX CODE OF THE TOWN OF SNOWFLAKE, ARIZONA, three (3) copies of
which are on file in the office of the town clerk, which document was made a public record by
resolution 03-430 of the town of Snowflake, Arizona, and which is hereby referred to, adopted and
made a part hereof as if fully set out in this subsection. (Ord. 03-216, 1-28-2003, eff. 2-27-2003)
1. Section 8A-447 of the town tax code is amended to read:
Sec. 8A-447. Rental, leasing, and licensing for use of real property: additional tax upon
transient lodging.
In addition to the taxes levied as provided in Section 8A-444, there is hereby levied and shall be
collected an additional tax in an amount equal to twoFOUR percent (24%) of the gross income
from the business activity of any hotel engaging or continuing within the City in the business of
charging for lodging and/or lodging space furnished to any transient. "Transient" means any
person who, for any period of not more than thirty (30) consecutive days, either at his own
expense or at the expense of another, obtains lodging or the use of any lodging space in any
hotel for which lodging or use of lodging space a charge is made.
2. Section 8A-455 of the town tax code is amended to read:
Sec. 8A-455. Restaurants and Bars.
(a) The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to twoTHREE percent (23%) of the gross income
from the business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in the business of preparing
or serving food or beverage in a bar, cocktail lounge, restaurant, or similar establishment where
articles of food or drink are prepared or served for consumption on or off the premises, including
also the activity of catering. Cover charges and minimum charges must be included in the gross
income of this business activity.
(b) Caterers and other taxpayers subject to the tax who deliver food and/or serve such food off
premises shall also be allowed to exclude separately charged delivery, set-up, and clean-up
charges, provided that the charges are also maintained separately in the books and records.
When a taxpayer delivers food and/or serves such food off premises, his regular business
location shall still be deemed the location of the transaction for the purposes of the tax imposed
by this Section.
(c) The tax imposed by this Section shall not apply to sales to a qualifying hospital, qualifying
community health center or a qualifying health care organization, except when sold for use in
activities resulting in gross income from unrelated business income as that term is defined in 26
U.S.C. Section 512.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 36/240
(d) The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to sales of food, beverages, condiments and
accessories used for serving food and beverages to a commercial airline, as defined in A.R.S. §
42-5061(A)(49), that serves the food and beverages to its passengers, without additional charge,
for consumption in flight.
(e) The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to sales of prepared food, beverages,
condiments or accessories to a public educational entity, pursuant to any of the provisions of title
15, Arizona Revised Statutes, to the extent such items are to be prepared or served to
individuals for consumption on the premises of a public educational entity during school hours.
(f) For the purposes of this section, "accessories" means paper plates, plastic eating utensils,
napkins, paper cups, drinking straws, paper sacks or other disposable containers, or other items
which facilitate the consumption of the food.
(Ord. 03-219, 3-25-2003, eff. 6-1-2003)
G. 2005 Amendments:
1. Sec. -480. Utility services. Of the model city tax code is amended to read:
(a) The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two percent (2%) of the gross income from the
business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in the business of producing,
providing, or furnishing utility services, including electricity, electric lights, current, power, gas
(natural or artificial), or water to:
(1) Consumers or ratepayers who reside within the city.
(2) (Reserved)
++ (Local Option #GG:
(2) Consumers or ratepayers of this city, whether within the city or without, to the extent that this
city provides such persons utility services, excluding consumers or ratepayers who are residents
of another city or town which levies an equivalent excise tax upon this city for providing such
utility services to such persons.)++
(b) Exclusion of certain sales of natural gas to a public utility. Notwithstanding the provisions of
subsection (a) above, the gross income derived from the sale of natural gas to a public utility for
the purpose of generation of power to be transferred by the utility to its ratepayers shall be
considered a retail sale of tangible personal property subject to sections -460 and -465, and not
considered gross income taxable under this section.
(c) Resale utility services. Sales of utility services to another provider of the same utility services
for the purpose of providing such utility services either to another properly licensed utility
provider or directly to such purchaser's customers or ratepayers shall be exempt and deductible
from the gross income subject to the tax imposed by this section, provided that the purchaser is
properly licensed by all applicable taxing jurisdictions to engage or continue in the business of
providing utility services, and further provided that the seller maintains proper documentation, in
a manner similar to that for sales for resale, of such transactions.
**((d) (Reserved)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 37/240
2. Regulation 3.08.350.2 of the model city tax code is amended to read:
Reg. 3.08.350.2. Recordkeeping: Expenditures.
The minimum records required for persons having expenditures, costs, purchases and rental or
lease or license expenses subject to, or exempt or excluded from, tax by this chapter are:
(a) The total price of all goods acquired for use or storage in the town.
(b) The date of acquisition and the name and business address of the seller or lessor of all
goods acquired for use or storage in the town.
(c) Documentation of taxes, freight, and direct customer service labor separately charged and
paid for each purchase, rental, lease, or license.
(d) The gross price of each acquisition claimed as exempt from tax, and with respect to each
transaction so claimed, sufficient evidence to satisfy the tax collector that the exemption claimed
is applicable.
(e) As applicable to each taxpayer, documentation sufficient to the tax collector, so that he may
ascertain:
(1) All construction expenditures and all privilege and use taxes claimed paid, relating to ownerbuilders
and speculative builders.
(2) Disbursement of collected gratuities and related payroll information required of restaurants.
(3) Franchise and license fee payments and computations thereto which relate to:
(A) (Reserved)
(B) Telecommunication service.
(4) The validity of any claims of proof of exemption, as provided by regulation.
(5) A claimed alternative prior value for reconstruction.
(6) (Reserved)
(7) (Reserved)
(8) Payments of tax to the Arizona department of transportation and computations therefore,
when a motor-vehicle transporter claims such the exemption.
(9) (Reserved)
(f) Any additional documentation as the tax collector, by regulation, shall deem necessary for any
specific class of taxpayer by reason of the specialized business activity of specific exemptions
afforded to that class of taxpayer.
(g) In all cases, the books and records of the taxpayer shall indicate both individual transaction
amounts and totals for each reporting period for each category of taxable, exempt, and excluded
expenditures as defined by this chapter.
(Ord. 05-256, 11-22-2005)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 38/240
H. 2007 Amendments:
1. Amendments: That certain document known as "the 2007 amendments to the tax code of the
town of Snowflake", three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk of the town
of Snowflake, Arizona, which document was made a public record by resolution 06-488 of the
town of Snowflake, Arizona, is hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set
out in this subsection.
2. Any person found guilty of violating any provision of these amendments to the tax code shall be
guilty of a class one misdemeanor. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate
offense punishable as hereinabove described.
3. If any sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this subsection or any part of these amendments to
the tax code adopted herein by reference is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional
by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions thereof.
4. The provisions of subsection H1 of this section as it relates to the definition of "transient",
subsection H3 of this section as it relates to subsections 8A-410(b)(3) through (5) and (c) of the
tax code of the town of Snowflake shall be effective from and after January 1, 2007.
5. The provisions of subsection H3 of this section as it relates to subsection 8A-410(b)(2) of the tax
code of the town of Snowflake shall be effective from and after July 1, 1999.
6. The provisions of subsections H4 and H5 of this section and this subsection H6 shall be
effective from and after September 1, 2006. (Ord. 06-284, 12-12-2006)
I. 2007 Amendments:
Sec. 8A-416. Construction contracting: speculative builders.
(a) The tax shall be equal to two percent (2%) of the gross income from the business activity upon
every person engaging or continuing in business as a speculative builder within the town.
(1) The gross income of a speculative builder considered taxable shall include the total selling
price from the sale of improved real property at the time of closing of escrow or transfer of title:
(2) "Improved real property" means any real property:
(A) Upon which a structure has been constructed; or
(B) Where improvements have been made to land containing no structure (such as paving or
landscaping); or
(C) Which has been reconstructed as provided by regulation; or
(D) Where water, power, and streets have been constructed to the property line.
(3) "Sale of improved real property" includes any form of transaction, whether characterized as a
lease or otherwise, which in substance is a transfer of title of, or equitable ownership in, improved
real property and includes any lease of the property for a term of thirty (30) years or more (with all
options for renewal being included as a part of the term). In the case of multiple unit projects,
"sale" refers to the sale of the entire project or to the sale of any individual parcel or unit.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 39/240
(4) "Partially improved residential real property", as used in this section, means any improved real
property, as defined in subsection (a)(2) above, being developed for sale to individual
homeowners, where the construction of the residence upon such property is not substantially
complete at the time of the sale.
(b) Exclusions.
(1) In cases involving reconstruction contracting, the speculative builder may exclude from gross
income the prior value allowed for reconstruction contracting in determining his taxable gross
income, as provided by regulation.
(2) Fair market value of land. Gross income from the sale of improved real property shall not
include the "fair market value" of the land which is included in the real property sold, when a
charge for such land is included in the total selling price of the real property sold.
(A) Except as provided in subsection (b)(2)(B) below, the taxpayer must document such "fair
market value" to the satisfaction of the tax collector, and maintain and provide such documentation
upon demand in addition to and in like manner to the books and records required in article III.
(B) In lieu of the documented fair market value of land allowed in subsection (b)(2)(A) above, an
amount equal to twenty percent (20%) of the total selling price may be used to estimate the "fair
market value" of land.
(3) (Reserved)
(4) A speculative builder may exclude gross income from the sale of partially improved residential
real property as defined in (a)(4) above to another speculative builder only if all of the following
conditions are satisfied:
(A) The speculative builder purchasing the partially improved residential real property has a valid
town privilege license for construction contracting as a speculative builder; and
(B) At the time of the transaction, the purchaser provides the seller with a properly completed
written declaration that the purchaser assumes liability for and will pay all privilege taxes which
would otherwise be due the town at the time of sale of the partially improved residential real
property; and
(C) The seller also:
(i) Maintains proper records of such transactions in a manner similar to the requirements provided
in this chapter relating to sales for resale; and
(ii) Retains a copy of the written declaration provided by the buyer for the transaction; and
(iii) Is properly licensed with the town as a speculative builder and provides the town with the
written declaration attached to the town privilege tax return where he claims the exclusion.
(c) Tax liability for speculative builders occurs at close of escrow or transfer of title, whichever
occurs earlier, and is subject to the following provisions, relating to exemptions, deductions and tax
credits:
(1) Exemptions.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 40/240
(A) The gross proceeds of sales or gross income attributable to the purchase of machinery,
equipment or other tangible personal property that is exempt from or deductible from privilege or
use tax under:
(i) Section 8A-465, subsections (g) and (p)
(ii) (Reserved)
shall be exempt or deductible, respectively, from the tax imposed by this section.
(B) The gross proceeds of sales or gross income received from a contract for the construction of
an environmentally controlled facility for the raising of poultry for the production of eggs and the
sorting, or cooling and packaging of eggs shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this section.
(C) The gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from the installation, assembly,
repair or maintenance of clean rooms that are deducted from the tax base of the retail
classification pursuant to section 8A-465, subsection (g) shall be exempt from the tax imposed
under this section.
(D) The gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from a contract entered into with a
person who is engaged in the commercial production of livestock, livestock products or agricultural,
horticultural, viticultural or floricultural crops or products in this state for the construction, alteration,
repair, improvement, movement, wrecking or demolition or addition to or subtraction from any
building, highway, road, excavation, manufactured building or other structure, project, development
or improvement used directly and primarily to prevent, monitor, control or reduce air, water or land
pollution shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this section.
(E) Development or impact fees included in a construction or development contract for payment to
the state or local government to offset governmental costs of providing public infrastructure, public
safety and other public services to a development.
(2) Deductions.
(A) All amounts subject to the tax shall be allowed a deduction in the amount of thirty-five percent
(35%).
(B) The gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from a contract entered into for the
installation, assembly, repair or maintenance of income-producing capital equipment, as defined in
section 8A-110, that is deducted from the retail classification pursuant to section 8A-465(g), that
does not become a permanent attachment to a building, highway, road, railroad, excavation or
manufactured building or other structure, project, development or improvement shall be exempt
from the tax imposed by this section. If the ownership of the realty is separate from the ownership
of the income-producing capital equipment, the determination as to permanent attachment shall be
made as if the ownership was the same. The deduction provided in this paragraph does not
include gross proceeds of sales or gross income from that portion of any contracting activity which
consists of the development of, or modification to, real property in order to facilitate the installation,
assembly, repair, maintenance or removal of the income-producing capital equipment. For
purposes of this paragraph, "permanent attachment" means at least one of the following:
(i) To be incorporated into real property.
(ii) To become so affixed to real property that it becomes part of the real property.
(iii) To be so attached to real property that removal would cause substantial damage to the real
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 41/240
property from which it is removed.
(3) Tax credits. The following tax credits are available to owner-builders or speculative builders, not
to exceed the tax liability against which such credits apply, provided such credits are documented
to the satisfaction of the tax collector:
(A) A tax credit equal to the amount of town privilege or use tax, or the equivalent excise tax, paid
directly to a taxing jurisdiction or as a separately itemized charge paid directly to the vendor with
respect to the tangible personal property incorporated into the said structure or improvement to
real property undertaken by the owner-builder or speculative builder.
(B) A tax credit equal to the amount of privilege taxes paid to this town, or charged separately to
the speculative builder, by a construction contractor, on the gross income derived by said person
from the construction of any improvement to the real property.
(C) No credits provided herein may be claimed until such time that the gross income against which
said credits apply is reported.
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of these amendments to the tax code shall be
guilty of a class one misdemeanor. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense
punishable as hereinabove described. (Ord. 07-301, 9-11-2007, eff. 10-1-2007)
3-2-3: PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of these amendments to the tax code shall be guilty
of a class one misdemeanor, punishable as set forth in subsection 1-4-1A of this code. Each day that
a violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as hereinabove described. (Ord. 127, 11-
26-1996, eff. 12-31-1996; amd. 1997 Code)
Title 4
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapter 1
FIRE DEPARTMENT1
4-1-1: CREATED; COMPOSITION:
There is hereby created a volunteer fire department for the town which shall consist of a full time paid
fire chief and as many other officers and firefighters as may be deemed necessary from time to time
by the town council. (Ord. 05-253, 7-26-2005)
4-1-2: ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION:
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 42/240
A. Appointment Of Firefighters: Firefighters shall be appointed at such time and in such manner as the
town council may deem necessary. The fire department shall set physical and mental standards for
each firefighter and appointee. The firefighters shall be subject to supervision by the fire chief.
(1986 Code § 4-2-5)
B. Departmental Rules And Regulations: The fire department shall be operated and managed by the
fire chief in accordance with such departmental rules and regulations as may from time to time be
adopted by the town council. (1986 Code § 4-2-2)
C. Compensation: The fire chief and firefighters shall be compensated as determined by the town
council. (1986 Code § 4-2-3)
4-1-3: FIRE CHIEF:
A. Appointment: The chief of the fire department shall be appointed by the town manager and serve at
the pleasure of the town manager. (Ord. 05-253, 7-26-2005)
B. Duties: It shall be the duty of the fire chief to:
1. Accountable For Department: Be accountable only to the mayor, town council and town
manager for the management, personnel, morale and general efficiency of the fire department.
2. Direct Operations: Direct the operations of the fire department, subject to the rules and
regulations thereof; provided, that the fire chief shall formulate such rules and regulations
subject to the approval of the town council.
3. Authority At Fire: Be present at all fires, if possible, and plan and direct the extinguishment
thereof. During the progress of a fire, the authority of the fire chief shall be absolute in all matters
directly concerning the extinguishment of the fire and disposition of the property endangered by
it.
4. Drills And Instruction: Conduct suitable drills or instruction at least once every two (2) months in
the operation and handling of equipment, first aid and rescue work, salvage, a study of buildings
in the town, water supplies, and all other matters generally considered essential to good
firemanship and safety of life and property endangered by it.
5. Arson Investigation: Assist the proper authorities in suppressing the crime of arson by
investigating or causing to be investigated the cause, origin and circumstances of all fires.
6. Building Inspection: Inspect buildings and premises and serve written notice upon the owner or
occupant to abate, within a specified time, any and all fire hazards that may be found. For the
purpose of conducting such inspection, the fire chief is hereby empowered to enter any and all
buildings and premises within the town at any reasonable hour. Any person served with such
written notice shall comply and notify the fire chief of his compliance within a reasonable time.
7. Maintain Records: Keep complete records of all fires, inspections, apparatus and equipment,
personnel and other information about the work of the fire department open to town council
inspection and furnish to the town council such information upon request.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 43/240
8. Annual Report To Council: Make a complete annual report, in writing, to the town council within
one month after the close of the fiscal year. Such report shall include the information specified in
subsection B7 of this section, together with comparative data for previous years and
recommendations for improving the effectiveness of the fire department.
9. Enforce Fire Safety Laws: Enforce or cause to be enforced all ordinances, laws and regulations
of the town and state, insofar as they pertain to fire and safety.
10. Dismissal Of Officers: Demote, dismiss or expel any officer or member of the fire department
for neglect or refusal to perform departmental duties, subject to the right of any members so
demoted, dismissed or expelled to appeal to the town council. (1986 Code § 4-2-4)
C. Disobedience Unlawful: It is unlawful for any person to refuse to obey an order issued by the fire
chief pursuant to his authority. (1986 Code § 4-2-11)
4-1-4: FIRE EQUIPMENT:
The fire department shall be equipped with such apparatus and other equipment as may be required
from time to time to maintain its efficiency and properly protect life and property from fire.
Recommendations concerning apparatus and equipment needed shall be made by the fire chief, and
after approval by the town council, such apparatus and equipment shall be purchased in such manner
as may be designated by the town council. All equipment of the fire department shall be safely and
conveniently housed in such place or places as may be designated by the town council. No person
shall use any fire apparatus or equipment for any private purpose, nor shall any person wilfully take
away or conceal any article used in any way by the fire department. No person shall enter any place
where the fire apparatus is housed or handle any apparatus or equipment belonging to the fire
department unless accompanied by or having special permission of an officer or authorized member
of the fire department. No fire apparatus and equipment shall be hired out or permitted to leave the fire
station except in response to a call for aid at a fire within the corporate limits of the town, or in
response to a call for aid at a fire in an area authorized for fire protection service or mutual aid under
the provisions of section 4-1-8 of this chapter. (1986 Code § 4-2-7)
4-1-5: ENTRY UPON ADJACENT PROPERTY:
It is lawful for any firefighter acting under the direction of the fire chief or another officer in command to
enter upon the premises adjacent to or in the vicinity of any building or other property that is on fire for
the purpose of extinguishing such fire, and no person shall hinder, resist or obstruct any firefighter in
the discharge of his duty as provided in this chapter. (1986 Code § 4-2-6)
4-1-6: RIGHT OF WAY ACKNOWLEDGEMENT2:
Each member of the fire department who drives a private motor vehicle shall be issued suitable
insignia which may be attached to such motor vehicle. All motor equipment of the fire department shall
have right of way over all other traffic when responding to an alarm. No unauthorized vehicle shall
follow within five hundred feet (500') of any apparatus belonging to the fire department, nor park any
vehicle or otherwise cause any obstruction to be placed within twenty feet (20') of the driveway
entrance to any fire station or other place where fire apparatus is stored and on the side of a street
opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy five feet (75') of the entrance or within fifteen
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 44/240
feet (15') of any fire hydrant. No person shall drive any vehicle over a fire hose, except upon specific
orders from the fire chief or other officer in charge where the hose is used. (1986 Code § 4-2-9)
4-1-7: FIRE ALARMS:
Suitable arrangements or equipment shall be provided for citizens to turn in an alarm and for notifying
all members of the fire department so that they may promptly respond. It is unlawful for any person
knowingly to turn in or cause to be turned in a false alarm. (1986 Code § 4-2-10)
4-1-8: PROTECTION OUTSIDE TOWN:
The town council may enter into agreements or contracts to furnish fire protection outside the town or
enter into mutual aid agreements, and the fire department is authorized to render firefighting service
pursuant to the terms of such agreements or contracts. (1986 Code § 4-2-8)
Chapter 2
BURNING RESTRICTIONS
4-2-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or rubbish fire or authorize any such fire to be kindled
or maintained on or in any public street, alley, road or other public ground without a permit or other
proper authorization. During construction or demolition of buildings or structures, no waste materials
or rubbish shall be disposed of by burning on the premises or in the immediate vicinity without having
obtained a permit or other proper authorization. (1986 Code § 9-1-5)
4-2-2: LOCATION RESTRICTION:
No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or rubbish fire or authorize any such fire to be kindled
or maintained on any private land, except as provided for by state law, and unless the location is not
less than fifty feet (50') from any structure and adequate provision is made to prevent fire from
spreading to within fifty feet (50') of any structure, or the fire is contained in an approved waste burner
located safely not less than fifteen feet (15') from any structure. (1986 Code § 9-1-5)
4-2-3: ATTENDANCE OF OPEN FIRES:
Bonfires and rubbish fires shall be constantly attended by a competent person until such fire is
extinguished. This person shall have a garden hose connected to the water supply or other fire
extinguishing equipment readily available for use. (1986 Code § 9-1-5)
4-2-4: CHIEF MAY PROHIBIT:
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 45/240
The chief of the fire department or designee, may prohibit any or all open outdoor fires, bonfires, and
outdoor rubbish fires when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous
or potentially hazardous. Fire restrictions will be determined through a declaration of a "red flag
warning" (or "red flag conditions"). (Ord. 11-336, 6-28-2011)
4-2-5: KINDLING FIRE ON LAND OF OTHERS:
No person shall kindle a fire upon the land of another without permission of the owner thereof or his
agent. (1986 Code § 9-1-5)
4-2-6: DEFINITIONS:
CAMPFIRE: An open outdoor fire used only for the cooking of food or for providing personal warmth
for human beings or for recreational purposes. A campfire shall be no larger than three feet (3') in
diameter and two feet (2') in height.
CHARCOAL FIRE: An open outdoor fire which uses primarily charcoal as the combustible material,
and which is used only for the purpose of cooking food.
FLUE: A pipe, tube, channel, duct or passage through which hot air, gas, steam, smoke or fire may
pass, such as a chimney, stovepipe or stack.
OPEN OUTDOOR FIRE: Any burning, oxidation or combustion of combustible material of any type in
the open where the products of combustion are not directed through a flue, including aerial fireworks
and permissible consumer fireworks but not including campfires and charcoal fires.
RED FLAG WARNING (OR RED FLAG CONDITIONS): A posting by the Snowflake fire department
chief to inform the town of the imminent or actual occurrence of extreme fire danger or extreme fire
conditions as determined by the national weather service. (Ord. 11-336, 6-28-2011)
Chapter 3
NUISANCE CONTROL AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
4-3-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
A. Health And Welfare: The purpose of this Chapter is to promote the health, safety, economic,
aesthetic and general welfare of the citizens of the Town, and to protect neighborhoods against
nuisances, blight and deterioration by establishing requirements for maintenance of all buildings
and structures of whatever kind, and by establishing requirements for the maintenance of all land,
whether improved or unimproved.
B. Applicability: This Chapter shall apply to all buildings, structures and lands within the Town without
regard to the use thereof or the date of construction or alteration of any building or structure. (Ord.
130, 3-25-1997)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 46/240
4-3-2: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. Town Manager: The Town Manager or his delegates shall implement, administer and enforce this
Chapter, and may establish rules, regulations and procedures to implement, administer and
enforce this Chapter.
B. Entry Onto Private Property: At any time, the Town Manager may:
1. Inspect, from outside the boundaries of a property, every portion of the property which is within
plain view;
2. Inspect any portion of a property with the consent of a person who owns the property;
3. Enter the exterior portion of a property, and/or make known his presence at the entrance to a
building or structure, for the purpose of locating or obtaining information or permission from, the
person in control of the property;
4. Enter a property in the manner provided in a search warrant or other court order;
5. Enter a property in any other lawful manner. (Ord. 130, 3-25-1997)
4-3-3: DEFINITIONS:
In this Chapter:
ABANDONED OR JUNKED VEHICLE: Any vehicle without the current required license plate and tag;
or that is inoperable, stripped, scrapped, junked, discarded, dismantled or wrecked.
AUTHORIZED RECEPTACLE: A garbage or debris storage and collection receptacle required or
authorized by the Town.
BLIGHT OR BLIGHTED: Unsightly conditions, including, but not limited to, the accumulation of debris
or garbage; any building structure characterized by holes, rot, collapse, crumbling or rusting; the
presence of any washing machine or other similar household appliance which is located out of doors
at a place which is within public view; and any other similar condition of disrepair, dilapidation or
deterioration.
BUILDING: Any structure having enclosed space and a roof for the housing and/or enclosure of
persons, animals or chattels.
DEBRIS: All combustible and noncombustible solid waste, whether or not subject to decay, including,
but not limited to, abandoned or junked vehicle or part thereof, industrial waste, junk, furniture part,
stove, sink, household fixture, refrigerator, vehicle part, mattress, broken asphalt, broken tile, broken
brick, broken concrete, rubbish, dead animal, cigarette, trash, broken glass, refuse, ash, abandoned,
broken or neglected equipment, a scattering or deposit of anything of little or no apparent economic
value, or other material which creates an unsightly and unsafe condition.
DETERIORATED OR DETERIORATION: An excessive lowering in the quality of the condition or
appearance of a building or structure or any part thereof, characterized by the process of decay or
degeneration, holes, rot, collapse, crumbling, rusting, vermin infestation, exposed electric wiring,
leaking or inoperable plumbing, unsafe conditions or crumbling asphalt or concrete; or by being used
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 47/240
by one or more persons for criminal activity; or by any other evidence of physical decay, excessive
neglect or lack of maintenance.
EXTERIOR SURFACE: The outside surfaces of a building or structure and any attachments thereto,
including, but not limited to, walls, roofs, doors, windows, gutters, porches, patios and chimneys.
GARBAGE: Any spoiled or discarded animal or vegetable material resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking or consumption of food for humans or animals, as well as other organic waste
material subject to rapid decomposition, which is not handled or disposed of properly.
GRAFFITI: Any drawing or inscription that degrades the appearance of property which is carved,
drawn or painted on a surface in a place which can be seen by the public.
INFESTATION: The apparent presence of insects, rodents or other pests.
LAND: All land in the Town, whether improved or unimproved, including, but not limited to vacant lots.
MAJOR REPAIR: The repair of damage to the body of any vehicle, or the removal from any vehicle of
a major portion thereof, including, but not limited to, the differential, transmission, head, engine block,
door, fender, body panel, hood or other similar part.
OWNS: A person who owns, leases, rents, occupies, controls or has the right to control any land,
building or structure.
PERSON: A human being, enterprise, corporation, association, partnership, firm, society or other
similar group or organization.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any street, sidewalk, alley or other public way and any public park, square, space,
ground or building.
STREET: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way, including, but not limited to, every
road, alley, highway, right of way and easement, any part of which is open to use for pedestrian or
vehicular traffic.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground, including, but
not limited to, a driveway, sidewalk, walkway, exterior step, railing, fence or wall.
TOWN MANAGER: The Town Manager, his delegates, or any peace officer.
VEGETATION: Any plant growth, whether living or dead, including, but not limited to, grass, weeds,
bushes, cactus and trees.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property may be transported or drawn
upon a street, upon water or stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 130, 3-25-1997)
4-3-4: PUBLIC NUISANCES:
A. Defined: Public nuisance means any of the following acts, omissions, conditions or things existing
at any place in the Town:
1. Privy, Vault, Pit: A privy, vault, cesspool, sump, pit or like place which is not securely protected
from insects or rodents, or which is foul or malodorous;
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 48/240
2. Manure: Animal manure in any quantity which is not securely protected from insects, rodents
and the elements, except for animal manure used on any farm, garden or ranch in such a
manner and for such purposes as are compatible with reasonable and customary methods of
good husbandry;
3. Junk Yards: Except where permitted by the Zoning Title1, using or maintaining any place for a
junk yard or dumping ground; or for the wrecking, disassembling, major repair or rebuilding of
any vehicle, farm equipment or machinery of any kind; or for the storing or leaving of any
abandoned or junked vehicle, including parts thereof. Notwithstanding the foregoing, major
repair or rebuilding of one vehicle at a time is allowed; provided, that the work is performed in a
place which is not visible from the boundaries of the parcel of land. When an activity which
would otherwise be prohibited by this subsection is nevertheless lawfully conducted on a parcel
of property in accordance with the Zoning Title, at all times every person who owns the parcel
must conduct the activity, and must keep all of the items described in this subsection, in a place
which is not visible from outside the boundaries of the parcel on which the activity is lawfully
conducted;
4. Offensive Substances: Any quantity of putrid, decayed, rotten, unsound or unwholesome bone,
meat, hide, skin, dead animal, fish, fowl or animal matter, butcher's trimmings, waste vegetation,
garbage, urine, feces, sewage or other similarly offensive substance; except for the temporary
retention of such items in an authorized receptacle in a manner authorized by law;
5. Excavations: Any unmarked or unprotected excavation, pit, well or hole which poses a
substantial risk of injury to any person: (Ord. 130, 3-25-1997)
a. It is unlawful for any person to make any excavation or dig any hole, drain or ditch in any
highway or thoroughfare in the Town without providing a sufficient light at night and a
temporary fence or suitable obstruction around such excavation to protect the public during
the day.
b. It is unlawful for any person to maintain a well, cellar, pit or other excavation of more than two
feet (2') in depth on any unenclosed lot, without substantial curbing, covering or protection.
(1986 Code § 10-1-2)
6. Unlocked Containers: Leaving or permitting to remain out of doors at any place, or within any
unoccupied or abandoned building or structure, any icebox, refrigerator or other container which
has an attached door or lid designed or intended to be airtight and a locking device which may
not be released from the inside;
7. Obstructions: Creating or maintaining any condition that obstructs or renders dangerous the use
or passage of any public property such as parks, streams, watercourses, sidewalks, squares,
alleys, streets or easements, or which interferes with, obstructs or blocks the vision of any
motorist;
8. Buildings; Structures: Any building or structure which is partially destroyed, structurally unsound,
left in a state of partial construction or abandoned;
9. Fire Conditions: Any condition which substantially increases the risk of fire;
10. Infestations: Any infestation or any condition which poses a substantial risk of attracting or
concealing insects, rodents, vermin, wild animals, scorpions or poisonous snakes, or which
increases the likelihood of infestation;
11. Health And Safety Risks: Any condition which poses a substantial risk to the health or safety of
any person or of the public, including, but not limited to, an unsafe, unsanitary or structurally
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 49/240
unsound condition; (Ord. 130, 3-25-1997)
12. Conditions Multiplying Flies: No owner, tenant or occupant of any premises within the Town
shall suffer, permit or have upon such premises any cesspool, vault, pit or like place; or animal
manure, garbage, trash, litter, rags or any other thing in which flies may breed or multiply, unless
the same shall be protected as to prevent the attraction, breeding and multiplying of flies; (1986
Code § 9-3-6)
13. Dangerous Structures: It is unlawful for any person to maintain or allow any signs, billboards,
awnings and other similar structures over or near streets, sidewalks, public grounds or places
frequented by the public, so situated or constructed as to endanger the public safety. (1986
Code § 10-1-1)
B. Prohibited: Every person who owns any property in the Town shall keep and maintain the property
free of every public nuisance. No person shall cause, maintain, allow, suffer or permit the existence
of a public nuisance anywhere in the Town. (Ord. 130, 3-25-1997)
4-3-5: PREMISES HOUSING ANIMALS:
The premises upon which fowl, rodents, cattle, horses, mules, sheep or goats are kept shall always be
sanitary and subject to inspection and regulation by the Town. (1986 Code § 9-3-4; 1997 Code)
4-3-6: LITTER CONTROL:
A. Littering Unlawful: No person shall throw, deposit or bury any garbage or debris on any property
within the Town.
B. Property Of Owner: Every person who owns property within the Town shall at all times keep and
maintain the property free of garbage and debris, except garbage or debris contained within an
authorized receptacle.
C. Area Adjacent: Every person who owns any property in the Town shall at all times keep and
maintain every sidewalk, landscape area, street, alley, easement, right of way or other similar area
adjacent to the property free of garbage and debris, except garbage or debris contained within an
authorized receptacle.
D. Transporting: No person shall transport any garbage or debris within the Town unless the vehicle
used is loaded in a manner which prevents material contained within or loaded upon the vehicle, or
any part thereof, from blowing, falling or being deposited upon any street, alley or other public
place. (Ord. 130, 3-25-1997)
4-3-7: MAINTENANCE OF LAND, BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:
Every person who owns any land, building or structure in the Town shall at all times keep and maintain
the land, building or structure in a manner which is free of:
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 50/240
A. Deterioration, blight, debris and garbage;
B. Poison oak, poison ivy, any noxious or toxic weed, any uncultivated or overgrown plant, any dry or
dead vegetation or any grass greater than thirty inches (30") in height;
C. Graffiti;
D. Every condition which poses a risk to the health and safety of the public or of any person. (Ord.
130, 3-25-1997)
4-3-8: VIOLATIONS:
A. Civil:
1. Every person who owns any land, building or structure in the Town is civilly responsible for every
violation of this Chapter which exists with respect to such land, building or structure.
2. Upon finding a person responsible for a civil violation, the court shall impose upon such person
a civil sanction of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than three hundred dollars
($300.00). The court shall not suspend the imposition of the minimum sanction unless the court
finds by a preponderance of the evidence that the person has corrected every violation for which
he was found responsible, and that the person is in compliance with this Chapter. In that event,
the court may, in its discretion, suspend all but twenty five dollars ($25.00) of the sanction upon
such conditions as the court deems just.
3. A first violation of this Chapter shall be cited by the Town as a civil violation. If a person is found
guilty in any twenty four (24) month period of a second violation of this Chapter, the person may
be cited for a criminal violation.
B. Criminal:
1. Every person who owns any land, building or structure in the Town, and who intentionally,
knowingly, wilfully or recklessly causes, allows, suffers or permits a violation of this Chapter to
exist with respect to such land, building or structure commits a Class One misdemeanor.
2. Upon conviction, the court, at a minimum, shall sentence the defendant to a fine of not less than
one hundred dollars ($100.00) and to probation for not less than one year. The court shall not
suspend the imposition of the minimum fine or probation unless the court finds by a
preponderance of the evidence that the defendant has corrected every violation for which the
defendant was found guilty, and that the defendant is in compliance with this Chapter. In that
event the court may, in its discretion, suspend all but fifty dollars ($50.00) of the fine on the
condition that the defendant does not commit another criminal violation of this Chapter for three
(3) years following the date of sentencing.
C. Actions Not Exclusive: The Town's election to prosecute a civil or criminal action to enforce the
provisions of this Chapter does not limit or restrict the Town's ability to bring against the defendant
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 51/240
any other action authorized by law, including, but not limited to, an administrative abatement
proceeding. (Ord. 130, 3-25-1997)
4-3-9: CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS:
A. Authority: In addition to any civil sanction or criminal penalty, the court may in its discretion order
the defendant to correct the violation by a specified date, and may order the Town to enter the
property and correct the violation if the defendant fails to comply with the court's correction order.
The court may require the defendant to correct the violation as a condition of suspending a portion
of the civil sanction or criminal penalty.
B. Recovery Of Costs Incurred By Town:
1. For a civil violation of this Chapter, if the Town corrects a violation pursuant to this Chapter, the
Town may petition the court to recover the costs, expenses and attorney fees which the Town
incurred in correcting the violation and in bringing the petition for recovery. If the court finds by a
preponderance of the evidence that the Town is entitled to recover, the court may order the
defendant to pay to the Town the amount of the costs, expenses and attorney fees reasonably
incurred by the Town, and may enter judgment in favor of the Town and against the defendant in
that amount. The court may make payment of the judgment a condition of suspending a portion
of the civil sanction.
2. For a criminal violation of this Chapter, if the Town corrects a violation pursuant to this Chapter,
the Town may petition the court to order the defendant to pay restitution to the Town in the
amount of the costs, expenses and attorney fees which the Town incurred in correcting the
violation and in bringing the petition for restitution. The court may, in its discretion, order the
defendant to pay such restitution to the Town. The court may make the payment of restitution a
condition of suspending a portion of the criminal penalty. (Ord. 130, 3-25-1997)
4-3-10: JOINT AND SEVERAL LIABILITY:
A. If more than one person owns a particular parcel of property, then all such persons are jointly and
severally liable for every civil violation of this Chapter existing with respect to that parcel.
B. In a criminal prosecution for violations of this Chapter, it shall not be a defense that another person
is also guilty of a criminal or civil violation of this Chapter. (Ord. 130, 3-25-1997)
4-3-11: ADMINISTRATIVE ABATEMENT:
A. Authority: If there is a violation of any provision of this Chapter, the Town may proceed with an
administrative abatement proceeding as set forth in this Section. Nothing in this Chapter shall
require the Town to proceed under this Section.
B. Notice: Notice of a violation under this Chapter shall be served either personally or mailed to the
owner and to the occupant or lessee, if any, at their last-known addresses by certified mail, or the
address to which the tax bill for the property was last mailed. If the owner does not reside on such
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 52/240
property, a duplicate notice shall also be sent to him by certified mail at his last known address.
The notice shall contain a statement that unless the person owning or controlling such property
complies therewith within thirty (30) days from the date such written notice is received, that the
Town will, at the expense of the person owning or controlling said property, perform or cause to be
performed the necessary work and that such person may appeal in writing to the Town Council
within thirty (30) days from the date that the written notice is received by him and prior to the date
of compliance. The notice shall include a legal description of the property and the approximate cost
to the Town if the person fails to comply with the notice.
C. Appeal Of Requirement: Prior to the date set for compliance on the notice, the owner or person
controlling such property may appeal in writing to the Town Council from the demand of the Town.
The Town Council, or its delegates, shall hear and determine the same and the decision of said
body shall be final. Said body may either affirm or reverse the decision of the Town or modify the
scope of work as required in the notice.
D. Refusal To Comply; Cost Assessment: If a person to whom notice, as aforesaid has been given, or
on or before the date of compliance on the notice, or within such further time as may have been
granted on appeal by the Town Council or its delegates, fails, neglects or refuses to remove from
such property any or all nuisances, the Town Manager is authorized and directed to either cause
same to be removed or disposed of at the expense of the owner and person controlling such
property. Upon completion of the work, the Town shall prepare a verified statement of account of
the actual costs of such removal or abatement, the additional inspection costs, labor costs, other
incidental connected costs and associated legal costs, the date the work was completed; and the
street address and/or the legal description of the property on which said work was done. The Town
shall mail a duplicate copy of such verified statement to the person owning and controlling such
property.
E. Appeal Of Assessment: The owner and/or person controlling such property shall have thirty (30)
days from the date of mailing to appeal in writing to the Town Council from the amount of
assessment as contained in the verified statement. If an appeal is not filed with the Town Council
within such thirty (30) day period, then the amount of the assessment as determined by the Town
shall become final and binding. If an appeal is taken, the Town Council, or its delegates, shall hear
and determine the appeal and may affirm the amount of the assessment, modify the amount
thereof, or determine that no assessment at all shall be made. The decision of said body shall be
final and binding on all persons.
F. Assessment Recorded: If no appeal is taken from the amount of the assessment, or if an appeal is
taken and the Town Council or its delegate, has affirmed or modified the amount of the
assessment, the original assessment or the assessment as so modified shall be recorded in the
office of the County Recorder and from the date of its recording, shall be a lien on said lot or tract
of land until paid. Such assessments shall be superior to all other liens, obligations, mortgages or
other encumbrances, except liens for general taxes. A sale of the property to satisfy an
assessment obtained under the provisions of this Section shall be made upon judgment of
foreclosure and order of sale. The Town shall have the right to bring an action to enforce the
assessment in the Superior Court of the county in which the property is located at any time after
the recording of the assessment, but failure to enforce the assessment by such action shall not
affect its validity. The recorded assessment shall be prima facie evidence of the truth of all matters
recited therein and of the regularity of all proceedings prior to the recording thereof.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 53/240
G. Installment Plans: Assessments that are imposed under this Chapter run against the property until
paid and are due and payable in equal annual installments as follows:
1. Assessments of less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be paid within one year after the
assessment is recorded.
2. Assessment of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more but less than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) shall be paid within two (2) years after the assessment is recorded.
3. Assessments of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more but less than five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) shall be paid within three (3) years after the assessment is recorded.
4. Assessments of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more but less than ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) shall be paid within six (6) years after the assessment is recorded.
5. Assessments of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more shall be paid within ten (10) years
after the assessment is recorded.
H. Past Due Interest: An assessment that is past due accrues interest at the rate prescribed by law.
I. Prior Assessments: A prior assessment for the purposes provided in this Chapter shall not be a bar
to a subsequent assessment or assessments for these purposes, and any number of assessments
on the same lot or tract of land may be enforced in the same action. (Ord. 130, 3-25-1997)
4-3-12: PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this Chapter, as amended, shall be guilty of a civil
offense or a Class One misdemeanor. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense
punishable as hereinabove described. (Ord. 130, 3-25-1997)
Footnote 1: See Title 10 of this Code.
Chapter 4
SMOKING RESTRICTIONS
4-4-1: PURPOSE:
Because the smoking of tobacco and the inhalation of environmental tobacco smoke (ETS) are
dangers to human health and the most prevalent cause of preventable death, disease, and disability,
as well as are annoyances, inconveniences, discomforts and general health hazards to those who are
involuntarily exposed to such, and in order to serve the public health, safety and welfare, the declared
purpose of this Chapter is to protect people from dangerous, unnecessary and/or involuntary health
risks by prohibiting the smoking of tobacco or any other plant on or in any Municipally owned
buildings. (Ord. 135, 10-21-1997)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 54/240
4-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this Chapter:
SMOKE OR SMOKING: A. Carrying or placing of a lighted cigarette or lighted cigar or lighted pipe or
any other lighted smoking equipment in one's mouth for inhaling and exhaling smoke or blowing
smoke rings.
B. Placing of a lighted cigarette or lighted cigar or lighted pipe or any other lighted smoking
equipment in an ashtray or other receptacle, and allowing smoke to diffuse in the air.
C. Carrying or placing of a lighted cigarette or lighted cigar or lighted pipe or any other lighted
smoking equipment in one's hands or any appendage of devices and allowing smoke to diffuse
in the air.
TOWN PROPERTY: All buildings and vehicles owned, leased or occupied by the Town of Snowflake.
(Ord. 135, 10-21-1997)
4-4-3: SMOKING ON TOWN PROPERTY PROHIBITED:
No person shall smoke in or on any Town property at any time. (Ord. 135, 10-21-1997)
4-4-4: PENALTY AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be liable for the imposition of a civil
sanction not to exceed twenty five dollars ($25.00) for the first offense and fifty dollars ($50.00) for
each successive offense. A third violation will be considered a Class One misdemeanor punishable
by up to six (6) months in jail and a fine of up to two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
Each day a violation continues after a citation for the violation has been issued constitutes a
separate violation.
B. By enforcing this Chapter, the Town undertakes only to promote the general welfare and health of
the community. It does not assume, nor does it impose on its officers and employees, an obligation
for breach of which it is liable in money damages to any person claiming injury from such breach.
(Ord. 135, 10-21-1997)
Chapter 5
MEDICAL MARIJUANA
4-5-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter defines the requirements for the sale and use of medical marijuana as established by
Arizona Revised Statutes section 36-2801 et seq., and regulates the sale and use in order to protect,
enhance, and promote the health, safety and welfare of individuals within the town of Snowflake. (Ord.
11-331, 2-8-2011)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 55/240
4-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:
DESIGNATED CAREGIVER: A person who is at least twenty one (21) years old; has agreed to assist
a patient with the use of medical marijuana; has not been convicted of an excluded felony, may assist
no more than five (5) patients as defined by Arizona Revised Statutes section 36-2801(5).
MEDICAL MARIJUANA: All parts of the genus cannabis whether growing or not, and the seed of such
plants that may be administered to treat or alleviate a qualifying patient's debilitating medical condition
or symptoms associated with the patient's debilitating medical condition.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA COMBINATION FACILITY: A facility that combines the dispensing and
cultivation of medical marijuana as approved by the town of Snowflake.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION: The process by which a person grows a marijuana plant.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION AND STORAGE FACILITY: A facility shall mean a building,
structure or premises used for the cultivation or storage of medical marijuana that is physically
separate and off site from a medical marijuana dispensary.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY: A nonprofit entity defined in Arizona Revised Statutes section
36-2801(11), that sells, distributes, transmits, gives, dispenses, or otherwise provides medical
marijuana to qualifying patients.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA INFUSION FACILITY: A facility that incorporates medical marijuana
(cannabis) by the means of cooking, blending, or incorporation into consumable/edible goods.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA QUALIFYING PATIENT: A person who has been diagnosed by a physician as
having a debilitating medical condition as defined in Arizona Revised Statutes section 36-2801.13.
PHYSICIAN: A person authorized to issue a certificate pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes section
36-2801.12. (Ord. 11-331, 2-8-2011)
4-5-3: MEDICAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION; NONRESIDENTIAL:
Medical marijuana cultivation is subject to the following conditions and limitations:
A. The applicant shall provide:
1. The name(s) and location(s) of all off site medical marijuana dispensaries associated with the
cultivation operation.
2. A copy of the operating procedures adopted in compliance with Arizona Revised Statutes
section 36-2804(B)(1)(c) as set forth in the application submitted to DHS.
3. A survey sealed by a registrant of the state of Arizona showing the location of all medical
marijuana dispensary or cultivation locations within five thousand two hundred eighty feet
(5,280').
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 56/240
B. Combination facilities are subject to the regulations of this section and section 4-5-5 of this chapter.
C. Retail sales of medical marijuana from cultivation locations is prohibited except for combination
facilities as approved by the town of Snowflake.
D. Medical marijuana cultivation may be permitted as a special use in AG, LI, and GC zoning districts.
E. Shall not be located within five thousand two hundred eighty feet (5,280') of similar facilities or
operations. This distance shall be measured from the lot line of the property in which the cultivation
is conducted or proposed to be conducted.
F. Shall not be located within five hundred feet (500') of a residentially zoned property. This distance
shall be measured from the lot line of the property in which the cultivation is conducted or
proposed to be conducted to the property boundary line of the residentially zoned property.
G. Shall not be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of a preschool, kindergarten, elementary,
secondary or high school, place of worship, public park, public cemetery, or community center.
This distance shall be measured from the lot line of the property in which the cultivation is
conducted or proposed to be conducted to the property line of the protected use.
H. Shall have operating hours no earlier than six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and no later than eight o'clock
(8:00) P.M.
I. Shall provide for proper disposal of marijuana remnants or byproducts and not to be placed within
the facility's exterior refuse containers. (Ord. 11-331, 2-8-2011)
4-5-4: MEDICAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION; RESIDENTIAL:
Residential medical marijuana cultivation is subject to the following conditions and limitations:
A. A residential cultivation property must be located more than twenty five (25) miles from a medical
marijuana dispensary as defined in Arizona Revised Statutes section 36-2801(11).
B. Residential cultivation shall be conducted only by a qualifying patient or a designated caregiver as
defined by Arizona Revised Statutes section 36-2801.
C. There shall be no exterior evidence of medical marijuana cultivation either within or outside a
residential property as viewed from a public right of way.
D. The qualified patient shall reside in the residence in which the residential medical marijuana
cultivation occurs.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 57/240
E. The qualified patient may only cultivate marijuana in the patient's primary residence. It is unlawful
for a qualified patient otherwise to cultivate marijuana within the town limits of the town of
Snowflake.
F. The residence shall maintain kitchen, bathrooms, and primary bedroom(s) for their intended use
and shall not be used primarily for residential medical marijuana cultivation.
G. The quantity of residentially cultivated medical marijuana shall be limited to twelve (12) marijuana
plants as defined by Arizona Revised Statutes section 36-2801(1)(b)(ii).
H. There shall be no emission of dust, fumes, vapors, or odors of marijuana into the environment from
the residence.
I. Residential cultivation shall be confined to an enclosed locked facility as defined by Arizona Revised
Statutes section 36-2801(6). (Ord. 11-331, 2-8-2011)
4-5-5: MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSING FACILITIES:
Medical marijuana dispensaries are subject to the following conditions and limitations:
A. The applicant shall provide:
1. The name(s) and location(s) of all off site medical marijuana cultivation operations associated
with and/or providing product to the dispensary.
2. A copy of the operating procedures adopted in compliance with Arizona Revised Statutes
section 36-2804(B)(1)(c) as submitted to DHS.
3. A survey sealed by a registrant of the state of Arizona showing the location of all medical
marijuana dispensaries or cultivation locations within five thousand two hundred eighty feet
(5,280').
4. A site plan, floor plan, building permits for occupancy change if required, and a security plan.
B. Combination facilities are subject to the regulations of section 4-5-3 of this chapter and this section.
C. Shall be located in a permanent building and may not be located in a trailer, cargo container, motor
vehicle or similar temporary structure.
D. Shall be a maximum one thousand five hundred (1,500) gross square feet for a dispensing facility
or three thousand (3,000) gross square feet for a combination dispensing/cultivation facility.
E. Shall not be located within five thousand two hundred eighty feet (5,280') of the same type of use.
This distance shall be measured from the lot line of the property in which the dispensing is
conducted or proposed to be conducted.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 58/240
F. Shall not be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of a preschool, kindergarten, elementary,
secondary or high school, place of worship, public park, public cemetery, or public community
center. This distance shall be measured from the lot line of the property in which the cultivation is
conducted or proposed to be conducted to the property line of the protected use.
G. Drive-through services are prohibited.
H. Shall have operating hours no earlier than six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and no later than eight o'clock
(8:00) P.M.
I. Shall provide for proper disposal of marijuana remnants or byproducts, and not to be placed within
the facility's exterior refuse containers. (Ord. 11-331, 2-8-2011)
Chapter 6
INDUSTRIAL HEMP
4-6-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter defines the requirements for the cultivation and processing of industrial hemp as
established by Arizona Revised Statutes section 3-311 et seq., and regulates the cultivation and
processing in order to protect, enhance, and promote the health, safety and welfare of individuals
within the Town of Snowflake. (Ord. 2018-01, 8-7-2018)
4-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:
AGRICULTURAL PILOT PROGRAM: Means the industrial hemp program that is designed to research
the growth, cultivation, and marketing of industrial hemp, hemp seeds and hemp products as
authorized by Arizona Revised Statutes 3-311 et seq., and the rules and orders adopted by the
Director of the Arizona Department of Agriculture.
DEPARTMENT: Means the Arizona Department of Agriculture.
GROWER: Means an individual partnership company or corporation that propagates industrial hemp
pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes 3-311 et seq., and the rules and orders adopted by the Director
of the department.
HARVESTER: Means an individual partnership company or corporation that is licensed by the
department to harvest industrial hemp for a licensed grower.
INDUSTRIAL HEMP: Means the plant cannabis sativa L., and any part of such a plant, whether
growing or not with a delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol concentration of not more than three-tenths percent
(3/10%) on a dry-weight basis.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 59/240
INDUSTRIAL HEMP SITE: Means the location at which a grower, harvester, transporter or processor
possesses industrial hemp.
LICENSE: Means the authorization that is granted by the department to propagate, harvest, transport,
or process industrial hemp.
PROCESSOR: Means an individual partnership company or corporation that is licensed by the
Arizona Department of Agriculture to receive industrial hemp for processing into hemp products and
hemp seeds.
TRANSPORTER: Means an individual partnership company or corporation that is licensed by the
Arizona Department of Agriculture to transport industrial hemp for a licensed grower to a processor.
(Ord. 2018-01, 8-7-2018)
4-6-3: INDUSTRIAL HEMP SITES:
Industrial hemp sites are subject to the following conditions and limitations:
A. The applicant shall provide:
1. A copy of the license issued by the Department of Agriculture which authorizes the operation of
an industrial hemp site.
2. A map showing the location of all medical marijuana cultivation locations within ten (10) miles of
the proposed industrial hemp site.
B. Industrial hemp sites may be permitted as a special use in AG, LI, and GC Zoning Districts.
C. Shall not be located within ten (10) miles of a medical marijuana cultivation location. This distance
shall be measured as a straight line, without regard for intervening structures or jurisdictional
boundaries, from the lot line of the property on which the industrial hemp site is proposed to be
conducted to the nearest lot line of the medical marijuana cultivation location.
D. Shall not be located within five hundred feet (500') of a Residentially zoned property. This distance
shall be measured from the lot line of the property in which the cultivation is conducted or
proposed to be conducted to the property boundary line of the Residentially zoned property.
E. Shall not be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of a preschool, kindergarten, elementary,
secondary or high school, place of worship, public park, public cemetery, or community center.
This distance shall be measured from the lot line of the property in which the cultivation is
conducted or proposed to be conducted to the property line of the protected use. (Ord. 2018-01, 8-
7-2018)
Title 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 60/240
Chapter 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT1
5-1-1: CREATED; COMPOSITION:
There is hereby created a police department for the town which shall consist of a chief of police, who
shall also serve as town marshal, and as many police officers as may from time to time be deemed
necessary by the town council for the safety and good order of the town. (1986 Code § 4-1-1)
5-1-2: ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION:
A. Appointment Of Officers: The chief of police shall be appointed by the town manager and shall
serve at the pleasure of the town manager. (Ord. 05-252, 8-23-2005)
B. Departmental Rules And Regulations: The police department shall be operated and managed in
accordance with such departmental rules and regulations as may from time to time be adopted by
the town council. (1986 Code § 4-1-4)
C. Compensation: The chief of police and the police officers shall be compensated as determined by
the town council. The chief of police shall not receive any perquisites, commissions or
compensation for his services as chief of police or town marshal, except as the town council may
prescribe. (1986 Code § 4-1-3)
5-1-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
It is the duty of the police department, under the direction of the chief of police, to:
A. Enforce Laws: Enforce this code and the statutes of the state within jurisdictional limits as conferred
by law and to arrest and charge the violators thereof.
B. Charge Of Laborers: Take charge of all those who are sentenced to labor on the streets or public
works of the town and to see that orders and sentences with reference to such are fully executed
and complied with.
C. Deliver Prisoners: Deliver any persons who may be confined in the jail upon conviction of a crime
committed under the jurisdiction of the magistrate court to any authorized officer of the town who
shall at any time demand such prisoners. Any such authorized person so demanding and receiving
such prisoners shall work such prisoners on the streets or alleys of the town or on any and all
authorized work as may be determined by the town council or town manager.
D. Records; Maintenance: Render such account of the police department, its duties and receipts as
may be required by the town council or town manager, and keep records of the office open to
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 61/240
inspection by the town council at any time, except those records as may be exempted by state or
federal law.
E. Traffic Enforcement: Enforce the traffic regulations of the town as specified in title 6 of this code and
enforce the traffic laws of the state within the limits of the town.
F. Authority To Detain Suspects: Any peace officer or duly authorized agent of the town may stop and
detain a person as is reasonably necessary to investigate an actual or suspected violation of any
provision of this code, and to serve a copy of the traffic complaint for any alleged civil or criminal
violation of this code.
G. Additional Required Duties: Perform such additional duties as may be required by the town council
or town manager. (1986 Code § 4-1-5)
5-1-4: ANSWERING CALLS OUTSIDE TOWN:
The members of the police department are duly authorized to answer calls for aid and assistance
beyond the corporate limits of the town whenever the chief of police, in his discretion, shall deem it
necessary to protect lives and property. (1986 Code § 4-1-6)
Chapter 2
ANIMAL CONTROL
5-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter and Article 5-2A of this Title:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: The Animal Control Officer of the Town, his designee or any peace
officer responsible for the enforcement of this Chapter.
ANIMAL OR ANIMALS: Horses, mules, burros, cattle, goats, sheep, cats, swine, llamas, ostriches,
emus or other livestock, poultry or any other animal that is susceptible to rabies, except dogs.
AT LARGE: Off the premises of the owner or not under the control of the owner, or other persons
acting for or on behalf of the owner.
COLLAR: A band, chain, harness or suitable device worn around the neck of the dog to which a
license may be affixed.
CONTROL OF OWNER: An owner or person responsible for the animal has immediate verbal control
or actual physical control of said animal.
DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS: An animal or dog which has a propensity to attack, to cause injury or
otherwise endanger the safety of human beings without provocation or which has been found to be a
vicious animal by a court of competent authority, which bites, inflicts physical injury on or attacks a
human being, or constitutes a physical threat to other animals.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 62/240
DOG: A member of the "canis familiaris" family.
OWNER: Any person owning, keeping, possessing, harboring or maintaining a dog or an animal.
POUND: Any establishment authorized by the Town for the confinement, maintenance, safekeeping
and control of dogs that come into custody of the Animal Control Officer.
REPEATEDLY: More than three (3) times in any thirty (30) day period.
VACCINATION: An anti-rabies vaccination using a type of vaccine approved by the State Veterinarian.
WILD ANIMAL: An animal of a wild nature or disposition. (Ord. 119, 2-25-1997)
5-2-2: ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
It is unlawful for any person to, in any manner, intervene, impede, prevent, obstruct or intimidate the
Animal Control Officer in the discharge of his duties in citing and impounding, or who shall rescue or
attempt to rescue any animal which has been impounded. (Ord. 119, 2-25-1997)
5-2-3: PUBLIC NUISANCE:
Any animal which does any of the following is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and may be
impounded by the Animal Control Officer at a cost to be borne by the owner. It is unlawful for any
person to permit such animal or animals to:
A. Molest passersby or passing vehicles;
B. Attack other animals;
C. Trespass on school grounds;
D. Repeatedly be at large;
E. Damage public or private property;
F. Bark, whine, howl, crow or burrow in an excessive, continuous or untimely fashion;
G. Repeatedly cause garbage to be thrown about; (Ord. 119, 2-25-1997)
H. A person who opens and does not close a gate thereby releasing the animal(s) of another as
defined in section 5-2-4 of this chapter, creates a public nuisance and is subject to the provisions
of this section as though such person were the owner of such animal(s) put at large, including, but
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 63/240
not limited to, the payment of damages caused to the owner(s) of the animal(s) released and/or
damages caused to others and their property and the payment of impound fees and costs. (Ord.
07-283, 2-13-2007)
5-2-4: AT LARGE:
A. Unlawful: It is unlawful to permit any animal to run at large in the town. Any such animal may be
impounded as provided in this chapter. It is also unlawful for any person to release an animal or
animals belonging to another, by opening a gate and then failing to close the gate of a barn, pen,
corral, pasture, or similar enclosures thereby causing or permitting the animal or animals to roam
at large. In the event a person, not the owner of the animal(s), has negligently, or unlawfully
opened a pen, corral, pasture, or similar enclosure and thereby caused or permitted an animal or
animals to run at large, then and in that event, such person is liable for the damages caused by
such animal(s) while at large.
B. Enclosure Required: Any person who keeps or causes to be kept any animal (except for cats)
within the corporate limits of the town shall keep such animal in a pen, corral, pasture or similar
enclosure to prevent their roaming at large. No such animal shall be kept within fifty feet (50') of
any occupied structure which is not occupied by the owner.
1. Exceptions: The prohibition against animal(s) running at large stated herein does not apply to
animals kept in those areas within the city limits that are or have been enclosed by fences,
corrals, barns, pens or similar enclosures being used for agricultural or personal purposes,
including, but not limited to, rangeland(s), pasture(s), corral(s), barn(s), or pen(s), or similar
enclosures, regardless of the size of such rangeland(s), pasture(s), barn(s), corral(s), pen(s) or
similar enclosure(s). This exception shall also apply to the heirs, lessees, and assigns of the
owner(s) of such barn(s), corral(s), pen(s) or similar enclosure(s).
2. Cattle Guards: If an owner of real property elects to lawfully sell or lease acreage bounded in
any way within such rangeland(s), pasture(s), corral(s), pen(s) or similar enclosure(s), then and
in that event, at the point(s) of ingress/egress of the external boundary of the rangeland(s),
pasture(s), corral(s), barn(s), pen(s), or similar enclosure(s), the seller or landowner shall
provide a cattle guard and a gate by which entry and exit thereto can be made. Any person that
tampers with a cattle guard such as covering it with flat surfaced materials, filling it with sand,
gravel or rock, or opening a gate contiguous thereto, shall be guilty of a class one misdemeanor.
(Ord. 07-283, 2-13-2007)
C. Picket Or Tie In Streets: It is unlawful to picket or tie any animal on any of the streets or rights of
way of the town for the purpose of grazing or feeding if it interferes with the safe passage of
pedestrians or vehicles.
D. Impounding Authority: Any animal at large may be impounded by the animal control officer.
E. Liability For Damages: The owner of an animal is liable for damages caused by such animal while
at large. (Ord. 119, 2-25-1997)
5-2-5: DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS:
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 64/240
It is unlawful to permit a dangerous or vicious animal of any kind to run at large within the town limits.
Any such animals may be immediately impounded.
A. Complaints: Upon complaint of any person, and after notice to the owner and a civil hearing, the
town magistrate may determine that an animal is dangerous or vicious and order one or more of
the following:
1. The destruction of said animal;
2. That such animal be confined within a building or secure enclosure;
3. That such animal be securely muzzled or caged at all times.
B. Destruction: The animal control officer is authorized to destroy any dangerous animal of any kind,
upon an order from the town magistrate, or when it is necessary for the protection of any person or
property, when in their judgment the animal is:
1. Dangerous or vicious; and
2. Cannot be safely impounded. (Ord. 119, 2-25-1997)
5-2-6: WILD ANIMALS:
Exhibitions or parades of wild animals may be conducted only upon securing a permit from the police
department. (Ord. 119, 2-25-1997)
5-2-7: DISTURBING THE PEACE:
No person owning, keeping, possessing, harboring or maintaining an animal shall suffer or permit
such animal to disturb the peace and quiet of any person any time of day or night by barking, whining,
howling, crowing, braying or by making any other similar objectionable noise, by running through or
across cultivated gardens, fields or landscaped yards. (Ord. 119, 2-25-1997)
5-2-8: SWINE:
It is unlawful to keep any live swine or potbellied pigs in the town within seventy five feet (75') of any
building used for human residence. (Ord. 119, 2-25-1997)
5-2-9: DISEASED ANIMALS:
A. Prohibited: No animal afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease shall be allowed to run at
large or be exposed to any public place whereby the health of man or beast may be affected.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 65/240
B. Removal: It shall be unlawful for any person knowing or suspecting an animal which has rabies or
with a contagious or infectious disease to allow such an animal to be taken off his premises or
beyond the limits of the town without the written permission of the animal control officer. Every
owner or other person knowing or suspecting that an animal has rabies or any contagious or
infectious disease shall immediately notify the animal control officer who shall either remove the
animal to the pound or summarily destroy it, except in cases where the state health officer or state
veterinarian is empowered to act. (Ord. 119, 2-25-1997)
5-2-10: IMPOUNDMENT:
A. Notice To Owners:
1. If the owner of any impounded animal shall be known to the animal control officer and shall
reside or have a known place of business in the town, the animal control officer shall notify the
owner of such animal personally or by letter through the post office or by notice placed at the
residence of the owner within forty eight (48) hours after such animal has been impounded. The
notice shall contain a description of the animal and shall state that unless reclaimed, such
animal shall be adopted or destroyed at the time and place specified in the notice.
2. An animal impounded pursuant to this chapter may be sold at public auction to the highest
bidder. Copies of the notice shall be posted at the place of impoundment and at the town hall.
B. Report: The animal control officer shall, after impounding any animal, make a report stating the kind
of animal and describing it by color or otherwise or by any marks or brands that may be on it, and
when it was impounded.
C. Conditions And Duration: The animal control officer shall provide for the keeping of all animals
impounded by the department in a safe, convenient and comfortable place within or near the town
limits and shall feed such animals at least once during every twenty four (24) hours and treat them
in a humane manner during the time they are impounded, which shall not be less than seventy two
(72) hours, unless sooner claimed by the owner.
D. Redemption: If the owner of any animal shall within seventy two (72) hours after such animal has
been impounded, apply to the animal control officer and pay the fees and charges established by
this chapter, the animal control officer may deliver any such animal to the owner or shall arrange
for the owner to pick up the animal from the pound or impound location, unless that animal has
been impounded pursuant to section 5-2-11 of this chapter. (Ord. 119, 2-25-1997)
5-2-11: QUARANTINE OF BITING ANIMALS:
Whenever any animal bites a person, such person and the owner of the animal shall immediately
notify the animal control officer, who shall arrange for quarantine of the animal to be made and shall
order the animal to be held on the owner's premises or shall have it impounded at the pound or at the
veterinary hospital at the owner's expense as long as necessary for a complete examination or for the
length of the quarantine, which will not be less than ten (10) days. Livestock shall be confined and
quarantined for the fourteen (14) day period in a manner regulated by the Arizona department of
agriculture. Caged or pet rodents or rabbits shall not be quarantined or laboratory tested. If it is
determined that the animal is infected with rabies or any other dangerous, infectious or contagious
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 66/240
disease, it shall be the duty of the animal control officer to destroy the animal. If, at the end of the
quarantine or impoundment, it is determined that the animal is free from such disease, the animal
shall be released and the owner will assume all the costs related to the quarantine or impoundment. If
the animal dies during the period of quarantine or impoundment, its head shall be sent to the state
department of health for examination. Any wild animals, with the exception of wild rodents or rabbits,
which bite any person may be killed and submitted to the animal control officer for transmission to an
appropriate diagnostic laboratory. A wild rodent or rabbit may be submitted for laboratory testing if the
animal has bitten a person and either the animal's health or behavior indicates that the animal may
have rabies or the bite occurred in an area that contains a rabies epizootic as determined by the
department of health services. (Ord. 119, 2-25-1997)
5-2-12: PENALTY:
A. Imposed: Unless otherwise provided herein, any person found violating any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of a class one misdemeanor, punishable in accordance with applicable state
law. Any person violating sections 5-2-3, 5-2-4, 5-2-7 of this chapter and sections 5-2A-2 and 5-2A-
6 of this chapter shall be guilty of a petty offense, punishable in accordance with applicable state
law. If any violation be continuing, each day's violation shall be deemed a separate violation. If any
person has two (2) prior petty offense convictions for violations of this chapter or article A of this
chapter, such person may be charged with a class one misdemeanor for any subsequent violation.
B. Revocation Of License: Any dog license may be revoked where: 1) the owner has received two (2)
or more convictions for violations of this chapter or article A of this chapter in a twelve (12) month
period; 2) the owner has been found guilty of animal cruelty pursuant to ordinance or state law; or
3) the owner has been found guilty of dangerous or vicious dog at large. Upon complaint and after
notice to the owner and a civil hearing, the town magistrate may issue an order revoking the
license of such owner and order that no new license may be issued for a specified period of time.
(Ord. 119, 2-25-1997)
ARTICLE A. DOGS
5-2A-1: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of Chapter 2 of this Title shall apply to dogs, unless such provision specifically
excludes dogs or unless there is a provision within this Article covering the same subject matter. (Ord.
119, 2-25-1997)
5-2A-2: VACCINATIONS:
A. Required: No dog shall be allowed to reside in the Town, unless said dog or dogs have been
vaccinated for rabies by a licensed veterinarian.
B. Certificate:
1. Before a license is issued for any dog, the owner must present a vaccination certificate signed
by a veterinarian licensed by this State or a government veterinarian stating the owner's name
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 67/240
and address and giving the dog's description, date of vaccination and type, manufacturer and
serial number of the vaccine and date revaccination is due. No dog shall be licensed unless it is
vaccinated in accordance with the provisions of this Article and the regulation promulgated
hereunder. A complete record of all of the above will be kept by the Animal Control Officer.
2. A dog vaccinated in any other place prior to entry into the Town may be licensed in the Town;
provided, that at the time of licensing, the owner of such dog presents a vaccination certificate,
signed by a veterinarian licensed to practice in that place or a veterinarian employed by a
governmental agency in that place, stating the owner's name and address and giving the dog's
description, date of vaccination and type, manufacturer and serial number of the vaccine used.
The vaccination must be in conformity with the provisions of this Article and the regulations
promulgated hereunder.
C. Low Cost Clinics: The Animal Control Officer may make provision for low cost vaccination clinics as
deemed necessary. The vaccination shall be performed by a veterinarian.
D. Impounded Unvaccinated Dogs: If a dog is impounded and found to be unvaccinated, the Animal
Control Officer is hereby authorized to cause such dog to vaccinated at the pound at a cost to be
borne by the owner. The vaccination shall be performed by a veterinarian, who shall issue a
verification of vaccination. (Ord. 119, 2-25-1997)
5-2A-3: LICENSES1 AND TAGS GENERALLY:
A. License Required: All dogs four (4) months old or older kept, harbored or maintained in the Town
for at least thirty (30) consecutive days in a calendar year must be licensed and registered. Dog
licenses shall be issued by the Animal Control Officer, upon payment of a license fee, which
license shall expire annually on March 31. The owner shall state at the time application is made for
such license, his name and address, the name, breed, color and sex of each dog owned or kept by
him.
B. Guide Dogs; Exemption: A guide dog belonging to a blind person who is a resident of the State or
any bona fide nonprofit organization which is in the business of breeding, raising or training dogs
that are to be used for guiding the blind shall, upon application by the owner or organization to the
Town and on presentation of proper proof, be licensed pursuant to this Article without a payment of
a fee.
C. Tag; Information: Each dog licensed under the terms of this Article shall receive, at the time of
licensing, a tag on which shall be inscribed the name of the Town, the number of the license and
the year in which it expires. The tag shall be attached to a collar or harness which shall be worn by
the dog at all times except as otherwise provided in this Article. Whenever a dog tag is lost, a
duplicate tag shall be issued upon application by the owner and payment of a fee of three dollars
($3.00) to the Animal Control Officer.
D. Counterfeit Tag; Removal: It is unlawful for any person to counterfeit or attempt to counterfeit an
official dog tag or remove such tag from any dog for the purpose of willful and malicious mischief,
or place a dog tag on a dog unless the tag was issued to that dog.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 68/240
E. New Ownership: Whenever the ownership of a dog has been changed, the new owner must secure
a transfer of license to such owner. A transfer fee of five dollars ($5.00) shall be charged to transfer
any license.
F. Exemptions To Wearing Tag: Dogs while being used for hunting or dogs while being exhibited at
recognized kennel club events, or dogs while engaged in races approved by the Arizona Racing
Commission, and such dogs while being transported to and from such events need not wear a
collar or harness with a valid license tag attached; provided, that they are properly vaccinated and
licensed.
G. Apprehend; Impound: The Animal Control Officer may apprehend and impound any dog found
without a current valid license tag.
H. Attachment Of Tag: It shall be the duty of every owner or keeper of any dog kept within the limits of
the Town to cause the license tag hereinabove mentioned to be securely attached around the
dog's neck and kept there at all times during the license period. Absence of the license tag from
the neck of any dog shall be "prima facie" evidence that the dog has not been licensed or
vaccinated as provided in this Article. Any such dog shall be deemed to be unowned. (Ord. 119, 2-
25-1997)
5-2A-4: FEES:
A. Established; Amendment: Fees required to be paid by this Article which are not specified herein
shall be as established by the Town Council by resolution. Fees which are specified in this Article
shall be in effect until such time as the fees are changed by the Town Council by resolution.
B. Specified: The license fee for a dog is five dollars ($5.00) per year, unless it is unsterile, the license
fee is seven dollars ($7.00). The fee for redemption of an impounded dog is twenty dollars ($20.00)
(impound charge). The impound fees double for each subsequent impoundment within one year
(of the incident) of the same dog in the following manner:
1. Second Impoundment: Twenty dollars ($20.00);
2. Third Impoundment: Forty dollars ($40.00);
3. Fourth Impoundment: Eighty dollars ($80.00); and
4. Fifth Impoundment: One hundred sixty dollars ($160.00). (Ord. 119, 2-25-1997)
5-2A-5: RESTRAINT:
No person in charge of any dog shall permit such dog to be in a public park or upon any public school
property unless the dog is physically restrained by a leash, enclosed in a car, cage or similar
enclosure, or being exhibited or trained at a recognized kennel club event, public school or park
sponsored event. (Ord. 119, 2-25-1997)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 69/240
5-2A-6: RUNNING AT LARGE:
A. Prohibited: No person owning, keeping, possessing, harboring or maintaining a dog shall allow
such dog to be at large.
B. Exception: A dog is not deemed to be at large:
1. While said dog is actively engaged in dog obedience training and is accompanied by and under
the control of his owner or trainer.
2. While such dog is being used for hunting purposes.
3. While such dog is being exhibited or trained at a recognized kennel club event.
4. While such dog is engaged in races approved by the Arizona Racing Commission. (Ord. 119, 2-
25-1997)
5-2A-7: BITING DOGS:
A. Reporting: Whenever a dog bites any person, the incident shall be reported to the Animal Control
Officer immediately by any person having direct knowledge.
B. Quarantine; Impoundment: Any dog that bites any person shall be quarantined and impounded, as
prescribed in Section 5-2-11 of this Title, for a period of not less than ten (10) days. The quarantine
period shall start on the day of the bite incident. If the day of the bite is not known, the quarantine
period shall start on the first day of impoundment. If the dog is impounded as a result of a dog bite
incident, the owner shall pay a fifty dollar ($50.00) impound fee.
C. Destruction; Release: If the dog shows clear clinical signs of rabies or other dangerous, contagious
and infectious disease, or if the owner consents to its destruction, it shall be the duty of the Animal
Control Officer to destroy such dog in as humane manner as is reasonably possible. If at the end
of the quarantine or impoundment, the Animal Control Officer, after consultation with a veterinarian
is convinced that the dog is free from such diseases, the dog shall be released. If the dog dies
during the period of quarantine or impoundment, its head shall be sent to the State Department of
Health for an examination. (Ord. 119, 2-25-1997)
5-2A-8: IMPOUNDMENT:
A. Authority: The Animal Control Officer may apprehend and impound any dog found without a current
valid license tag; any dog with or without a current valid license tag which is found running at large;
any dog disturbing the peace; any dog which bites any person; or any dog which is a public
nuisance as defined in Section 5-2-3 of this Title. Said Officer shall have the right to enter upon
private property when it is necessary to do so in reasonable pursuit of and in order to apprehend
any dog subject to impoundment.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 70/240
B. Notification To Owner: The Animal Control Officer shall notify the owner in person or by mail or by
notice placed at the residence of the owner of any licensed dog impounded under the provisions of
this Article.
C. Time Of Impoundment: Each unlicensed dog impounded shall be kept and maintained at the pound
for a minimum of three (3) days. At the expiration of the impoundment period, anyone may claim
the dog; provided, that such person pays all established impound fees and completes the licensing
provisions of this Article. If no person claims the dog, the Animal Control Officer may dispose of the
dog in a humane manner. (Ord. 119, 2-25-1997)
5-2A-9: ADOPTION:
In accordance with Arizona Revised Statutes, section 11-1022 (sterilization of impounded dogs), and
amendments thereto:
A. Spay Or Neuter Required:
1. A dog shall not be released for adoption from a county, city or town pound or from an animal
shelter unless the dog has been surgically spayed or neutered.
2. The adopting party must sign an agreement to have the dog spayed or neutered within thirty
(30) days or before sexual maturity and deposit with the pound or shelter an amount sufficient to
ensure that the dog will be sterilized. The pound or shelter shall refund to the adopting party any
monies deposited pursuant to the agreement if within the time provided in the agreement there is
presented a written statement signed by a licensed veterinarian that the adopted dog has been
spayed or neutered. The deposit required for spaying is fifty dollars ($50.00) and for neutering is
thirty five dollars ($35.00). If the adopting party does not spay or neuter the dog and provide a
receipt to the Town within thirty (30) days, the fee is forfeited to the Town.
B. Fee: The Town adopting fee is fifteen dollars ($15.00), which includes the license fee.
C. Use Of Funds: Deposit monies that are not refunded must be used in public education to prevent
overpopulation of dogs and cats. The Animal Control Division may fund or help fund and
coordinate public education classes or handouts. (Ord. 119, 2-25-1997)
5-2A-10: RABIES EPIDEMIC:
Whenever the prevalence of hydrophobia renders such action necessary to protect the public health
and safety, the Mayor shall issue a proclamation ordering every person owning or keeping a dog to
confine it securely on his premises unless it is muzzled so that it cannot bite. No person shall violate
such proclamation and any unmuzzled dog running at large during the time fixed on the proclamation
may be destroyed by the Animal Control Officer without notice to the owner. (Ord. 119, 2-25-1997)
Footnote 1: See subsection 5-2-12B of this Title for license revocation provisions.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 71/240
Chapter 3
OFFENSES1
5-3-1: DISPLAYING VEHICLES FOR SALE ON PROPERTY:
A. Motor Vehicle Defined: "Motor vehicle" shall be defined as an automobile or truck, motorcycle,
recreational vehicle, boat, trailer or heavy construction or farm vehicles.
B. Unlawful: No person shall cause or permit a motor vehicle owned by or registered to him to be
parked or displayed upon any property other than his own, or upon property which he is renting or
leasing for residential purposes, for the purpose of advertising said vehicle for sale.
C. Exceptions:
1. This section shall not apply to any person who causes or permits the parking of a motor vehicle
owned by him upon property owned by any person licensed by the state for the purpose of
carrying on the business of retail sale of such vehicles.
2. This section shall not apply to the parking of a single vehicle for sale on a single residential lot,
irrespective of vehicle ownership. (Ord. 118, 2-13-1996)
5-3-2: WRECKING OR STORAGE YARD:
A. Location Restricted: It is unlawful for any person to establish, maintain or control a wrecking yard or
storage yard for any type of wrecked or disabled vehicles, of any type or character, within four
hundred feet (400') from the center of Main Street or 3rd North Street within the town. (1986 Code
§ 10-1-18; amd. 1997 Code)
B. Separate Offense: Each twenty four (24) hour period during which such condition remains in
violation of this section shall be deemed to be a separate offense and violation of this section.
(1986 Code § 10-1-18)
5-3-3: EXPLOSIVES AND FIREWORKS; PERMIT REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person within the limits of the town to blast or use powder, display fireworks as
defined by Arizona Revised Statutes 36-1601 et seq., or other explosives without a written permit from
the fire chief. The preceding sentence is not meant to regulate in any way permissible consumer
fireworks as defined by Arizona Revised Statutes 36-1601 et seq. (Ord. 10-330, 12-14-2010)
5-3-4: WEAPONS:
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 72/240
A. Unlawful Discharge Of A Firearm: It is unlawful for any person within the limits of the town to fire or
discharge any firearm within one-fourth (1/4) mile of an occupied structure without permission and
in accordance with Arizona Revised Statutes title 17 (hunting regulations) except:
1. As allowed pursuant to the provisions of chapter 4, title 13 and title 17 of the Arizona Revised
Statutes,
2. On a properly supervised range, or
3. By special permit of the chief of police for the use of such gun or instrument for a valid and
proper purpose, and for use in a manner not likely to harm any person, animal or property.
B. Unlawful Use Of "Other Weapons": No person shall, within the limits of Snowflake, on any public
property, including, but not limited to, public parks, public streets, playgrounds, open space,
recreation facilities or any other public facility, discharge or cause to set off any weapon listed in
this subsection. It is unlawful for any person within the limits of the town to discharge or shoot a
bow and arrow, a BB gun, air gun, pellet gun, dart gun, slingshot, gas operated gun (air soft or
paintball gun) or other similar gun or instrument except:
1. Approval Of Property Owner: On private property with approval of the owner, with a backdrop
that would prevent the projectile from traveling off of the private property.
2. Children Under Age Fourteen: Children under the age of fourteen (14) must have adult
supervision when discharging or shooting a weapon under this subsection.
3. Legitimate Business: Any business engaged in the operation of paintball or air soft gun games
or other weapons operating within the appropriate zoning district in which the discharge of
paintball guns is carried out in an approved and controlled environment.
4. Special Permit: By special permit of the chief of police for the use of such gun or instrument for a
valid and proper purpose, and for use in a manner not likely to harm any person, animal or
property.
5. Bow And Arrow:
a. A bow and arrow may be used for hunting, to legally take game as outlined in Arizona
Revised Statutes title 17.
b. A bow and arrow may be used for target practice or competitions and will follow rules listed in
subsections B1 through B4 of this section.
C. Penalty:
1. Any person found guilty of violating any provisions of this section, except as otherwise provided
in this code, shall be guilty of a class one misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished by a fine of not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) or by
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as hereinabove
described.
2. Any person found guilty of violating any provisions of subsections B1 through B5 of this section
shall be guilty of petty offense and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00).
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 73/240
D. Public Events And Places: Any person, other than a peace officer on duty carrying a weapon, upon
entering any public place or attending a public event, may be required by the operator of the
establishment or the sponsor of the event to remove his weapon and place it in the custody of the
operator of the establishment or the sponsor of the event. (Ord. 12-03, 6-12-2012)
5-3-5: PROSTITUTION:
It is unlawful for any person to practice prostitution, to patronize a prostitute or to solicit any person to
visit or patronize a prostitute or place of prostitution. (1986 Code § 10-1-12)
5-3-6: LITTERING:
It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any litter in or upon any street, alley, public grounds,
school grounds, church grounds or property of other persons. (1986 Code § 10-1-4)
5-3-7: SEARCHLIGHTS:
It is unlawful for any person to operate within the town any incandescent or arc type searchlight,
beacon light or similar lighting device designed to and capable of projecting a beam of light into the
sky for a distance in excess of one-half (1/2) mile, unless permission is obtained from the town council.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to emergency searchlights or beacons operated pursuant
to public authority. (1986 Code § 10-1-13)
5-3-8: SPITTING:
It is unlawful for any person to spit upon any of the public sidewalks or crosswalks in the town or upon
any public path, byway or highway, or in or on any public ground or park in the town, or upon the floor
or interior of any public building in the town. (1986 Code § 1-1-15)
5-3-9: HAZARDOUS WATER CONDITIONS:
A. Unlawful To Permit: It is unlawful for any person to wilfully or negligently permit or cause the escape
or flow of water in such quantity as to cause flooding, or to impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic,
to create a hazardous condition to such traffic, or to cause damage to the public streets of the
town.
B. Irrigation Water: It is unlawful for any person to wilfully or negligently permit or cause the escape or
flow of irrigation water in such quantity as to cause flooding, to impede vehicular or pedestrian
traffic, to create a hazardous condition to such traffic, or to cause damage to the public streets of
the town through the failure or neglect to properly operate or maintain any irrigation structure,
delivery ditch or waste ditch in which said person has a vested right or interest or through the wilful
or negligent failure of said person to accept irrigation water after it has been ordered by him. (1986
Code § 10-1-16)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 74/240
5-3-10: OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS:
It is unlawful for any person to obstruct any public street or alley, sidewalk or park or other public
grounds within the town by committing any act of, or doing anything which is injurious to the health, or
indecent or offensive to the senses, or to do in or upon any such streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks, or
other public grounds, any act or thing which is an obstruction or interference to the free use of
property or with any business lawfully conducted by anyone, in or upon, or facing or fronting on any of
such streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks or other public grounds in the town. (1986 Code § 10-1-8)
Chapter 4
MINORS; CURFEW
5-4-1: REGULATIONS:
A. Under Sixteen Years: It shall be unlawful for any juvenile under the age of sixteen (16) years to be,
remain or loiter in, about or upon any place in the Town away from the dwelling house or usual
place of abode of said juvenile, between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and five o'clock
(5:00) A.M. of the following day.
B. Sixteen Years Of Age Or Older: It shall be unlawful for any juvenile sixteen (16) years of age or
older and under the age of eighteen (18) years to be, remain or loiter in, about or upon any place in
the Town away from the dwelling house or usual place of abode of said juvenile, between the
hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. of the following day. (Ord. 120,
2-13-1996)
5-4-2: PARENTS AND GUARDIANS:
A. Responsibility: It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care,
custody or supervision of a juvenile to permit such juvenile to be, remain or loiter in, about or upon
any place in the Town away from the dwelling or usual place of abode of said juvenile in violation of
Section 5-4-1 of this Chapter.
B. Knowledge; Does Not Constitute Defense: It shall not constitute a defense hereto that such parent,
guardian or other adult person having the care, custody or supervision of such juvenile coming
within the provisions of Section 5-4-1 of this Chapter, did not have actual knowledge of the
presence of such juvenile in, or about or upon any place in the Town away from the dwelling house
or usual place of abode of said juvenile, if said parent, guardian, or other person having the care,
custody or supervision of such juvenile or juveniles, in the exercise of reasonable care and
diligence, should have known of the aforementioned unlawful acts of such juvenile. (Ord. 120, 2-
13-1996)
5-4-3: EXCEPTIONS:
The curfew set forth in Section 5-4-1 of this Chapter does not apply to:
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 75/240
A. Legally Emancipated Minors: Legally emancipated minors, whether the emancipation be through
marriage, military service or other legally sufficient grounds.
B. Accompanied By Parent Or Guardian: Minors who are accompanied by their parent, guardian or
other person having the legal care and custody of the minor.
C. Specific Functions: Minors who could otherwise be in violation of the terms of this Chapter when:
1. Their presence is reasonably required in the pursuit of a lawful occupation, business or
profession in which the minor is engaged; with the permission of a parent, guardian, or other
person having the legal care and custody of the minor; or
2. The minor is on an emergency errand, medical or otherwise; or
3. The minor is going to, attending or coming from a place or function sponsored by or related to
school, church, civic, or other nonprofit organization. These functions shall include, but are not
necessarily limited to: classes, services, meetings, dances, dramatic or musical performances,
sporting events, or other social events sponsored by school, religious, civic, or other nonprofit
organizations, with the permission of the parent, guardian, or other person having the legal care
and custody of the minor. (Ord. 120, 2-13-1996; 1997 Code)
5-4-4: PENALTY:
A. Delivery Of Juvenile Into Custody: In addition to any other powers he may have, any law
enforcement officer who arrests a juvenile for violating any of the provisions of Section 5-4-1 of this
Chapter is also hereby empowered to demand of the parent, guardian or other person having the
care, custody or supervision of such juvenile that such parent, guardian or other person come and
take such juvenile into custody. Should there be a failure of the parent, guardian or other person to
take custody of such juvenile, the officer may then be empowered to take such juvenile home. It
shall be unlawful for any such parent, guardian or other person having the care, custody or
supervision of said juvenile to fail or refuse to take such juvenile into custody after such demand is
made upon them.
B. Violation:
1. Juvenile: It shall be unlawful for any juvenile to violate the provisions of Section 5-4-1 of this
Chapter. The proceedings shall be taken in accordance with and pursuant to the Juvenile Code
as contained in the Arizona Revised Statutes, section 8-201 et seq.
2. Parent Or Guardian: Any parent or guardian of the juvenile who shall violate the provisions of
Section 5-4-2 and subsection 5-4-4A of this Chapter shall be guilty of a Class Three
misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 120, 2-13-
1996; 1997 Code)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 76/240
Chapter 5
FALSE ALARMS
5-5-1: PURPOSE AND FINDINGS:
A. The town council of the town of Snowflake is enacting this chapter to encourage security alarm
users and alarm system monitoring companies to maintain the operational reliability and proper
use of security alarm systems in order to reduce unnecessary police responses to false alarms.
The council finds that false alarms are not only a public nuisance but also a threat to public safety
by diverting limited police resources from legitimate requests for assistance and other law
enforcement matters.
B. The council intends this chapter to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the general public
and not to protect particular individuals or to otherwise designate a particular group of persons who
should be especially affected by the terms of this chapter. This chapter imposes or creates no
duties on the part of the city or its departments and employees, and the obligation of complying
with the requirements of this chapter, and any liability for failure to do so is placed upon the parties
responsible for owning, operating, monitoring or maintaining security alarm systems.
C. The council is authorized to enact this chapter pursuant to its police powers. The council does not
intend this chapter to conflict with any state laws that may govern the licensing of alarm system
monitoring companies and false alarms. (Ord. 01-200, 9-18-2001)
5-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
A. For the purpose of this chapter, the following words have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ALARM SYSTEM MONITORING COMPANY: Any individual, partnership, corporation or other form
of association that engages in the business of monitoring security alarm systems and reporting any
activation of such alarm systems to the police.
ALARM USER: Any individual, partnership, corporation or other form of association that owns or
leases a security alarm system or on whose premises a security alarm system is maintained for
the protection of the premises.
AUTOMATIC DIALING TELEPHONE ALARM: A security alarm system with a device that
automatically dials the police department emergency assistance telephone lines without human
activation of the device by the alarm user.
CHIEF OF POLICE: The chief of police of the town of Snowflake and the chief's designee.
DEPARTMENT: The Snowflake/Taylor police department.
DISPATCH OR RESPONSE: A discretionary decision whether to direct police units to a location
where there has been a request, made by whatever means, for police assistance or investigation.
There is no duty to dispatch under any circumstances, including to answer an alarm signal, and all
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 77/240
dispatch decisions are made subject to competing priorities and available police resources.
FALSE ALARM: An alarm signal eliciting notification to and a response by the police when there is
no evidence of a crime or other activity that warrants a call for immediate police assistance and no
person who was on or near the property or has viewed a video communication from the property
called for the police dispatch or confirmed the need for police assistance. "False alarm" does not
include an alarm signal caused by violent conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances
beyond the control of the alarm user.
SECURITY ALARM SYSTEM: Any system, device, or mechanism for the detection and reporting
of any unauthorized entry or attempted entry or property damage upon premises protected by the
system that may be activated by sensors or other techniques and, when activated, automatically
transmits a telephone message or emits an audible, visible, or electronic signal that can be heard,
seen, or received by persons outside of the protected premises and is intended to summon police
assistance. (Ord. 01-200, 9-18-2001)
5-5-3: AUDIBLE ALARM STANDARDS:
A. A security alarm system that emits an audible signal that may be heard outside of the protected
premises shall conform to the following requirements:
1. Audible alarms shall automatically discontinue emitting the audible sound within ten (10)
minutes after activation of the alarm; and
2. With respect to security alarm systems in existence prior to the enactment of this chapter that do
not comply with subsection A1 of this section, the alarm user shall have ninety (90) days from
the enactment of this chapter in which to make the necessary modifications to the alarm system
in order to comply with the requirement. (Ord. 01-200, 9-18-2001)
5-5-4: VIOLATION OF AUDIBLE ALARM STANDARDS:
A. The sounding of an audible signal from a security alarm system that can be heard continuously off
the premises for more than ten (10) minutes is a civil infraction and the alarm user, in addition to
any other penalties specified herein, shall be penalized by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each
offense.
B. It is a defense to a violation of this section that the continuous sounding of the alarm:
1. Assisted in saving a life or avoiding injury; or
2. Was caused by a malfunction of the alarm system equipment without the alarm user's prior
knowledge of the cause of the malfunction; or
3. Was activated by an unauthorized entry or criminal activity. (Ord. 01-200, 9-18-2001)
5-5-5: AUTOMATIC DIALING TELEPHONE SYSTEMS PROHIBITED:
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 78/240
A. Beginning ninety (90) days after the effective date hereof, it shall be unlawful for any individual,
partnership, corporation or other form of association to sell, offer for sale, install, maintain, operate
or assist in the operation of any alarm system with an automatic dialing or digital alarm
communicator feature that automatically calls the police in the event of an alarm. (Ord. 01-200, 9-
18-2001)
5-5-6: ALARM USERS:
A. An alarm user shall:
1. Maintain the premises and security alarm system in a manner that will minimize or eliminate
false alarms;
2. Review all alarm system operating instructions including those for verification of an alarm;
3. Notify the alarm system monitoring company of a false alarm activation as soon as the user is
aware of the false alarm; and
4. Not manually activate an alarm except when needing an immediate police response to an
emergency. (Ord. 01-200, 9-18-2001)
5-5-7: ALARM SYSTEM MONITORING COMPANIES:
A. An alarm system monitoring company engaging in business activities in the town shall:
1. Obtain all necessary business licenses as required by the town and the state of Arizona;
2. Maintain a current record, accessible to the chief of police at all times, that includes: the names
of the alarm users serviced by the company; the addresses of the protected properties; the type
of alarm system, original installation date and subsequent modifications, if any, for each
protected property; and a record of the false alarms at each property;
3. Provide the chief of police such information as the chief requests regarding: the nature of the
company's security alarms; the company's method of monitoring the alarms; the company's
program for preventing false alarms, including educational programs for alarm users; and the
company's method for disconnecting audible alarms;
4. Provide each of its alarm system users with: operating instructions for the alarm system,
including an explanation of the alarm company's alarm verification process; a telephone number
to call for assistance in operating the system; and a summary of the provisions of this chapter
relating to penalties for false alarms and the possibility of no police response to alarm systems
experiencing excessive false alarms;
5. Maintain a verification process, as specified in section 5-5-8 of this chapter, for all monitored
security alarm systems in order to prevent unnecessary police dispatches resulting from false
alarms;
6. Communicate requests for police response to the department in a manner specified by the chief;
7. Communicate requests for cancellations of police response in a manner specified by the chief;
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 79/240
8. Maintain a record of all requests for police response to an alarm, including: the date and time of
the alarm and request for police response; the alarm system user's name and address; evidence
of the company's attempt to verify the alarm; and, to the best of its knowledge, an explanation of
the cause of any false alarm; and
9. Work cooperatively with the alarm system user and the chief in order to determine the cause of
any false alarm and to prevent recurrences. (Ord. 01-200, 9-18-2001)
5-5-8: SECURITY ALARM VERIFICATION PROCESS:
A. A verification process is an independent method of an alarm system monitoring company for
determining that a signal from a security alarm system requires immediate police response. The
verification process shall not take more than five (5) minutes, calculated from the time that the
alarm company receives the alarm signal until the alarm company determines whether to request a
police dispatch. The means of verification shall include at least one of the following:
1. The establishment of voice communications with the alarm user or a person authorized by the
user at or near the premises with the alarm who may indicate whether there is an immediate
need for police response;
2. A feature that permits the alarm user or a person authorized by the user to send a special signal
to the alarm company that will cancel the alarm immediately after the signal has been sent and
prevent the alarm company from calling the police;
3. The installation of a video system that provides the alarm company when the alarm signal is
received with the ability to ascertain whether activity is occurring that warrants immediate police
response;
4. A confirmation that an alarm signal reflects a need for immediate police response from either the
alarm user or a person authorized by the user or an alternate response agency made before
dispatching the police; or
5. An alternate system that the chief determines has or is likely to have a high degree of reliability.
(Ord. 01-200, 9-18-2001)
5-5-9: UNLAWFUL ACTIVATION OR REPORT OF ALARM:
A. No person shall activate a security alarm system for the purpose of summoning the police except in
the event of an unauthorized entry, robbery, or other crime being committed or attempted on the
premises, or if the person needs immediate assistance in order to avoid injury or serious bodily
harm.
B. Any person who shall notify the police of an activated alarm and have knowledge that such
activation was apparently caused by an electrical or other malfunction shall at the same time notify
the police of the apparent malfunction. (Ord. 01-200, 9-18-2001)
5-5-10: DETERMINATION OF FALSE ALARM; REBUTTABLE PRESUMPTION:
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 80/240
A. For the purposes of this chapter, there is a rebuttable presumption that the following determinations
made by the chief of police or by a police officer dispatched to the premises reporting an alarm
signal are correct:
1. There is no evidence of a crime or other activity that would warrant a call for immediate police
assistance at the premises.
2. No individual who was on or near the premises or who has viewed a video communication from
the premises called for a police dispatch or verified a need for an immediate police response;
and
3. There is no evidence that violent conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances
beyond the control of the alarm user caused the activation of the alarm. (Ord. 01-2000, 9-18-
2001)
5-5-11: PENALTY FOR FALSE ALARM:
A. A false alarm is a civil infraction, and the alarm system user shall be penalized by a fine of fifty
dollars ($50.00) for the second false alarm responded to by the police department within a
calendar year and for each false alarm responded to thereafter within the same calendar year.
(Ord. 01-200, 9-18-2001)
5-5-12: APPEAL OF FALSE ALARM FINE:
A. The Snowflake justice court may waive the civil penalty incurred by an alarm system user for a
false alarm and clear the notice of violation as a warning if:
1. The notice to the alarm user describes a violation of section 5-5-11 of this chapter; and
2. Within fifteen (15) days after the date of the notice of a false alarm, the alarm user either follows
the instructions on the back of the notice of violation to arrange an appearance in court or mails
a written response to the court requesting a waiver and clearance as a warning.
3. The alarm user may present evidence before the court or in the written response to the court
that shows: the steps that the alarm user or alarm system monitoring company has taken, or is
taking, to correct the false alarm problem; the incidence of crime in the area of the property; the
facts and circumstances of the false alarm; and other relevant information. (Ord. 01-200, 9-18-
2001)
5-5-13: NO RESPONSE TO FREQUENT FALSE ALARMS; APPEAL OF NO
RESPONSE DETERMINATION:
A. When the chief of police determines whether to make an immediate dispatch in response to
notification of a signal from a security alarm system, the chief may disregard a call for police
assistance when:
1. The call for assistance comes from an alarm system for a premises that has a record of sending
four (4) false alarms in a six (6) month period; and
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 81/240
2. The call is the only basis for making the dispatch.
B. The chief may consider such a call for assistance as an additional factor in the chief's decision to
order an immediate police response when an in person call, verification from a person at or near
the premises, or other independent evidence shows a need for immediate police assistance at the
premises.
C. To discourage false alarms, the chief shall adopt a process of sending a letter or delivering other
written notice informing the alarm user who has had a false alarm of the consequences of
excessive false alarms, the need to take corrective action, and the prospect that four (4) false
alarms in a six (6) month period shall result in the police disregarding alarms from the premises
and not responding to requests for immediate police assistance unless there is an in person call for
assistance from someone at or near the premises or other independent information that verifies the
need for an immediate police response.
D. Before determining not to respond to alarms from a premises as specified above, the chief shall
send or deliver notice to the alarm user that:
1. Four (4) false alarms have been received from the property within a six (6) month period;
2. The remedy authorized in subsection A of this section may be taken;
3. The alarm system user may request a hearing before the chief or the chief's designee and
explain why the chief should not take the proposed action;
4. If no hearing is requested, the department will after ten (10) days from the delivery of the notice
disregard alarms from the premises unless there is an in person call for assistance from
someone at or near the premises or other independent information that verifies the need for an
immediate police response; and
5. A requirement of an in person communication or other verification shall remain in effect for a
period of one year.
E. If a hearing is requested, the chief shall schedule the hearing within ten (10) days of the receipt of
the request. At the hearing, the chief may consider such factors as: the steps that the alarm user or
alarm system monitoring company has taken, or is taking, to correct the problem; the incidence of
crime in the area of the premises; the facts and circumstances of the false alarms; and other
relevant information presented by the alarm user or the alarm system monitoring company.
F. The chief may suspend or cancel the remedy under subsection A of this section if the chief
determines that the alarm user or alarm system monitoring company has taken appropriate actions
to prevent the recurrence of false alarms. (Ord. 01-200, 9-18-2001)
5-5-14: VIOLATION; CIVIL PENALTIES:
A. An alarm system monitoring company's failure to comply with any of the requirements of this
chapter shall be a civil infraction, punishable by a fine of up to two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
Each day of noncompliance shall constitute a separate offense.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 82/240
B. The violations of the other sections of this chapter shall be a civil infraction and punishable by a fine
of up to fifty dollars ($50.00), unless otherwise specified.
C. There shall be a maximum penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) for any of the following:
1. Failure to respond to a false alarm notice within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the notice;
2. Failure to appear for a hearing requested pursuant to this chapter; and
3. Failure to pay any fine imposed pursuant to this chapter.
D. Any fines imposed under this section are appealable to the Snowflake justice court. (Ord. 01-200,
9-18-2001)
5-5-15: FALSE ALARM PREVENTION PROGRAMS:
A. All fines collected pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be directed to the police
department for expenditure on false alarm prevention programs, as established by the chief of
police. (Ord. 01-200, 9-18-2001)
5-5-16: SEVERABILITY:
A. Severability is intended throughout and within the provisions of this chapter. If any section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is held to be invalid or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, then that decision shall not affect the validity
of the remaining portions of this chapter. (Ord. 01-200, 9-18-2001)
Chapter 6
PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCTS
5-6-1: SALE OF PRODUCTS CONTAINING PSEUDOEPHEDRINE:
A. In this article, unless the context otherwise requires:
PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCT: Any product containing ephedrine or pseudoephedrine and
includes any compound, mixture or preparation that contains any detectable quantity of ephedrine.
Pseudoephedrine, norpseudoephedrine, or phenylpropanolamine or their salts, optical isomers or
salts of optical isomers. Product packaging that lists ephedrine, pseudoephedrine,
norpseudoephedrine, or phenylpropanolamine as an active ingredient shall constitute prima facie
evidence that the product is a pseudoephedrine product.
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT: Any place of business that offers any pseudoephedrine products for
sale at retail.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 83/240
B. The operator of a retail establishment shall keep all products containing pseudoephedrine behind a
store counter or otherwise in a manner that is inaccessible to customers without the assistance of
the operator or an employee of the establishment.
C. A person making a retail sale of a product containing pseudoephedrine shall require a government
issued, photo identification from the purchaser and shall record the purchaser's name, date of
birth, quantity of pseudoephedrine product purchased, transaction date and the initials of the seller.
D. The information required to be obtained by subsection C of this section will be retained by the retail
establishment for a period of ninety (90) days, and will be considered a confidential document that
will only be available to the operator of the retail establishment, and shall be available to the town
of Snowflake/Taylor police department officers, Arizona department of public safety officers,
Navajo County sheriff's department officers, and other law enforcement officers. (Ord. 05-258, 1-
10-2006)
5-6-2: EFFECTIVE DATE:
A. The effective date of this chapter is February 9, 2006. (Ord. 05-258, 1-10-2006)
5-6-3: PENALTY:
A. A violation of this section is a class 1 misdemeanor. (Ord. 05-258, 1-10-2006)
Title 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 1
ADMINISTRATION
6-1-1: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Duty Of Police: It shall be the duty of the police to provide for the enforcement of the street traffic
regulations of the Town and all of the State vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the Town, to
make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate accidents and to assist in developing ways and
means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out all duties specially imposed upon the police by
this Title.
B. Peace Officer Authority: Any peace officer of the Town may be authorized by the Police Chief to
perform any of the duties of the Police Chief included in this Title. (1986 Code § 12-1-1)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 84/240
6-1-2: TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS:
A. Records Maintained: The police shall keep a record of all violations of the traffic laws of the Town or
of the State vehicle laws of which any person has been charged, together with a record of the final
disposition of all such alleged offenses. Such record shall accumulate during at least a five (5) year
period and from that time on the record shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent
five (5) year period.
B. Numbering Forms: All forms for records of violations and notices shall be serially numbered. For
each month and year, a written record shall be kept available to the public showing the disposal of
all such forms.
C. Public Records: All records and reports shall be public records. (1986 Code § 12-1-2)
6-1-3: TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS:
A. Investigation: It shall be the duty of the police to investigate traffic accidents and to arrest and assist
in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law causing or contributing to such
accidents. (1986 Code § 12-1-3)
B. Reports Required: The Police Chief shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports.
(1986 Code § 12-1-5; 1997 Code)
C. Studies: Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the Police Chief
shall conduct studies of such accidents and determine remedial measures. (1986 Code § 12-1-4)
6-1-4: ANNUAL SAFETY REPORT:
The Police Chief shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the Town Manager.
Such report shall contain information on traffic matters in the Town as follows:
A. Accident Data: The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the number of
persons injured and other pertinent traffic accident data.
B. Investigations; Safety Activities: The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent
data on the safety activities of the Police Chief.
C. Plans And Recommendations: The plans and recommendations of the Police Chief for future traffic
safety activities. (1986 Code § 12-1-5)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 85/240
Chapter 2
TRAFFIC CONTROL
6-2-1: DIRECTING TRAFFIC; AUTHORITY:
A. Police: The police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal.
B. Fire Department: Officers of the fire department may direct or assist the police in directing traffic.
(1986 Code § 12-2-1; amd. 1997 Code)
6-2-2: OBEDIENCE REQUIRED:
A. Regulations: It is unlawful, except as otherwise provided in this code, for any person to do any act
forbidden or fail to perform any act required by this title or wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any
lawful order or direction of the police or of any fire department official. (1986 Code § 12-2-2)
B. Signs: Whenever traffic signs are erected as provided in this title, every driver of a vehicle shall
obey such signs unless directed to proceed by the police or a traffic control signal. No driver shall
drive upon or through any private property such as an oil station, vacant lot or similar property to
avoid obedience to any regulation included in this title. (1986 Code § 12-2-11)
6-2-3: TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
The police chief, after discussion with the public works director, and with the approval of the town
manager, shall authorize the placement and maintenance of traffic control devices, signs and signals
when and as required under the traffic regulations of the town to make effective the provisions of said
regulations, and may authorize placement and maintenance of additional traffic control devices as he
may deem necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic laws of the town, or under state law, or to
guide or warn traffic. The town manager, in an open meeting, will advise the town council of any
authorized changes. (Ord. 05-243, 1-25-2005)
6-2-4: CROSSWALKS, SAFETY ZONES, TRAFFIC LANES:
The police chief is hereby authorized, on approval by the town council:
A. Crosswalks: To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of
the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in his opinion there is particular danger to
pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as he may deem necessary.
B. Safety Zones: To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may
deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 86/240
C. Traffic Lanes: To mark lanes for traffic on street pavement at such places as he may deem
advisable, consistent with the traffic laws of the town. (1986 Code § 12-2-5)
6-2-5: SPEED LIMITS1:
A. Public Streets: Any speed in excess of twenty five (25) miles per hour shall be prima facie evidence
that the speed is not reasonable and is a civil traffic violation on every public street of the town,
except state or county highways where the posted speed limit is different and those streets
designated by resolution of the town council as having other speed limits. (1986 Code § 12-2-13)
B. Public Schools: When posted any speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour on streets adjacent
to a public school and located within the town limits shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is
not reasonable and is a civil traffic violation. This subsection shall be in force from seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M. to four o'clock (4:00) P.M. on days school is in session. (Ord. 09-318, 10-27-2009)
6-2-6: OBSTRUCTION OF VIEW:
It is unlawful for any person to maintain or allow any tree, hedge, billboard or other obstruction which
prevents persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways from obtaining a clear view of
traffic when approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk. (1986 Code § 10-1-9)
6-2-7: THROUGH STREETS, STOPS, RIGHTS OF WAY:
A. Authority To Designate: The police chief, after discussion with the public works director and with the
approval of the town manager, shall designate through streets, intersections where stops are
required, and intersections where vehicles shall yield the right of way. The town manager, in an
open meeting, will advise the town council of any authorized changes.
B. Placement Of Signs: When the police chief shall designate any through street or intersection where
vehicles are to stop or yield the right of way, the police chief, in conjunction with the public works
department, shall erect and maintain the appropriate signs at every location where a vehicle must
stop or yield the right of way. The town manager, in an open meeting, will advise the town council
of any authorized changes. (Ord. 05-243, 1-25-2005)
6-2-8: ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS:
A. Authority To Designate: The town council shall, by resolution, designate any streets or alleys which
are to be limited to one-way traffic. (1986 Code § 12-2-9)
B. Placement Of Signs: When any resolution of the town council designates any one-way street or
alley, the police chief shall, in conjunction with the public works department, place and maintain
signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in
place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 87/240
where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. (1986 Code § 12-2-9; amd. 1997
Code)
6-2-9: TURNING REGULATIONS:
A. Limitations And General Safety: The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to
proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in a business district and shall not upon any
other street so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety and without interfering
with other traffic. (1986 Code § 12-2-8)
B. Course Traveled:
1. Placement Of Markers: The police chief is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within
or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such
intersections, and such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as
prescribed by law.
2. Obedience: When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed within an
intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning, no driver of a vehicle shall
disobey the directions of such indications. (1986 Code § 12-2-6; amd. 1997 Code)
C. Right, Left Or U-Turns:
1. Placement Of Signs: The police chief, on approval by the town council, is hereby authorized to
determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn
and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited
between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be
plainly indicated on the signs, or such signs may be removed when such turns are permitted.
2. Obedience: Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left or U-turn is
permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. (1986 Code § 12-
2-7)
6-2-10: PROCESSIONS:
A. Permit Required: No procession or parade, except funeral processions, shall be held without first
securing a permit from the police chief, and all such requests for permits shall state the time, place
of formation, proposed line of march, destination and such other regulations as the police chief
may set forth therein.
B. Identification: A funeral procession composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified by such
methods as may be determined and designated by the police chief.
C. Drivers In Procession: Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the righthand
edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical
and safe.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 88/240
D. Driving Between Vehicles Prohibited: No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles
comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such
vehicles are conspicuously designated. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic
is controlled by traffic-control signals or the police. (1986 Code § 12-2-12)
6-2-11: TRUCKS AND LARGE VEHICLES:
A. Defined: A "truck or large vehicle" shall be defined as any vehicle, trailer or combination, with eight
(8) wheels or more.
B. Restriction: No person shall operate or park any truck or large vehicle in any residentially zoned
area within the town.
C. Placement Of Signs: The town may cause signs to be posted as necessary to regulate the
entrance of trucks and large vehicles into residentially zoned areas.
D. Vehicle Operator; Responsibility: Whenever any truck or large vehicle is operated in violation of the
provisions of this section, the person operating the truck or large vehicle at the time of the violation
shall be responsible for such violation and is subject to the penalty therefor. This may include
damages that result from the violation.
E. Exceptions:
1. This restriction shall not apply to anyone operating a truck or large vehicle for deliveries or
pickups in a residentially zoned area; provided, that the operator shall use the shortest and most
direct route to and from the nearest nonresidential street for such a trip and shall not park longer
than required to load or unload the truck or large vehicle expeditiously.
2. This restriction shall not apply to anyone operating a truck or large vehicle in a residentially
zoned area if the origin or destination of the trip is not accessible from a nonresidential area. In
this case, the operator shall use the shortest and most direct route between the origin or
destination and the nearest nonresidential street and the operator shall not park on the street.
3. This restriction shall not apply to the operation of emergency vehicles.
4. This restriction shall not apply during special events, such as parades, where no alternative
route is available. (Ord. 152, 10-13-1998)
6-2-12: COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES AND ROLLERBLADES:
No person upon roller skates, rollerblades or riding any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device shall go
upon any roadway, except while crossing a street on a crosswalk, and, when crossing, such person
shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians.
(1986 Code § 12-2-3; amd. 1997 Code)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 89/240
6-2-13: USE OF ENGINE BRAKES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle on any street or highway within the town limits with the
assistance of an engine brake (commonly referred to as a "Jake brake") or similar device. (Ord. 171,
6-27-2000)
Chapter 3
PARKING REGULATIONS1
6-3-1: AUTHORITY TO ERECT SIGNS; OBEDIENCE:
The police chief, after discussion with the public works director and with the approval of the town
manager, may erect signs requiring parking at an angle to the curb, allowing parking on the left hand
curb on one-way streets, notifying drivers that parking is prohibited, and restricting parking in any way
that may be necessary. When such signs have been erected, no person shall stop or stand a vehicle
in disobedience to such parking restrictions. The town manager, in an open meeting, will advise the
town council of any authorized changes. (Ord. 05-243, 1-25-2005)
6-3-2: METHOD OF PARKING:
Except as otherwise provided by resolution of the town council, every vehicle stopped or parked upon
a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of
such vehicle parallel to and within eighteen inches (18") of the right hand curb. (1986 Code § 12-3-1)
6-3-3: BLOCKING TRAFFIC:
A. Streets: No person shall stop, stand or park any motor vehicle, or other vehicle, upon a street in the
town in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than twenty feet (20') of
the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, except that a person may stop
temporarily, in the actual loading or unloading of passengers, or when necessary, in the
observance of traffic signs or signals of the police.
B. Alleys: No person shall park a motor vehicle, or other vehicle, within an alley or entrance to a
private driveway, except for the loading or unloading of materials, and not then unless such loading
or unloading can be accomplished without blocking the alley to the free movement of vehicular
traffic. (1986 Code § 12-3-2)
6-3-4: ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS:
When signs are erected indicating no parking on that side of the street adjacent to any school
property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place for one hour before school
opens until one hour after school closes on any school day. (1986 Code § 12-3-3)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 90/240
6-3-5: VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS:
No person shall park any vehicle, whether in usable condition or not, nor shall an owner permit his
vehicle to be parked upon any sidewalk in the town. (1986 Code § 12-3-5)
6-3-6: HANDICAPPED AREAS:
A. Insignia Display: No person shall park a vehicle in a parking space set aside and identified for use
only by persons with physical disabilities, unless the vehicle has displayed thereon a distinguishing
insignia as provided in section 28-881 of the Arizona Revised Statutes.
B. Identified Spaces: Subsection A of this section shall apply only to those parking spaces that are
identified with standard signs or other markers, as approved by the police.
C. Consent For Enforcement: Any person or business which causes a parking space to be set aside
for use only by persons with physical disabilities and identifies such parking space by the methods
described in subsection B of this section, shall be deemed to have given consent to the police to
enforce a violation of this section, when such violation occurs on the private property of such
person or business. (1986 Code § 12-3-6)
6-3-7: ADJACENT TO PARKS:
No person shall park a vehicle or allow a vehicle to remain parked on any public road or alley adjacent
to or abutting any town park during the hours between twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. The police may remove any vehicle in violation at the expense of the owner. (1986 Code
§ 12-3-8)
6-3-8: ABANDONED VEHICLES:
Any vehicle left unattended, after being tagged by the police, for more than forty eight (48) hours
within the right of way of a highway, road, street or other public thoroughfare or on any sidewalk, is
declared to be an abandoned vehicle and the police may forthwith remove the same from the
sidewalks or streets of the town at the expense of the owner of such vehicle. (1986 Code § 12-3-7)
Title 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Chapter 1
PUBLIC PARKS1
7-1-1: SUPERVISION:
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 91/240
The Town shall supervise all parks, park scheduling and park maintenance. Any construction,
alterations, additions or repairs to the parks effected by anyone other than the Town shall require
written advance permission and comply with all specifications imposed by the Town or its designated
agent for such purposes. (1986 Code § 11-3)
7-1-2: PRESENCE IN PARKS:
A. Hours Authorized: It is unlawful for any person to be upon or remain upon any Town park, ball field
or golf course between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and dawn of each day. (1986 Code § 11-1-1;
1997 Code)
B. Exception: Any authorized Town employee or such other person as authorized in writing by the
Chief of Police shall be excepted from subsection A of this Section. (1986 Code § 11-1-1)
7-1-3: INTOXICATING BEVERAGES; PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall consume any spirituous liquor of any kind in the Town playgrounds, ball fields or
parks, except by written permit issued by the Town Manager or other person designated by the Town
Council. Designated areas where absolutely no drinking of spirituous liquors of any kind whatsoever is
allowed in the parks are the playground equipment areas, ball stands, basketball courts, tennis courts,
fenced ball fields and swimming pools. Designated areas where alcoholic beverages may be
consumed shall be determined by the Town Council and shall be posted on the permit. The period of
use shall be posted on the permit. A duplicate of the permit shall be retained by the issuer of the
permit. (1986 Code § 11-1-6)
7-1-4: RIDING VEHICLES ON GROUNDS:
No person shall at any time drive or ride on any automobile, truck, motorcycle, motor scooter or other
motor vehicle upon the grounds of any Town park, playground, ball field or golf course, except in
public streets running through such premises or within designated parking areas located upon such
premises, without the written permission of the Town Manager or such other person as the Town
Council may designate. (1986 Code § 11-1-2)
7-1-5: IMPROPER USE OF FACILITIES:
No person shall damage or improperly use the toilets, or water and sewer facilities in any Town park,
playground, ball park or golf course or cause the lighting facilities to be turned on during other than
normal hours, without the written consent of the Town Manager or such other person as the Town
Council may designate. (1986 Code § 11-1-3)
7-1-6: ANIMALS:
No animals shall be allowed in Town parks, golf course, playgrounds or ball fields, unless such
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 92/240
animals are leashed or in direct control of the owner. (1986 Code § 11-1-5)
7-1-7: CAMPING:
No person shall sleep or camp overnight in any Town park or its adjacent streets, except by written
permit issued by the Town Manager or other person designated by the Town Council. (1986 Code
§ 11-1-7)
7-1-8: GARBAGE AND TRASH:
No person shall dump, spill, deposit, place, throw or leave refuse, rubbish, filthy or odor-causing
objects, substances or other trash in the parks, playgrounds, ball fields, golf course or any other Townowned
or operated recreation area. No trash, except that associated with picnic activity at the park or
recreation area shall be deposited in the trash receptacles provided by the Town at those locations.
(1986 Code § 11-1-9)
7-1-9: GLASS BOTTLES OR CONTAINERS:
No person shall bring glass bottles or containers into or on the premises of the parks, playgrounds,
ball fields, golf course or any other Town-operated recreation area. (1986 Code § 11-1-10)
7-1-10: TENNIS AND HANDBALL COURTS:
The following rules and regulations shall apply to all public tennis and handball courts in the Town:
A. Skateboards, Roller Skates Or Blades: No skateboards, roller skates or roller blades on courts.
B. Vehicles: No bicycles, motorcycles or other types of vehicles allowed on courts.
C. Shoes: Tennis or flat, soft-soled shoes required on courts.
D. Play Limit: Be courteous; limit play to one hour or match when other players are waiting.
E. Use Limits: Tennis courts are for playing tennis only. Handball courts are for playing handball only.
F. Destruction: No writing or drawing on or defacing of buildings, walls, sidewalks, curbs, roadways,
fences or courts.
G. Penalty: Any violation of any provision of this Section, except subsection F of this Section, shall be
a petty offense. A violation of subsection F of this Section shall be a Class One misdemeanor.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 93/240
Violators are subject to the penalty provisions provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1986 Code
§ 11-2; 1997 Code)
7-1-11: USE CONTRARY TO REGULATIONS; PERMIT REQUIRED:
Any individual or group who wishes to use parks in a manner contrary to this Chapter must obtain a
park use permit from the Town Manager or other person designated by the Town Council. (1986 Code
§ 11-1-8)
7-1-12: ADDITIONAL RULES AND REGULATIONS; AUTHORITY:
The Town Council may adopt additional rules and regulations from time to time as they deem
reasonably necessary for the safety and efficient use by the public of the parks. (1986 Code § 11-4)
Footnote 1: A.R.S. § 9-494.
Chapter 2
TREES, PLANTS AND SHRUBS
7-2-1: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter provides authority over all trees, plants and shrubs, located within street rights of way
(street trees) and public places of the town (park trees); and trees, plants and shrubs located on
private property that constitute a hazard or threat as described herein. (Ord. 166, 12-14-1999)
7-2-2: ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY:
The town council or its designee shall implement, administer and enforce this chapter, and may
establish rules, regulations and procedures to implement, administer and enforce this chapter. When
requested by the town council, the town arborist shall consider, investigate, make finding, report and
recommend upon any special matter of question coming within the scope of his/her work. (Ord. 166,
12-14-1999)
7-2-3: DEFINITIONS:
PARK TREE(S): Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public parks having
individual names, and all areas owned by the town or to which the public has free access as a park,
including town-owned cemeteries and grounds surrounding town-owned buildings.
REMOVE OR REMOVAL: The actual removal of a tree, by digging up, cutting down, or the effective
removal through damage.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 94/240
STREET TREE(S): Trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on land lying between
property lines on either side of all streets, avenues, or ways within the town.
TOWN ARBORIST: Any person employed or retained by the town wherein his/her capacity has
obtained current certification from the international society of arboriculture (ISA) as a certified arborist.
TREE TOPPING: Tree topping is the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches
(3") in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and
disfigure the tree.
TREE(S): Any self-supporting, woody plant of a species which normally grows at maturity to an overall
height of a minimum of ten feet (10'), and is six inches (6") or greater in diameter at a height of four
feet six inches (4'6") from the ground. (Ord. 166, 12-14-1999)
7-2-4: TREE PLANTING, MAINTENANCE AND REMOVAL:
It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business or occupation of planting, cutting,
trimming, pruning, removing, spraying or otherwise treating street or park trees within the town without
first providing sufficient proof of competence, certification or licensing to the town council or its
designee. A permit will then be issued (at no charge) to the qualifying party, with an outline of the
scope of work to be performed and assure compliance with standards, specifications and inspections.
No such proof or permit will be required of any public service company or town employee doing such
work in the pursuit of their public service endeavors. (Ord. 166, 12-14-1999)
A. Street Trees To Be Planted: The following list constitutes the official street tree species for the town.
No species other than those included in this list may be planted as street trees without the written
permission of the town council or its designee. The town arborist will keep on file "The Town of
Snowflake Tree Selection Guide", a recommended list of other trees, not designated "Street
Trees", that will grow well in our area.
Small Trees
(25' Or Less)
Medium Trees
(25' To 60')
Large Trees
(Over 60')
Amur maple
English hawthorn
Crabapple
Flowering plum
Mayday tree or bird cherry
(Prunus padus)
Green or red ash
Honey locust (thornless)
London plane
Callery or flowering pear
(Pyrus calleryana)
European mountain ash
Locust (purple robe)
Goldenrain tree
(Koelreuteria paniculata)
Austrian black pine
Northern red oak
(Ord. 01-181, 1-23-2001)
B. Spacing: The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three (3) species size classes
listed in subsection A of this section, and no trees may be planted closer together than the
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 95/240
following: small trees, twenty five feet (25'); medium trees, thirty five feet (35'); and large trees,
forty feet (40'); except in special plantings designed or approved by a landscape architect.
C. Distance From Curb And Sidewalk: The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curb lines and
sidewalks will be in accordance with the three (3) species size classes listed in subsection A of this
section. No trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the following: small trees, two
feet (2'); medium trees, three feet (3'); large trees, four feet (4').
D. Distance From Street Corners And Fire Hydrants: No street tree shall be planted closer than thirty
feet (30') of any street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curb lines.
No street tree shall be planted closer than ten feet (10') of any fire hydrant. (Ord. 166, 12-14-1999)
E. Utilities: No street tree shall be planted within five (5) lateral feet of any underground water line,
sewer line, transmission line or other utility. No street tree other than those species listed as "small
trees" in subsection A of this section may be planted under or within ten (10) lateral feet of any
overhead utility wire. (Ord. 01-181, 1-23-2001)
F. Public Tree Care: The town shall have the right to plant, prune, treat, maintain and remove trees,
plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public
grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry
and beauty of such public grounds.
The town council or its designee may remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part
thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which, by reason of its nature, is injurious to sewers,
electric power lines, gas lines, water lines or other public improvements or is affected with any
injurious fungus, insect or other pest. This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by
adjacent property owners providing that the selection and location of said trees are in accordance
with subsections A through D of this section.
G. Tree Topping: It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or city department to
top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property. Trees severely damaged by storms
or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning
practices are impractical may be exempted from this subsection at the determination of the town
council or its designee.
H. Pruning, Corner Clearance: Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right of way within
the town shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street
lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of eight
feet (8') above the surface of the street or sidewalk.
Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs,
which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The town shall have the right to prune any
tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street
from a streetlight or interferes with visibility of any traffic-control device or sign.
I. Removal Of Stumps: All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the
ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground. (Ord. 166,
12-14-1999)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 96/240
7-2-5: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter or who fails to comply with any notice issued
pursuant to provision of this chapter, upon conviction or plea of guilty, shall be subject to a fine not to
exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each separate offense. Each day during which any violation
of the provisions of this chapter shall occur or continue shall be a separate offense. If after the third
offense the violation is not remedied, the violation will be treated as a class one misdemeanor under
subsection 1-4-1A of this code. If, as a result of the violation of any provision of this chapter, the injury,
mutilation, or death of a street or park tree on city-owned property is caused, the cost of repair or
replacement, or the appraised dollar value of such tree, shall be borne by the party in violation. The
value of trees shall be determined in accordance with the latest revision of "A Guide to the
Professional Evaluation of Landscape Trees Specimen Shrubs and Evergreens", as published by the
international society of arboriculture. (Ord. 166, 12-14-1999)
Chapter 3
RIGHT OF WAY
7-3-1: RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT:
Any person or entity desiring to make a street cut or bore under any town street, or desiring to perform
other construction work within any street right of way within the town, shall apply for and obtain a town
of Snowflake right-of-way permit prior to performing any construction within the town right of way. Said
right-of-way permit will only be given to a person or entity approved by the town's public works
director, or his designee, to work in the right of way. The town shall not be liable for any loss, damage,
or injury, which may occur as a result of the person or entity performing construction work within the
town's right of way. (Ord. 172, 6-27-2000)
Title 8
WATER AND SEWER
Chapter 1
WATER SERVICE AND REGULATIONS
8-1-1: ADMINISTRATION:
A. Management Of System: The Town Council shall have the immediate control and management of
all things pertaining to the Town waterworks system and shall cause to be performed all acts that
may be necessary for the prudent, efficient and economical management and protection of said
waterworks. The Town Council shall have the power to prescribe such other and further rates,
rules and regulations as it may deem necessary. (1986 Code § 16-1-1)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 97/240
B. Accounting: The Billing Clerk shall keep a correct account of all receipts, make out all bills for water
and materials furnished to consumers, collect the same, and deposit the proceeds so collected to
the credit of the Town, and in accordance with the direction of the Town Council. (1986 Code § 16-
1-2; 1997 Code)
8-1-2: REGULATIONS PART OF CONTRACT:
All regulations contained in this Chapter shall be considered a part of the contract of every person
taking water from the waterworks of the Town, and every person taking water shall be considered as
having expressly consented to be bound thereby. Consumers outside the Town limits shall, upon
application for water service, be required to sign a statement agreeing to the regulations set forth in
this Chapter. (1986 Code § 16-9)
8-1-3: APPLICATION FOR SERVICE:
A. Contents: Application for the use of water shall be made in person, at the Town Hall, to the Billing
Clerk by the owner or agent of the property to be benefited, designating the location of the property
and stating the purpose for which the water may be required. (1986 Code § 16-2-1; 1997 Code)
B. Grounds For Rejection: The Town may reject any application for water service for any good and
sufficient reason, including the following: service not available under a standard rate; service which
involves excessive service expense; service which may affect the supply to other consumers;
service when the applicant is delinquent in payment of bills incurred for service previously supplied
at any location. (1986 Code § 16-2-2)
C. Violation Of Application Provisions: For violation of any of the provisions relating to application for
service, the Town shall, at the expiration of fifteen (15) days after mailing written notice to the last
known address of the consumer and providing an opportunity for a hearing, at its option, remove
the meter and discontinue service. Where the meter is thereafter reinstalled, the consumer shall
first pay to the Town a reinstallation charge which shall be set by resolution of the Town Council.
(1986 Code § 16-2-3)
8-1-4: DEPOSIT:
When a deposit is made, the individual in whose name such deposit is made shall be responsible for
payment of all bills incurred in connection with the service furnished. In those cases where a deposit is
not required, the person owning the premises shall be responsible for payment of all bills incurred in
connection with the services furnished. (1986 Code § 16-3-2)
8-1-5: RATES AND BILLS:
A. Rates Set By Resolution: The Town Council shall, by resolution, determine water rates for
consumers both inside and outside the Town limits. (1986 Code § 16-5-1)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 98/240
B. Minimum Rate: Service for a time period less than a month shall be charged at the minimum
monthly rate, plus any additional charge for usage above the minimum charge usage. (1986 Code
§ 16-5-2)
C. Water Bills:
1. Meter Reading; Due Date: Water meters shall be read on the twentieth day of each month, as
nearly as possible, and a separate bill shall be rendered for each meter and mailed on or near
the first day of each succeeding month. All water bills shall be due on or before the twentieth day
of the month following the reading of the meter. The Town reserves the right to vary the dates or
length of billing period, temporarily or permanently, if necessary or desirable.
2. Nonpayment: If a monthly bill is still unpaid one month after consumption, the water meter may
be disconnected and the customer's account may be closed by deducting from the customer's
deposit the total amount of the bill, up to the time the meter is disconnected. Balance of deposit,
if any, remains to customer's credit. (Ord. 90, 8-17-1988)
3. Termination Of Service; Hearing: Prior to terminating service for nonpayment of amounts due,
the Town will give written notice to the consumer and provide an opportunity for a hearing for
such consumer with a Town officer, as designated by the Town Council. (1986 Code § 16-5-3B)
4. Reconnection: Reconnection charge, payable in addition to a new deposit, shall be set by
resolution of the Town Council. (Ord. 90, 8-17-1988)
D. Incorrect Bill: Any consumer may present a claim to the Town if he believes that he may have
received an incorrect water bill. Such claim shall be presented in person at the Town Hall before
such bill becomes delinquent; provided, that the consumer may make a claim following payment of
his bill and his payment shall not prejudice his claim. Such claim shall not exempt the consumer
from delinquency penalties if he fails to pay his bill on time. (1986 Code § 16-5-4)
E. Turning Water On And Off; Charges: A charge shall be made for each turn off and each turn on of
water service for reasons other than change of occupancy. The amount of the charge shall be set
by resolution of the Town Council. (1986 Code § 16-5-5)
F. Commencement And Application Of Charges:
1. The Town shall commence service charges for a consumer when the water meter is installed
and the connection is made, regardless of whether water is used or not.
2. Charges for water service for additional units shall apply even if a unit is unoccupied. (1986
Code § 16-5-6)
8-1-6: METERS:
A. General Provisions:
1. Ownership; Repair: All water sold by the Town shall be metered by meters which shall be owned
and kept in repair by the Town.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 99/240
2. Placement: The Town may install a water meter on the property line or on the consumer's
property in such location as deemed necessary and which is conveniently accessible by a meter
reader.
3. Equipment Belonging To Consumer: Water pipes and equipment belonging to the consumer
shall be so arranged to permit the placing of a single water meter for that property convenient to
the Town. If the water pipes and equipment belonging to the consumer are not arranged to
permit such placement of a meter, and additional meters are required, each such additional
meter shall be considered as an additional account and shall be so billed.
4. Two Meters On Same Premises: When two (2) or more meters are installed on the same
premises for different consumers, they shall be closely grouped and each meter shall be clearly
marked as to which consumer it belongs. (1986 Code § 16-6-1; 1997 Code)
B. Installation Fee: The fee for a water meter installation shall be set by resolution of the Town
Council. (1986 Code § 16-6-2)
C. Readings:
1. Failure Of Meter: If a water meter fails to operate and a reading cannot be taken, a bill will be
made by the Town in an amount based on the average monthly billing of the previous three (3)
months.
2. Interference By Dog: In the event any dog kept on the premises interferes with meter reading by
an employee of the Town and the meter is not read, a billing will be made by the Town in an
amount based on the average monthly billing of the previous three (3) months. (1986 Code § 16-
6-3)
3. Special Readings: Any consumer may request and have the Town perform a special reading of
his water meter. If the special reading indicates that the regular meter reading was incorrect,
then there shall be no charge, otherwise a charge in an amount to be set by resolution of the
Town Council shall be added to the consumer's regular water bill. (Ord. 85, 11-18-1987)
D. Testing; Meter Replacement: Any consumer may, upon written application, have his meter tested
for accuracy by the Town. If the meter registers a divergence from accuracy greater than three
percent (3%), the indicated adjustment shall be made in the water service charges for a total
period not longer than the current period and the monthly period immediately preceding. If a meter
so tested registers within three percent (3%) of accuracy, a charge in an amount to be set by
resolution of the Town Council shall be added to the consumer's regular water bill to pay the cost
of such test. All inaccurate and defective meters shall be replaced by the Town immediately when
detected. (Ord. 86, 11-18-1987)
8-1-7: CONSUMER RESPONSIBILITIES:
A. Water Facilities: The consumer shall have complete responsibility for the installation and
maintenance of adequate water facilities on the premises, and the Town shall not in any way be
responsible for the installation, maintenance, inspection or damage of such facilities or damage
caused by any defect in such facilities on the consumer's premises. Such facilities shall be
maintained by the consumer in full compliance with any and all rules and regulations of the Town in
addition to applicable State statutes. (1986 Code § 16-7-1)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 100/240
B. Damage To System; Injury To Employees: Any damage to the Town water system or injury to Town
employees caused by the negligence of any consumer and which requires any repairs,
replacements or damages, the cost of such shall be added to that consumer's bill, and if such
charges are not paid, water service may be discontinued. (1986 Code § 16-7-2)
C. Right Of Way: Each consumer shall provide to the Town such easement and right of way as is
necessary to provide water service to that consumer. (1986 Code § 16-7-3)
D. Installation Of Lines: The Town may refuse to provide service unless the lines or piping are installed
on the premises so as to prevent cross-connections or backflow1. (1986 Code § 16-7-4)
E. Protection Of Town Property: The consumer shall guarantee proper protection for Town property
placed on his premises and shall permit access to it only to authorized representatives of the
Town. (1986 Code § 16-7-5)
F. Prohibited Uses:
1. Supplying Water To Other Persons: No occupant or owner of any building into which water is
introduced will be allowed to supply water to other persons or families or for use on any other
property. The Town reserves the right to shut off the supply for abuses of water privileges.
2. Commercial Use Separate: Any water service for commercial use shall not be included in a
residential service account and shall have a separate meter and connection. (1986 Code § 16-7-
6)
3. Digging Streets Without Permit: It is unlawful for any person to dig up or cause to be dug up any
street or alley in the Town for the purpose of connection with the water system of the Town
without first obtaining a permit from the Water Department.
4. Tampering With Equipment: No person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part
of the Town water system. (1997 Code)
G. Sprinkling Restrictions:
1. Water Shortage: In case of water shortage or scarcity, the Town Council may, by resolution,
place any restrictions which it deems necessary upon the use of water for irrigation or sprinkling
purposes.
2. System Construction: Sprinkler systems must be constructed or equipped so as to prevent
contaminated water from flowing back into the sprinkler system. (1986 Code § 16-7-7)
H. Waste Of Water: Consumers shall prevent unnecessary waste of water and keep all water outlets
closed when not in actual use. All water outlets, including those used in conjunction with hydrants,
urinals, water closets, bathtubs and other fixtures, must not be left running for any purpose other
than the use for which they were intended. In addition to the penalty provided herein for Code
violations, the water supply may be turned off where any such waste occurs. (1986 Code § 16-7-8)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 101/240
8-1-8: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
A. Notice Required: Any person who desires to discontinue the use of water shall file written notice
with the Billing Clerk at least three (3) working days in advance of intended termination of service.
Responsibility for water consumed extends to the time of departure or to the time specified for
departure, whichever occurs last. (1986 Code § 16-4-1; 1997 Code)
B. Discontinuance Under Certain Conditions: The Town may discontinue water service under any of
the following conditions:
1. To prevent fraud or abuse.
2. Disregard of Town rules pertaining to water service.
3. Emergency repairs.
4. Insufficient supply caused by factors outside the control of the Town.
5. Legal process.
6. Direction of public authorities.
7. Local emergency requiring emergency measures. (1986 Code § 16-4-2)
8. Tampering with any part of the distribution system, including the meter, by the consumer. (1986
Code § 16-4-2; 1997 Code)
9. Nonpayment of bill as provided in subsection 8-1-5C of this Chapter. (1986 Code § 16-4-2)
8-1-9: EXTENSION OF SYSTEM:
The developer or property owner shall pay the costs for utility extension based on the current
extension policy adopted by the Town Council. (1986 Code § 16-10)
8-1-10: LIABILITY:
A. Interruption Of Service; Notification: The Town shall notify the consumer in advance of any
anticipated interruption of service when such advance notice is possible. The Town shall not be
responsible for any interruption of water service caused by forces beyond its control. (1986 Code
§ 16-8-1)
B. Liability Limited: No liability shall attach to the Town for any injury or damages that may result from
turning on or shutting off the water in any main, service connection or pipe; or the restriction of use
or discontinuance of any water service, or any failure of the water supply, regardless of any notice
or lack of notice thereof. The Town shall not be held liable, in any respect, for the condition,
defects, failure or use of any pipe, connection, fixture or appurtenance, not belonging to the Town,
on any premises, or for loss or damage resulting therefrom. (1986 Code § 16-8-2)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 102/240
Footnote 1: See Chapter 3 of this Title.
Chapter 2
SEWER SERVICE AND REGULATIONS
8-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this Section:
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees
Centigrade (20°C) expressed in parts per million (ppm) in weight.
BRANCH SEWER: A sewer which receives sewage from lateral sewers from a relatively small area.
BUILDING SEWER OR HOUSE SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the sewer
connection or other place of disposal.
COMBINED SEWER: A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
DEVELOPER: Any person engaged in the organizing and financing of a sewage collecting system
within an area tributing to a trunk sewer of the Town sewer system. Such may be either a subdivider or
a legally constituted improvement district.
GARBAGE: Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling,
storage and sale of produce.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES: The liquid wastes from industrial processes as distinct from sanitary sewage.
LATERAL SEWER: A sewer which discharges into a branch or other sewer and has no other common
sewer tributary to it.
MAIN SEWER: A sewer which receives sewage from one or more branch sewers as tributaries.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, ditch or other body of surface or ground water.
pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: Garbage that has been shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers with no
particle greater than one-fourth inch (1/4") in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer controlled by public authority.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and ground waters
are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE: A combination of the water carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 103/240
and industrial establishments together with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT: Any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage.
SEWAGE WORKS: All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.
SEWER CONNECTION: The connection to the public sewer and the extension therefrom of the sewer
to the property line at the alley or the curb line of the street, whichever is applicable, depending on the
location of the public sewer.
SEWER DEPARTMENT: Those officers and agents of the Town supervising sewer operations for the
Town.
STORM SEWER OR STORM DRAIN: A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage,
but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.
TRUNK SEWER: A sewer which receives sewage from many tributary main sewers and serves as an
outlet for a large territory.
WATERCOURSE: A channel in which a flow of water occurs either continuously or intermittently.
(1986 Code § 15-1)
8-2-2: APPLICATION FOR SERVICE:
No sewer connection connecting the Town sanitary sewer system to any consumer shall be made by
any person or the Town, except upon written application furnished to the Town by the owner of the
premises to which sanitary sewer service is to be furnished, or his authorized agent. A monthly rental
charge will be made for such sanitary sewer connection according to the rates fixed by the Town until
the service is discontinued by order of the Sewer Department or written order of the owner or his
authorized agent. (1986 Code § 15-2-1)
8-2-3: DEPOSIT:
The Town Council shall set a policy regarding sewer deposits to be established by resolution. The
resolution shall be kept on file with the Town Clerk. (Ord. 112, 8-23-1994)
8-2-4: RATES AND BILLS:
A. Rates Regulated; Changes: The Town Council shall regulate and change the rates by resolution as
it becomes necessary to meet the obligations of the Town and the Sewer Department for the Town
sewer system.
B. Minimum Charge: The minimum monthly charge, as provided by resolution of the Town Council,
shall be made for each sanitary sewer connection regardless of location.
C. Trailer Courts, Campgrounds: For service to trailer courts, campgrounds, auto courts or multipleunit
dwellings, the minimum monthly charge shall be established by resolution of the Town Council.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 104/240
The monthly bill will be based on each occupied trailer.
D. Sewer Bills:
1. Due Date: All fees for sewer service will be included on the water bill and are payable by the
twentieth day of the month next following the month of consumption, at the Town Hall, and no
demand for the payment of the same need be made by the Water Department, but each
consumer shall be responsible for the payment thereof, at the proper place and time. In case
any prescribed payment date falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the effective date of
payment, as set forth above, shall be deemed to be the day following such Saturday, Sunday or
legal holiday. (1986 Code § 15-2-3)
2. Nonpayment: If a monthly bill is still unpaid one month after the month of consumption, the water
meter may be disconnected and the customer's account may be closed by deducting from the
customer's deposit the total amount of the bill, up to the time the meter is disconnected. Balance
of deposit, if any, remains to customer's credit. (1986 Code § 15-2-3; 1997 Code)
3. Termination Of Service; Hearing: Prior to terminating service for nonpayment of amounts due,
the Town will give written notice to the consumer and provide an opportunity for a hearing for
such consumer with a Town officer, as designated by the Town Council.
4. Reconnection: Reconnection charge, payable in addition to a new deposit, shall be set by
resolution of the Town Council.
5. Services To Town; Public Buildings: All services furnished the Town or any public buildings shall
be charged to the appropriate department, and the Sewer Department shall account for all
services, whether to the Town or any person or corporation. (1986 Code § 15-2-3)
8-2-5: EXTENSION POLICY:
A. Plans, Specifications And Construction: A developer who wishes to extend sewer facilities must
employ a civil engineer registered in the State to perform the field engineering and prepare
detailed plans and specifications for the sewer extension. The final detailed plans and
specifications for the main sewer extension must be approved by the Arizona Department of
Environmental Quality (ADEQ) and by the Town Council before construction begins. The design
and engineering will be in accordance with the specifications of the ADEQ and the Town prior to
construction. The construction shall meet the Town's specifications, requirements and approval,
and will be subject to inspection by the Town's agents during construction. Subject to the
provisions of this Chapter, the Town agrees to permit the developer to connect into the Town's
existing trunk sewer lines and the main sewer line to be constructed by the developer herein
provided. (1986 Code § 15-3-1; 1997 Code)
B. Area To Be Served: The maximum area to be served by the proposed main sewer line and its
ultimate branches and laterals shall be determined by the Town Engineer based on local drainage
conditions. In the event that the area to be serviced by the developer is lesser in size than the
maximum area to be serviced by the proposed main sewer line and its ultimate laterals, the main
sewer line shall be designed, engineered and constructed to serve the maximum area as
determined by the Town Engineer. If other parties in the service area desire to join with the
developer in constructing the proposed main sewer line, this agreement will be considered as
including such additional parties. (1986 Code § 15-3-2)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 105/240
C. Costs Of Extension: The developer shall pay the costs for utility extension based on the current
extension policy adopted by the Town Council. (1986 Code § 15-3-3)
D. Charges: Any connection charge will not affect the right of the Town to assess its regular sewage
rental charges against the owners of property within the developer's area. Building or house
connection charges (sewer tap) shall be paid to the Town at the prevailing rate and are not
refundable. (1986 Code § 15-3-4)
E. Ownership Of Main Line: The Town shall have exclusive control of connections to the proposed
main sewer line and upon its completion, the main line shall become and be the property of the
Town. Except as otherwise herein provided, all provisions of the Town Code and ordinances or
amendments thereto applicable to sewer services, including all charges therefor, shall apply to
services in the proposed area. (1986 Code § 15-3-5)
8-2-6: BUILDING CONNECTIONS:
A. Permit Required: No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening
into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written
permit from the Sewer Department. (1986 Code § 15-4-7)
B. Application: Upon issuance of a required permit to any person, each and every permit issued shall
be presented by the person to the Sewer Department and application made for the building
connection. (1986 Code § 15-4-8)
C. Fee: The fee for each building connection for residential users and for commercial users shall be
set by resolution of the Town Council. (1986 Code § 15-4-11)
D. Inspection And Approval: No building sewer will be connected to the building connection until it has
been inspected and approved by the Sewer Department or Building Inspector. (1986 Code § 15-4-
9)
E. Records Maintained: The Sewer Department shall keep a record of all building connections made,
the purpose for which they are to be used, together with the name of the owner of the property, his
agent or representative. (1986 Code § 15-4-10)
8-2-7: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS:
A. Prohibited Substances:
1. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, ground
water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to
any sanitary sewer.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 106/240
2. Except as provided in this Section, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of
the following described waters or wastes into any public sewer:
a. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit
(150°F).
b. Any water or waste which may contain more than fifty parts per million (50 ppm) by weight of
fat, oil or grease.
c. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas.
d. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
e. Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics,
wood, paunch manure, grits such as brick, cement, onyx, carbide or any other solid or viscous
substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewer works.
f. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five and one-half (51/2) or higher than nine (9),
or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment and personnel of the sewage works.
g. Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure
or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans, or animals, or
create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
h. Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that
unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment
plant.
i. Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance. (1986
Code § 15-5-1)
B. Interceptors; When Required:
1. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Sewer
Department, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in
excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients, except that
such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units.
2. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Sewer Department and shall be
located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
3. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious material capable of withstanding
abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight
and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gas tight and
watertight.
4. Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his
expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. (1986 Code § 15-5-2)
C. Specific Waters And Wastes; Authority Of Department: The admission into the public sewers of any
waters or wastes having any of the following characteristics shall be subject to the review and
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 107/240
approval of the Sewer Department:
1. A five (5) day biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) greater than three hundred parts per million
(300 ppm) by weight.
2. Containing more than three hundred fifty parts per million (350 ppm) by weight of suspended
solids.
3. Containing any quantity of substance having the characteristics described in subsection A of this
Section.
4. Having an average daily flow of greater than two percent (2%) of the average daily sewage flow
of the Town. (1986 Code § 15-5-3)
D. Preliminary Treatment:
1. When Required: Where necessary, in the opinion of the Sewer Department, the owner shall
provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to:
a. Reduce the BOD to three hundred parts per million (300 ppm) and the suspended solids to
three hundred fifty parts per million (350 ppm) by weight.
b. Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for
in subsection C of this Section.
c. Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes.
2. Approval: Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed
preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for approval of the Sewer Department and the
State Department of Health Services. No construction of such facilities shall be commenced until
such approvals are obtained in writing.
3. Maintenance Of Facilities: Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or
wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the
owner at his expense. (1986 Code § 15-5-4)
E. Manholes: When required by the Sewer Department, the owner of any property served by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building
sewer to facilitate observation and sampling of wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be
accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Sewer Department. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be
maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. (1986 Code § 15-5-5)
F. Special Agreements With Industrial Concerns: No statement contained in this Chapter shall be
construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the Town and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted
by the Town for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern. (1986 Code § 15-
5-6)
8-2-8: SEWER DEPARTMENT RESPONSIBILITIES; LIABILITIES:
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 108/240
A. Consumer's Equipment; Defects: The Sewer Department shall not be responsible for the
installation, maintenance or inspection of the consumer's service line, piping and apparatus or for
any defects therein.
B. Right Of Refusal:
1. Improper Installation: The Sewer Department shall have the right to refuse service, unless the
consumer's lines or piping are installed in such manner as to prevent cross-connections or
backflow1.
2. Capacity: The Sewer Department may refuse service to any prospective consumer when the
capacity of the sewer system will not permit additional loads being placed thereon.
C. Notification Of Interruption: Under normal conditions, the consumer shall be notified of any
anticipated interruption of service.
D. Negligence Of Third Persons: The Sewer Department shall not be responsible for the negligence of
third persons or forces beyond the control of the Sewer Department resulting in any interruption of
service or damage to the property of the consumer. (1986 Code § 15-4-1)
8-2-9: CONSUMER RESPONSIBILITIES:
A. Connection; Service To One Lot: Building or house sewer connections on the consumer's premises
shall be so arranged as to provide service to one lot. If additional service is required, it will be
considered as a separate and individual account. (1986 Code § 15-4-2)
B. Installation; Maintenance: The consumer's house or building service line, sewer connection and
apparatus, from the consumer's house or building to consumer's property line, shall be installed
and maintained by the consumer, at the consumer's expense, in a safe and efficient manner and in
accordance with the Sewer Department's rules and regulations and in full compliance with the
regulations of the State Department of Health Services. Failure to comply with such regulations
relieves the Town of any and all liability from injury or damage proximately caused therefrom. (Ord.
77, 12-17-1986)
C. Safeguarding Property; Access: The consumer shall safeguard the Sewer Department's property
placed on the consumer's premises and shall permit access to it only by the authorized
representatives of the Sewer Department.
D. Damage To Property: In the event that any loss or damage to the property of the sewer department
or any accident or injury to persons or property is caused by or results from the negligence or
wrongful act of the consumer, his agents or employees, the cost of necessary repairs or
replacements shall be paid by the consumer to the sewer department and any liability otherwise
resulting shall be assumed by the consumer. The amount of such loss or damage or the cost of
repairs may be added to the consumer's bill, and, if not paid, service may be discontinued by the
sewer department after providing notice and an opportunity for a hearing as specified in subsection
8-2-4D3 of this chapter.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 109/240
E. Discontinuance Of Service: The sewer department may discontinue its service for the following
additional reasons:
1. To prevent fraud or abuse.
2. The consumer's wilful disregard of or refusal to comply with this chapter or other rules as may
be adopted by the town council.
F. Easement; Right Of Way: When service to a consumer shall require the laying of any town sewer
lines or the installation of any other town property on, under, across or over the consumer's
property, the consumer will grant to the town an easement, right of way or license for such
installation. (1986 Code § 15-4-2)
G. Contacting The Town: When sewer problems are experienced, the consumer should first contact
the town. The town will then check the main sewer line and if there is an existing cleanout, the
town will also inspect it to determine if the stoppage is in the service line or on the building site of
the cleanout. The town will clear the stoppage if it is in the service part of the system.
H. Responsibility For Cleanout: The consumer is responsible for keeping the sewer clear between the
building and the service cleanout if there is one. If there is no cleanout or no location of cleanout,
the consumer is also responsible for clearing the service line to the sewer main. Locating the
building sewer and its connection to the service sewer is also the consumer's responsibility,
although the town will attempt to assist with available records and information. The town suggests
that the consumer employ a plumber to clear any stoppages in the building or sewer service line. If
a service line has to be dug and no cleanout exists, the customer is responsible to have a cleanout
installed at the property line.
I. Defective Service Line: If there is no cleanout to grade, the plumber must first expose the end of the
service line at the easement or property line. The town will not perform any work on private
property except within a public utility easement.
J. Limit Of Town's Responsibility: The town's only responsibility for work on private property is for
damage caused by wastewater backup due to stoppages in the sewer main, or in the case of a
double wye installation, flow from the other property.
K. Rear Easement Responsibility: The town does not have service line cleanouts in rear easements.
The consumer is responsible for clearing building sewer to the sewer main. (Ord. 173, 6-27-2000)
8-2-10: PRIVATE SEWAGE SYSTEMS:
A. Compliance With Chapter: Except as provided in this chapter, it is unlawful to construct or maintain
within the town any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the
disposal of sewage. (1986 Code § 15-4-5)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 110/240
B. When Permitted; Sanitation: Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available within the
town or in any area under the jurisdiction of the town, the building sewer shall be connected to a
private sewage disposal system, which complies with the regulations of the ADEQ. Such private
sewage disposal system shall be constructed, maintained and operated at all times in a sanitary
manner. (1986 Code § 15-4-5; amd. 1997 Code)
C. Discontinuance: Within one year after a public sewer becomes available within three hundred feet
(300') of any property served by a private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be
made to the public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and any septic tanks,
cesspools, and similar private sewage facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable
material. (1986 Code § 15-4-5)
8-2-11: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
It is unlawful for any person:
A. Interference With Department; Inspector: To interfere in any way with the officers of the town water
department, sewer department or building inspector in the discharge of any of their duties, either in
the tapping of any sewer pipe, main or lateral belonging to the town, or in the laying or connecting
of such pipe, main or lateral.
B. Digging Streets Without Permit: To dig up or cause to be dug up any street or alley in the town for
the purpose of connection with the sewer system of the town without first obtaining a permit from
the sewer department.
C. Placing Street In Original Condition: Who, having a permit to dig up any portion of any street or
alley of the town for the purpose of connecting with the sewer system of the town to fail or neglect
to place the street or alley in its original condition under the supervision of the sewer department
and as required by it. (1986 Code § 15-4-3)
D. Unsanitary Disposal Of Excrement: To deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner
upon public or private property within the town, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the town,
any human or animal excrement or other objectionable waste. (1986 Code § 15-4-4)
E. Tampering With Equipment: To maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover,
deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the town
sewage system. (1986 Code § 15-4-6)
Chapter 3
BACKFLOW AND CROSS-CONNECTIONS
8-3-1: PURPOSE:
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 111/240
The purpose of this Chapter is:
A. To protect the public potable water supply of the Town from the possibility of contamination or
pollution by isolating within the customer's internal distribution system or the customer's private
water system, such contaminants or pollutants that could backflow into the public water system;
and,
B. To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual or potential, between the
customer's in-plant potable water system and nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures, and
industrial piping systems; and,
C. To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control that will
systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems.
(Ord. 110, 3-22-1994)
8-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this Section:
APPROVED: Accepted by the authority responsible as meeting an applicable specification stated or
cited in this Chapter or as suitable of the proposed use.
AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY: Any water supply on or available to the premises other than the
purveyor's approved public water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another
purveyor's public potable water supply or any natural source, such as a well, spring, river, stream,
harbor, and so forth; used waters; or industrial fluids. These waters may be contaminated or polluted,
or they may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the water
purveyor does not have sanitary control.
BACK PRESSURE: A pressure, higher than the supply pressure, caused by a pump, elevated tank,
boiler, or any other means that may cause backflow.
BACK SIPHONAGE: Backflow caused by negative or reduced pressure in the supply piping.
BACKFLOW: The undesirable reversal of flow in a potable water distribution system as a result of a
cross-connection.
BACKFLOW PREVENTER: An assembly or means designed to prevent backflow.
A. Air Gap: The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest
opening from any pipe or faucet conveying water or waste to a tank, plumbing fixture, receptor,
or other assembly and the flood level rim of the receptacle. These vertical, physical separations
must be at least twice the diameter of the water supply outlet, never less than one inch (1") (25
mm).
B. Double Check Valve Assembly: The approved double check valve assembly consists of two (2)
internally loaded check valves, either spring loaded or internally weighted, installed as a unit
between two (2) tightly closing resilient-seated shut off valves and fittings with properly located
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 112/240
resilient-seated test cocks. This assembly shall only be used to protect against a nonhealth
hazard (that is a pollutant).
C. Reduced-Pressure Backflow Prevention Assembly: The approved reduced-pressure principle
backflow prevention assembly consists of two (2) independently acting approved check valves,
together with a hydraulically operating, mechanically independent pressure differential relief
valve located between the check valves and below the first check valve. These units are located
between two (2) tightly closing resilient-seated shutoff valves as an assembly and equipped with
properly located resilient-seated test cocks.
CONTAMINATION: An impairment of a potable water supply by the introduction or admission of any
foreign substance that degrades the quality and creates a health hazard.
CROSS-CONNECTION: A connection or potential connection between any part of a potable water
system and any other environment containing other substances in a manner that, under any
circumstances would allow such substances to enter the potable water system. Other substances may
be gases, liquids, or solids, such as chemicals, waste products, steam, water from other sources
(potable or nonpotable), or any matter that may change the color or add odor to the water.
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL BY CONTAINMENT: The installation of an approved backflow
prevention assembly at the water service connection to any customer's premises, where it is
physically and economically unfeasible to find and permanently eliminate or control all actual or
potential cross-connections within the customer's water system; or it shall mean the installation of an
approved backflow prevention assembly on the service line leading to and supplying a portion of a
customer's water system where there are actual or potential cross-connections that cannot be
effectively eliminated or controlled at the point of the cross-connection.
CROSS-CONNECTIONS, CONTROLLED: A connection between a potable water system and a
nonpotable water system with an approved backflow prevention assembly properly installed and
maintained so that it will continuously afford the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard.
HAZARD, DEGREE OF: The term is derived from an evaluation of the potential risk to public health
and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the potable water system.
A. Hazard, Health: A cross-connection or potential cross-connection involving any substance that
could, if introduced in a potable water supply, cause death, illness, spread disease, or have a
high probability of causing such effects.
B. Hazard, Nonhealth: A cross-connection or potential cross-connection involving any substance
that generally would not be a health hazard but would constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically
objectionable, if introduced into the potable water supply.
C. Hazard, Plumbing: A plumbing-type cross-connection in a consumer's potable water system
that has not been properly protected by an approved air gap or an approved backflow prevention
assembly.
D. Hazard, System: An actual or potential threat of severe damage to the physical properties of the
public potable water system or the consumer's potable water system or of a pollution or
contamination that would have a protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the
system.
INDUSTRIAL FLUIDS SYSTEM: Any system containing a fluid or solution that may be chemically,
biologically, or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration, such as would constitute
a health, system, pollution, or plumbing hazard, if introduced into an approved water supply. This may
include, but not be limited to: polluted or contaminated waters; all types of process waters and used
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 113/240
waters originating from the public potable water system that may have deteriorated in sanitary quality;
chemicals in fluid form; plating acids and alkalies; circulating cooling waters connected to an open
cooling tower; and/or cooling towers that are chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic
substances; contaminated natural waters, such as wells, springs, streams, rivers, bays, harbors, seas,
irrigation canals or systems, and so forth; oils, gases, glycerine, paraffins, caustic and acid solutions,
and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other purposes for firefighting purposes.
POLLUTION: The presence of any foreign substance in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to
constitute a nonhealth hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
SERVICE CONNECTION: The terminal end of a service connection from the public potable water
system, that is, where the water purveyor loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its
point of delivery to the customer's water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service
connection, then the service connection shall mean the downstream end of the meter. There should
be no unprotected takeoffs from the service line ahead of any meter or backflow prevention assembly
located at the point of delivery to the customer's water system. Service connection shall also include
water service connection from a fire hydrant and all other temporary or emergency water service
connections from the public potable water system.
WATER, NONPOTABLE: Water that is not safe for human consumption or that is of questionable
quality.
WATER, POTABLE: Water that is safe for human consumption as described by the public health
authority having jurisdiction.
WATER SYSTEMS OPERATOR: The Water Systems Operator in charge of the Water Department of
the Town is invested with the authority and responsibility for the implementation of an effective crossconnection
control program and for the enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter.
WATER, USED: Any water supplied by a water purveyor from the public potable water system to a
consumer's water system after it has passed through the point of delivery and is no longer under the
sanitary control of the water purveyor. (Ord. 110, 3-22-1994)
8-3-3: RESPONSIBILITY FOR PROTECTION:
The Water Systems Operator shall be responsible for the protection of the public potable water
distribution system from contamination or pollution due to the backflow of contaminants or pollutants
through the water service connection. If, in the judgment of the Water Systems Operator, or his/her
designated agent, a backflow prevention assembly is required, the Water Systems Operator shall give
notice in writing to said customer to install such an approved backflow prevention assembly at specific
locations on his/her premises. The customer shall immediately install such approved assembly at
his/her own expense; and, failure, refusal, or inability on the part of the customer to install, have
tested, and maintain said assembly shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the
premises until such requirements have been satisfactorily met. (Ord. 110, 3-22-1994; 1997 Code)
8-3-4: WATER SYSTEM:
A. The water system shall be considered as made up of two (2) parts: the utility system and the
customer system.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 114/240
B. The utility system shall consist of the source facilities and the distribution system, and shall include
all those facilities of the water system under the complete control of the utility, up to the point
where the customer's system begins.
C. The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the production, treatment,
storage, and delivery of water to the distribution system.
D. The distribution system shall include the network of conduits used for the delivery of water from the
source to the customer's system.
E. The customer's system shall include those parts of the facilities beyond the termination of the utility
distribution system that are utilized in conveying utility-delivered domestic water to points of use.
(Ord. 110, 3-22-1994)
8-3-5: PROTECTION OF WATER SUPPLY:
No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the water purveyor
unless the water supply is protected as required by State/provincial laws and regulations and this
backflow prevention Chapter. Service of water to any premises shall be discontinued by the water
purveyor if a backflow prevention assembly required by this backflow prevention Chapter is not
installed, tested, and maintained, or if it is found that a backflow prevention assembly has been
removed, bypassed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises. Service will not be
restored until such conditions or defects are corrected. (Ord. 110, 3-22-1994)
8-3-6: INSPECTION OF SYSTEM:
The customer's system should be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized
representatives of the Town to determine whether cross-connections or other structural or sanitary
hazards, including violations of these regulations, exist. When such a condition becomes known, the
Water Systems Operator shall deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing
for a physical break in the service line until the customer has corrected the condition in conformance
with State and Town statutes relating to plumbing and water supplies and the regulations adopted
pursuant thereto. (Ord. 110, 3-22-1994)
8-3-7: BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY:
A. Conditions For Requiring: An approved backflow prevention assembly shall be installed on each
service line to a customer's water system at or near the property line or immediately inside the
building being served; but in all cases, before the first branch line leading off the service line
wherever the following conditions exist:
1. In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply that is not or may not be of safe
bacteriological or chemical quality and that is not acceptable as an additional source by the
Water Systems Operator, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the
premises by installing an approved backflow prevention assembly in the service line, appropriate
to the degree of hazard.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 115/240
2. In the case of premises on which an industrial fluids or any other objectionable substances are
handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system,
the public system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an
approved backflow prevention assembly in the service line, appropriate to the degree of hazard.
This shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating from the utility system
that have been subject to deterioration in quality.
3. In the case of premises having: a) internal connections that cannot be permanently corrected
and controlled; or b) intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of
the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or
impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross-connections exist, the public water
system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved
backflow prevention assembly in the service line.
B. Type Of Assembly: The type of protective assembly required under subsection A of this Section
shall depend upon the degree of hazard that exists as follows:
1. In the case of any premises where there is an auxiliary water supply as stated in subsection A1
of this Section and it is not subject to any of the following rules, the public water system shall be
protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced-pressure principle
backflow prevention assembly.
2. In the case of any premises where there is water or substance that would be objectionable but
not hazardous to health, if introduced into the public water system, the public water system shall
be protected by an approved double-check valve assembly.
3. In the case of any premises where there is any material dangerous to health that is handled in
such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public
water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reducedpressure
principle backflow prevention assembly. Examples of premises where these conditions
will exist include sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemical manufacturing
plants, hospitals, mortuaries, and plating plants.
4. In the case of any premises where there are "uncontrolled" cross-connections either actual or
potential, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an
approved reduced-pressure principle backflow prevention assembly at the service connection.
5. In the case of any premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or
restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete in-plant cross-connection survey,
the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by either an
approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced-pressure principle backflow prevention
assembly on each service to the premises.
6. In the case of any premises where, in the opinion of the Water Systems Operator, an undue
health threat is posed because of the presence of extremely toxic substances, the Water
Systems Operator may require an air gap at the service connection to protect the public water
system. This requirement will be at the discretion of the Water Systems Operator and is
dependent on the degree of hazard.
C. Standards And Specifications:
1. Any backflow prevention assembly required herein shall be a model and size approved by the
Water Systems Operator. The term approved backflow prevention assembly shall mean an
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 116/240
assembly that has been manufactured in full conformance with the standards established by the
American Water Works Association titled: AWWA C510-89, Standard for Double Check Valve
Backflow Prevention Assembly; and AWWA C511-89, Standard for Reduced-Pressure Principle
Backflow Prevention Assembly, and have met completely the laboratory and field performance
specifications of the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research of the
University of Southern California, established by "Specification of Backflow-Prevention
Assemblies", section 10 of the most current issue of the Manual of Cross-Connection Control.
2. Said AWWA and FCCHR standards and specifications have been adopted by the Water
Systems Operator. Final approval shall be evidenced by a "certificate of approval" issued by an
approved testing laboratory certifying full compliance with said AWWA standards and FCCHR
specifications.
3. The following testing laboratory has been qualified by the Water Systems Operator to test and
certify backflow preventers: Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research,
University of Southern California, University Park, Los Angeles, CA 90089.
4. Testing laboratories, other than the laboratory listed above, will be added to an approved list as
they are qualified by the Water Systems Operator.
5. Backflow preventers subjected to back pressure or back siphonage that have been fully tested
and have been granted a certificate of approval by said qualified laboratory and are listed on the
laboratory's current list of approved backflow prevention assemblies may be used without further
testing or qualification.
D. Certified Inspections: It shall be the duty of the customer/user at any premises where backflow
prevention assemblies are installed to have certified inspections and operational tests made at
least once per year. In those instances where the Water Systems Operator deems the hazard to
be great enough, certified inspections may be required at more frequent intervals. These
inspections and tests shall be at the expense of the water user and shall be performed by the
assembly manufacturer's representative, Public Works Department personnel, or by a certified
tester approved by the Water Systems Operator. It shall be the duty of the Water Systems
Operator to see that these tests are made in a timely manner. The customer/user shall notify the
Water Systems Operator in advance when the tests are to be undertaken so that the
customer/user may witness the tests if so desired. These assemblies shall be repaired,
overhauled, or replaced at the expense of the customer/user whenever said assemblies are found
to be defective. Records of such tests, repairs, and overhaul shall be kept and made available to
the Water Systems Operator.
E. Systems Not Meeting Requirements: All presently installed backflow prevention assemblies that do
not meet the requirements of this Section but were approved assemblies for the purpose described
herein at the time of installation and that have been properly maintained shall, except for the
inspection and maintenance requirements under subsection D of this Section, be excluded from
the requirements of these rules so long as the Water Systems Operator is assured that they will
satisfactorily protect the utility system. Whenever the existing assembly is moved from the present
location, requires more than minimum maintenance, or when the Water Systems Operator finds
that the maintenance constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by an approved
backflow prevention assembly meeting the requirements of this Section. (Ord. 110, 3-22-1994)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 117/240
Title 9
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
BUILDING CODE; PERMITS
9-1-1: BUILDING CODE:
A. Purpose: The purpose of the building requirements set forth in this chapter is to provide minimum
standards safeguarding life or limb, health, safety, property and public welfare by regulating and
controlling the design, construction and quality of materials of all buildings and structures within the
town limits.
B. Building Official: The building official, inspector, or other administrative authority referenced in this
chapter shall be vested in the office of the town manager, or such other person the town manager
may appoint, subject to town council approval. It shall be the duty of the building official to
administer this chapter. All town law enforcement officials and agencies shall, whenever requested
by the building official, enforce this chapter to the extent they are lawfully authorized to do so.
C. Rules And Regulations: The building official may adopt rules and regulations, subject to the
approval of the town council, in the interest of public safety, health, and general welfare, to
implement the provisions of this chapter and to secure the intent thereof. But no such rule shall
have the effect of waiving technical provisions specifically provided in the uniform building code or
of violating accepted engineering practices involved in public safety.
D. Standards: No person shall construct or cause to be constructed any building or addition to any
building within the corporate limits of the town that does not meet or exceed the standards as set
forth in the uniform building code. (Ord. 115, 3-17-1995)
1. Exceptions to the currently adopted building code will be amended to read as follows:
Exception 1:
1806.5.5 FOUNDATION ELEVATIONS. On graded sites, the finished floor shall be 6 inches
above the crown of the road or 12 inches above the flow line of a gutter when a gutter is present.
The public works director may approve alternate elevations provided it can be demonstrated that
required drainage to the point of discharge and away from the structure is provided at all
locations on the site and in no instance adversely affects neighboring properties.
(Ord. 07-302, 9-11-2007)
E. Penalty: Any person violating any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of a class one
misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code, and may also be
required to remove portions of any building which are in violation of this section. (Ord. 115, 3-17-
1995; amd. 1997 Code)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 118/240
9-1-2: BUILDING PERMIT:
A. Required: No person shall construct or cause to be constructed any building or addition to any
building within the corporate limits of the town without first obtaining a building permit, issued by
the building official. (Ord. 115, 3-7-1995)
B. Permit Requirements: A building permit shall not be issued until satisfactory evidence has been
provided by the applicant that the proposed construction shall conform to all applicable zoning
requirements. (Ord. 115, 3-7-1995; amd. 1997 Code)
C. Permit Fee: A building permit fee shall be adopted by resolution of the town council.
D. Penalty: Any person beginning construction without a building permit required under this section
may be charged a penalty fee in addition to the normal permit fee, as established by resolution of
the town council. (Ord. 115, 3-7-1995)
9-1-3: MANUFACTURED HOME PERMIT:
A. Permit Required: No person shall install or cause to be installed any manufactured home within the
corporate limits of the town without first obtaining a manufactured home permit issued by the
building official. (Ord. 116, 9-27-1995)
B. Permit Requirements: A manufactured home permit shall not be issued until satisfactory evidence
has been provided by the applicant that the proposed manufactured home shall conform to all
applicable zoning requirements. (Ord. 116, 9-27-1995; amd. 1997 Code)
C. Permit Fee: A manufactured home permit fee shall be adopted by resolution of the town council.
D. Penalty: A person installing a manufactured home without a manufactured home permit as required
under this section may be charged a penalty fee in addition to the normal permit fee, as
established by resolution of the town council. (Ord. 116, 9-27-1995)
Chapter 2
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
9-2-1: DEFINED:
All buildings or structures which have any or all of the following defects shall be deemed "dangerous
buildings":
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 119/240
A. Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to have become dangerous to
life, safety or the general health and welfare of the occupants or the people of the Town.
B. Those which are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe or because of any other conditions, constitute a
fire hazard or are unsanitary, or otherwise are dangerous to the health, safety or general welfare of
the people of this Town. (1986 Code § 7-4-1; 1997 Code)
9-2-2: DECLARED NUISANCE:
All "dangerous buildings", as defined by Section 9-2-1 of this Chapter, are hereby declared to be
public nuisances and shall be repaired, vacated or demolished as provided in this Chapter. (1986
Code § 7-4-3)
9-2-3: TOWN OFFICIALS; DUTIES:
A. Building Inspector: The Building Inspector shall:
1. Complaints By Persons: Inspect any building, wall or structure about which complaints are filed
by any person to the effect that a building, wall or structure is or may be existing in violation of
this Chapter.
2. Reports By Town Departments: Inspect any building, wall or structure reported by the Fire or
Police Departments as probably existing in violation of the terms of this Chapter.
3. Notify Interested Persons: Notify in writing the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, agent and
all other persons having an interest in said building, as shown by the land records of the Navajo
County Recorder, of any building found by him to be a dangerous building, within the standard
set forth in Section 9-2-1 of this Chapter, that:
a. The owner must vacate, or repair, or demolish said building in accordance with the terms of
the notice and this Chapter;
b. The occupant or lessee must vacate said building or may have it repaired in accordance with
the notice and remain in possession;
c. The mortgagee, agent or other persons having an interest in said building as shown by the
land records of the Navajo County Recorder may at his own risk repair, vacate or demolish
said building or have such work or act done; provided, that any person notified under this
subsection to repair, vacate or demolish any building shall be given such reasonable time, not
exceeding sixty (60) days, as may be necessary to do, or have done, the work or act required
by the notice provided for herein.
4. Description Of Conditions: Set forth in the notice provided for in subsection A3 of this Section, a
description of the building or structure deemed unsafe, a statement of the particulars which
make the building or structure a dangerous building and an order requiring the same to be put in
such condition as to comply with the terms of this Chapter within such length of time, not
exceeding sixty (60) days, as is reasonable.
5. Report Noncompliance: Report to the Town Manager any noncompliance with the "notice"
provided for in subsections A3 and A4 of this Section.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 120/240
6. Appearance At Hearings: Appear at all hearings conducted by the Town Manager or Town
Council and testify as to the condition of dangerous buildings.
7. Placement Of Notice; Contents: Place a notice on all dangerous buildings reading as follows:
This building has been found to be a dangerous building by the Building Inspector. This notice
is to remain on this building until it is repaired, vacated or demolished in accordance with the
notice which has been given to the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee or agent of this building,
and all other persons having an interest in said building, as shown by the land records of the
Navajo County Recorder. It is unlawful to remove this notice until such notice is complied with.
(1986 Code § 7-4-4)
B. Town Manager: The Town Manager shall:
1. Notice To Appear: Upon receipt of a report of the Building Inspector, as provided for in
subsection A5 of this Section, give written notice to the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee,
agent and all other persons having an interest in said building, as shown by the land records of
the Navajo County Recorder, to appear before him on the date specified in the notice, to show
cause why the building or structure reported to be a dangerous building should not be repaired,
vacated or demolished in accordance with the statement of particulars set forth in the Building
Inspector's notice provided for in subsection A4 of this Section.
2. Conduct Hearing: Hold a hearing and hear such testimony of witnesses, including the Building
Inspector and the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee or any other person having an interest in
said building, as shown by the land records of the Navajo County Recorder, shall offer relative to
the dangerous building.
3. Written Findings: Make written findings of fact from the testimony offered pursuant to subsection
B2 of this Section as to whether or not the building in question is a dangerous building within the
terms of Section 9-2-1 of this Chapter.
4. Issue Order: Issue an order based upon findings of fact made pursuant to subsection B3 of this
Section commanding the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee, agent and all other persons
having an interest in said building, as shown by the land records of the Navajo County Recorder,
to repair, vacate or demolish any building found to be a dangerous building within the terms of
this Chapter; and provided, that any person so notified, including the owners, shall have the
privilege of either vacating or repairing said dangerous building; or any person having an interest
in said building as shown by the land records of the Navajo County Recorder may demolish said
dangerous building at his own risk to prevent the acquiring of a lien against the land upon which
said dangerous building stands by the Town as provided in subsection B5 of this Section.
5. Noncompliance; Town Authority: If the owner, occupant, mortgagee or lessee fails to comply
with the order provided for in subsection B4 of this Section within twenty (20) days, the Town
Manager shall cause such building or structure to be repaired, vacated or demolished as the
facts may warrant, under the standards provided for in Section 9-2-4 of this Chapter, and shall,
with the assistance of the Town Attorney cause the costs of such repair, vacation or demolition to
be charged against the land on which the building existed as a Municipal lien or cause such
costs to be added to the tax duplicate as an assessment, or to be levied as a special tax against
the land upon which the building stands or did stand, or to be recovered in a suit at law against
the owner; provided, that in cases where such procedure is desirable and any delay thereby
caused will not be dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the people of
this Town, the Town Manager may notify the Town Attorney to take legal action to force the
owner to make all necessary repairs or demolish the building.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 121/240
6. Report To Town Attorney: Report to the Town Attorney the names of all persons not complying
with the order provided for in subsection B4 of this Section.
7. Appeal To Town Council: A person to whom an order of the Town Manager is directed shall have
the right, within ten (10) days of the service of such order, to appeal to the Town Council. The
Town Council shall convene a quorum within thirty (30) days to review such order. If the order is
affirmed or modified, the person to whom it is directed shall comply with the order as so affirmed
or modified within twenty (20) days. If such person fails to comply with the order, the Town
Manager shall cause such building or structure to be repaired, vacated or demolished as set
forth in subsection B5 of this Section. (1986 Code § 7-4-5)
C. Town Attorney: The Town Attorney shall:
1. Prosecute: Prosecute all persons failing to comply with the terms of the notices provided for in
subsections A3 and A4 of this Section, and the order provided for in subsection B4 of this
Section.
2. Appear At Hearings: Appear upon request at all hearings before the Town Manager in regard to
dangerous buildings.
3. Bring Suit: Bring suit to collect all Municipal liens, assessments or costs incurred by the Town
Manager in repairing or causing to be vacated or demolished dangerous buildings.
4. Other Legal Action Necessary: Take such other legal action as is necessary to carry out the
terms and provisions of this Chapter. (1986 Code § 7-4-7)
D. Police And Fire Departments: The employees of the Town Police and Fire Departments shall
promptly make a report in writing to the Building Inspector of all buildings or structures which are,
may be, or are suspected to be dangerous buildings within the terms of this Chapter. (1986 Code
§ 7-4-11)
9-2-4: STANDARDS:
The following standards shall be followed in substance by the Building Inspector in ordering repair,
vacation or demolition:
A. Repair: If the dangerous building can reasonably be repaired so that it will no longer exist in
violation of the terms of this Chapter, it shall be ordered repaired.
B. Vacation: If the dangerous building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health,
morals, safety or general welfare of its occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated.
C. Demolition: In any case where a dangerous building is fifty percent (50%) damaged or decayed, or
deteriorated from its original value or structure, it may be demolished, and in all cases where a
building cannot be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this Chapter it
shall be demolished. In all cases where a dangerous building is a fire hazard existing or erected in
violation of the terms of this Chapter and cannot reasonably be repaired, it shall be demolished.
(1986 Code § 7-4-2)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 122/240
9-2-5: EMERGENCY CASES:
In cases where it reasonably appears that there is immediate danger to the life or safety of any person
unless a "dangerous building", as defined in this Chapter, is immediately repaired, vacated or
demolished, the Building Inspector shall report such facts to the Town Manager and the Town
Manager shall cause the immediate repair, vacation or demolition of such dangerous building. The
costs of such emergency repair, vacation or demolition of such dangerous building shall be collected
in the same manner as provided in subsection 9-2-3B5 of this Chapter. (1986 Code § 7-4-8)
9-2-6: OWNER ABSENT:
In cases, except emergency cases, where the owner, occupant, lessee or mortgagee is absent from
the Town, all notices or orders provided for in this Chapter shall be sent by registered mail to the
owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee and all other persons having an interest in said building, as
shown by the land records of the Navajo County Recorder, to be the last known address of each, and
a copy of such notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the dangerous building to which it
relates. Such mailing and posting shall be deemed adequate service. (1986 Code § 7-4-9)
9-2-7: ADMINISTRATIVE LIABILITY:
No officer, agent or employee of the Town shall render himself personally liable for any damage that
may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his
duties under this Chapter. Any suit brought against any officer, agent or employee of the Town as a
result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this Chapter shall be
defended by the Town Attorney until the final determination of the proceedings therein. (1986 Code
§ 7-4-10)
9-2-8: VIOLATIONS:
A. Owner: It is unlawful for the owner of any dangerous building to fail to comply with any notice or
order to repair, vacate or demolish said building given by any person authorized by this Chapter to
give such notice or order.
B. Occupant; Lessee: It is unlawful for the occupant or lessee in possession to fail to comply with any
notice to vacate and to fail to repair said building in accordance with any notice given as provided
for in this Chapter.
C. Notice Removal: It is unlawful for any person to remove the notice provided for in subsection 9-2-
3A7 of this Chapter. (1986 Code § 7-4-6)
Chapter 3
UNIFORM NUMBERING SYSTEM
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 123/240
9-3-1: SYSTEM ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a uniform system for numbering buildings fronting on all streets, avenues
and public ways in the Town, and all houses and other buildings shall be numbered in accordance with
these provisions. (Ord. 89, 5-18-1988)
9-3-2: BASELINES FOR DIVIDING TOWN:
Center Street shall constitute the baseline which will divide the Town into northern and southern parts.
Main Street, also known as Highway 77, shall be considered the baseline which divides the Town into
east and west parts.
A. North Of Center Street: Each building north of Center Street and facing a street running in a
northerly direction shall carry a number and address indicating its location north of such base
street.
B. South Of Center Street: Each building south of Center Street and facing a street running in a
southerly direction shall carry a number and address indicating its location south of such base
street.
C. East Of Main Street: Each building east of Main Street and facing a street running in an easterly
direction shall carry a number and address indicating its location east of such base street.
D. West Of Main Street: Each building west of Main Street and facing a street running in a westerly
direction shall carry a number and address indicating its location west of such base street. (Ord.
89, 5-18-1988)
9-3-3: ASSIGNING NUMBERS:
A. Basis: The numbering of buildings on such streets shall begin at the baseline. All buildings on the
south side of east/west streets and east side of north/south streets shall bear odd numbers and
likewise, all buildings on the north side of east/west streets and west side of north/south streets
shall bear even numbers.
B. Lots; Dwellings: A block interval system shall be used with individual numbers being assigned
according to blocks.
1. A multiple-family dwelling having only one main entrance shall be assigned only one number,
and separate apartments in the building will carry letter or number designations in addition to the
numbering assigned to the main entrance of the dwelling.
2. Any duplex houses having two (2) front entrances shall have a separate number for each
entrance.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 124/240
C. Buildings Facing Short Streets: All buildings facing streets not extending through to the baseline
shall be assigned the same relative numbers as if the street had extended to the baseline. (Ord.
89, 5-18-1988)
9-3-4: DIRECTIONAL DESIGNATION:
In addition to the numbers placed on each house or other building, as heretofore provided, all streets,
avenues and other public ways within the Town are hereby given the following directional designation:
A. North Of Center Street: All streets north of Center Street and running in a generally northerly
direction are given the direction of "north" as part of the street name.
B. South Of Center Street: All streets south of Center Street and running in a generally southerly
direction are given the direction of "south" as part of the street name.
C. East Of Main Street: All streets east of Main Street and running in a generally easterly direction are
given the direction of "east" as part of the street name.
D. West Of Main Street: All streets west of Main Street and running in a generally westerly direction
are given the direction of "west" as part of the street name. (Ord. 89, 5-18-1988)
9-3-5: NOTIFICATION BY TOWN:
It shall be the duty of the Public Works Director to inform any applicant of the number or numbers of
any such lot or property, as provided in this Chapter. (Ord. 89, 5-18-1988)
9-3-6: PLACEMENT ON BUILDINGS:
A. Required: There shall be assigned to each house and other residential or commercial building
location on any street, avenue or public way in the Town, its respective number under the uniform
system provided in this Chapter. When each house or building has been assigned its respective
number or numbers, the owner, occupant or agent shall place or cause to be placed upon each
house or building controlled by him, the number or numbers assigned under the uniform system,
as provided in this Chapter.
B. Time For Compliance: Such numbers shall be placed on all appropriate existing buildings within
thirty (30) days after the assignment of a permanent number. The numbers used shall not be less
than three inches (3") in height and shall be made of a durable and clearly visible material.
C. Placement: The numbers shall be conspicuously placed so that the number can be seen plainly
from the street line. Whenever any building is situated more than fifty feet (50') from the street line,
the numbers shall appear near the walk, driveway or entrance to such buildings, so as to be easily
discernible from the roadway. (Ord. 89, 5-18-1988)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 125/240
9-3-7: NAMING, CHANGING OR RENAMING:
A. New Streets: Everyone submitting a subdivision plat to the Planning and Zoning Commission or to
the Town Council for their approval shall show the proper names of any and all streets. These
street designations shall be approved by the Town Council before such new streets are officially
named. Street name suggestions may originate with the parties submitting the plat, under the
guidance of the Public Works Director or other Town Council designee.
B. Existing Streets: The Mayor and Town Council, by resolution, may change, rename or name an
existing or newly established street within the limits of the Town at any time, upon recommendation
of the Planning and Zoning Commission or any other Town Council designee. (Ord. 89, 5-18-1988;
1997 Code)
9-3-8: PLAT BOOK:
A plat book of all streets, avenues, and public ways within the Town showing the proper number of all
houses or other buildings fronting upon all streets, avenues or public ways shall be kept on file in the
office of the Public Works Department. These plats shall be open to inspection by any person during
the office hours of the Town Hall. (Ord. 89, 5-18-1988)
9-3-9: PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this Chapter, requiring that they renumber and/or
post the number of their home or other building in a conspicuous place, as directed by this Chapter, or
who otherwise refuses to cooperate with the renumbering of their house or building or the renaming of
their street, shall be guilty of a petty offense, pursuant to the provisions of Arizona Revised Statutes,
section 13-802(D), and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-
1 of this Code. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense, punishable as
hereinabove described. (Ord. 89, 5-18-1988; 1997 Code)
Chapter 4
STATE STANDARD FOR STORM WATER
DETENTION/RETENTION
9-4-1: REQUIRED:
The state standard for storm water detention/retention, dated August 1999 is required for all
construction and development in the town of Snowflake, and this certain document, three (3) copies of
which are on file in the office of the town clerk of the town of Snowflake, being marked and designated
as the state standard for storm water detention/retention, August 1999 edition, including the state
standard attachment SSA8-99, regulates and governs the construction and development of all
properties within the incorporated limits of the town of Snowflake. (Ord. 07-303, 9-25-2007)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 126/240
Title 10
ZONING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
10-1-1: INTRODUCTION:
A. Title: These regulations shall be shall be known as the TOWN OF SNOWFLAKE ZONING
ORDINANCE, may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as "this Ordinance".
B. Purpose: The purpose of this Ordinance is to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the
citizens of the Town by guiding, controlling, and regulating the design, location, use, and
occupancy of buildings and property.
C. Scope: Except for work related to the provision of essential public services, or work located
primarily in a public way, or as otherwise provided herein, no land may be divided, no structure
shall hereafter be used, erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered,
repaired, or improved, nor shall any land be used, except in conformity with this Ordinance, and
before any such activity is undertaken, a zoning clearance must be obtained from the Town.
Further, no person shall divert, retard, or obstruct the flow of waters in any watercourse whenever
it creates a hazard to life or property without first securing a zoning clearance.
1. Any use changed or altered in any significant manner, substantially decreased in production, or
terminated or removed for a period exceeding six (6) months, will be required to submit a new
site plan prior to restarting, or resuming full production.
2. Every application for a zoning clearance must be accompanied by a sketch draft, or scaled
drawn site plan as required by this Ordinance or the Town Manager. All Town departments,
officials and employees charged with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall
refuse to issue permits or licenses affecting land or structures in conflict with any provision of
this Ordinance. Any permit issued in conflict with any provision of this Ordinance is null and void.
D. Internal Inconsistencies: Where, in any specific case, different sections of this Ordinance or any
other Town ordinance or Code specify different requirements, the more restrictive shall govern.
Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific
requirement shall apply. (Ord. 132, 6-10-1997)
10-1-2: INTERPRETATION:
A. General: The interpretation and application of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be made by the
Town Manager or a designee. In interpreting and applying this Ordinance, the Town Manager shall
be held to the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general
welfare.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 127/240
B. Boundaries: Where uncertainty exists concerning the boundaries of any zone shown on the Town of
Snowflake Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
1. Single-Zoned Properties: Where zone boundaries are indicated as approximately following the
features noted below, those features shall be construed to be the zone boundaries:
a. Street or alley lines or the center lines thereof and railroad rights of way, whenever any street,
alley, railroad or other public way is vacated, the zones adjoining each side of such street,
alley, or public way shall be considered as extended to the center of such vacation and all
areas included in the vacation shall then be subject to all appropriate regulations of those
zones.
b. Property lines.
c. Stream or waterway center lines.
2. Multi-Zoned Properties: Where zone boundaries divide a lot or parcel, the zoning boundary shall
be considered a "lot line" if the area created by such "lot line" meets the designated zone
minimum lot area and width requirements. If the area created by such "lot line" would not comply
with such requirements, zoning for the entire parcel shall be that which is applied to the larger
portion of the property. (Ord. 132, 6-10-1997)
10-1-3: FEES:
Fees for Town services provided in the administration of this Ordinance may be set by resolution of
the Town Council. (Ord. 132, 6-10-1997)
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
10-2-1: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Violations: When any structure, or parcel of land regulated by this Ordinance is being used contrary
to this Ordinance, the Town may order such use discontinued, or such structure removed or
restored, or the land, or portion thereof vacated by notice served on any person causing the
violation. Such person shall eliminate the violation within the time prescribed by the Town after
receipt of such notice, and bring the structure, parcel of land, or portion thereof, into conformance
with the requirements of this Ordinance. Failure to comply fully with the conditions of approval of
any permit is a violation of this Ordinance.
B. Site Inspections: The Town Manager, in the discharge of his duties, and for good or probable
cause, may enter any premise, building, or structure at any reasonable hour to inspect the same in
connection with any application made under this Ordinance, or for any investigation or inspection
as to whether or not any portion of such premises, building, or structure is being used in violation
of this Ordinance. Written notice served on the owner or occupant of any premises sought to be
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 128/240
inspected at least twenty four (24) hours before such inspection takes place, shall be given in all
cases in which permission to inspect has been refused. Every person who, after the receipt of such
notice, denies or prevents, obstructs, or attempts to deny, prevent, or obstruct access to such
premises is guilty of a Class One misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of
this Code.
C. Town Manager: The Town Manager is charged with enforcement of the provisions of this
Ordinance. (Ord. 132, 6-10-1997)
10-2-2: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES:
A. Public Hearings: Any permit for which a public hearing is required will be noticed in accordance with
Arizona Revised Statutes, section 9-462.04.
B. Decision Making And Appeals:
1. General: All appeals will be considered by the agency to which they have been appealed at a
public hearing. The agency to which a decision has been appealed, may either:
a. Uphold the decision.
b. Reverse the decision.
c. Modify the decision.
d. Refer the decision back to its author for reconsideration.
2. Appeal Hierarchy: Where decisions are appealed by any member of the Town Council, the
Planning and Zoning Commission, Town staff; or by any individual, it shall be done by filing a
written notice of appeal with the Town Manager in which the following rules shall apply:
a. Decisions of the Town Manager may be appealed to the Planning and Zoning Commission;
and decisions of the Planning and Zoning Commission may be appealed to the Town Council.
b. Any member of the Planning and Zoning Commission may appeal a decision of the Town
Manager to the Planning and Zoning Commission; and any member of the Town Council may
appeal any decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission to the Town Council.
c. Decisions of the Town Manager when acting as the Hearing Officer may be appealed to the
Board of Adjustment. Any member of the Board of Adjustment may appeal a decision of the
Manager/Hearing Officer to the Board of Adjustment.
3. Time Limit: Appeals will only be considered if they are filed within ten (10) working days after the
decision to be appealed was made. Decisions are final after the ten (10) day appeal period has
passed, if no appeal has been filed.
4. Stay Of Proceedings: An appeal suspends the action taken and stays all proceedings in the
matter, unless the Town certifies that a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. Upon
such certification, proceedings shall not be stayed except by restraining order as injunctive relief
granted by a court of record on application and notice to the Town. Proceedings shall not be
stayed if the appeal requests relief which has been previously denied, except pursuant to a
special action in Superior Court.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 129/240
5. Referrals: At the Town Manager's discretion, any matter being considered for action by the Town
Manager may be referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission for decision.
C. Permit Issuance And Expiration:
1. Application Acceptance: No application for any permit pursuant to this Ordinance may be
accepted which is not complete, legible, and accompanied by the required fee. Permit
applications may only be submitted by property owners or their authorized representatives. The
Town Manager may require any of the following as proof of ownership/agency prior to accepting
a permit application:
a. A copy of a title report issued not more than thirty (30) days prior to the date of submittal by a
title company authorized to do business in the State.
b. Proof of agency, if the land is owned by a corporation, in the form of a corporate resolution
certified by the secretary of the corporation and authenticated by the corporate seal, or
acknowledged in the form prescribed by Arizona Revised Statutes, section 33-506.2,
designating the applicant to act as an agent.
c. Proof of agency, if the land is owned by a partnership, in the form of a written document from
the partners designating the applicant to act as agent, certified and acknowledged as
prescribed in Arizona Revised Statues, section 33-506.
d. Proof of agency, if the land is owned by an individual other than the applicant, certified and
acknowledged as prescribed in Arizona Revised Statutes, section 33-506.1.
2. Zoning Clearance Required: No building or other permit required by this Ordinance shall be
issued without a zoning clearance.
3. Expiration Or Cancellation: Any permit issued under this Ordinance expires after one year, or
other time period specified at issuance, unless the use or structure authorized by the permit is
established prior to that time; or, unless an extension is granted by the issuing authority before
expiration. (Ord. 132, 6-10-1997)
10-2-3: PENALTY:
A. Fines; Imprisonment: Any person, whether as principal, owner, agent, tenant, employee, or
otherwise found violating any provision of this Ordinance, or violating or failing to comply with any
order or regulation made hereunder, shall be guilty of a Class One misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof may be punished by a fine, and/or imprisonment as prescribed by law for such a
violation. Such person, shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during
which any such violation or failure to comply with these regulations is committed, continued, or
permitted.
B. Prosecution: Any building, structure, or improvement set up, erected, built or maintained, any fill,
excavation, or development, or any use of property contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance
shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance per se. The Town
Attorney may, upon order of the Town Council, directed by the Town Manager, or on his own
initiative, immediately upon discovery of such public nuisance, commence all necessary actions or
proceedings for the abatement, enjoinment, and removal thereof in the manner provided by law;
and may take such other lawful steps and may apply to such court or courts as may have
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 130/240
jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate, enjoin, and remove such building or use and restrain
and enjoin any person from setting up, erecting, building, moving, or maintaining any such building
or using any property contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance or otherwise violating this
Ordinance.
C. Exclusivity: All misdemeanors provided for herein shall be cumulative and exclusive. The conviction
and punishment of any person hereunder shall not relieve such person from the responsibility to
correct prohibited conditions or to remove buildings, structures, or improvements, nor prevent the
enforcement, correction, or removal thereof. (Ord. 132, 6-10-1997)
Chapter 3
DEFINITIONS
10-3-1: CONSTRUCTION:
A. Usage: For purposes of this Ordinance, certain terms, phrases, words, and their derivatives shall
be construed as specified herein. The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company, or corporation as well as an individual. The words "used", or
"occupied", include the words "intended", "designed", or "arranged to be used or occupied". The
word "shall" is mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive, except when used in the negative.
When not inconsistent with the context, the present tense includes the future, the singular includes
the plural, and the plural includes the singular.
B. Undefined Terms: Where terms are not defined, they have their ordinarily accepted meanings within
the context with which they are used. Webster's New World Dictionary of American English,
copyright 1991, provides the ordinarily accepted word meanings referred to above. (Ord. 132, 6-
10-1997)
10-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
A.R.S.: The Arizona Revised Statutes.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE: A subordinate structure or use, not used as living quarters and
not including kitchen or sleeping facilities, customarily incidental to and located on the same lot
occupied by a principal use or structure. Accessory uses are permitted in all zones and a home
occupation may be accessory to any residential use.
ADULT ARCADE: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slugoperated
or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines,
projectors, or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer
persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or
characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas".
ADULT BOOKSTORE: A commercial establishment which as one of its principal business purposes
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 131/240
offers for sale or rental, for any form of consideration, any one or more of the following:
A. Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, computer
simulations, holograms, motion pictures, videocassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other
visual representations which depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas"; or
B. Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified
sexual activities".
ADULT CABARET: A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly
features:
A. Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or
B. Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or
by "specified sexual activities"; or
C. The display of films, motion pictures, computer simulations, holograms, videocassettes, slides,
or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
ADULT MOTEL: A hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment which:
A. Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with
closed-circuit television transmissions, films, computer simulations, holograms, motion pictures,
videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the
depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; and has a
sign visible from the public right of way which advertises the availability of this adult type of
photographic reproductions; or
B. Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours; or
C. Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subagent the room for a period of time that is
less than ten (10) hours.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A commercial establishment where, for any form of
consideration, films, holograms, computer simulations, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or
similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown or displayed which are characterized by the
depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS: An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult
motion picture theater, adult theater, adult video store, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual
encounter center.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 132/240
ADULT THEATER: A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which
regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or in live performances which are
characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities".
ADULT VIDEO STORE: See definition of Adult Bookstore.
BASEMENT: Any floor level below the first story in a building, except that a floor level in a building
having only one floor shall be classified as a basement, unless such floor level qualifies as a first story.
A basement is considered a story if its ceiling is more than five feet (5') above the average established
grade of its perimeter, or if it is used for residential or business purposes by other than janitors or
domestic servants in the same building.
BOARD: Town of Snowflake Town Council which is also designated as the Snowflake Town Board of
Adjustment.
BOARDING HOUSE: A building where, for compensation and by prearrangement for definite longterm
periods, lodging and meals are provided for three (3) or more, but not exceeding twenty (20)
persons.
BUILDABLE AREA: That portion of a lot or parcel within the required front, rear and side yard
setbacks which is available for the construction of structures.
BUILDING: A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for housing, shelter, or enclosure
of persons, animals, or property of any kind.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance to the level of the highest point of the building wall, if the
building has a flat roof, or to the highest point of the roof, if the roof is of any other type, measured
from the natural grade, or from the average level of the finished ground surface across the front of the
building.
BUILDING, MAIN: A building in which the principal use on a lot is conducted; in any residential zone,
any dwelling is considered a main building on the lot on which it is situated.
COMMISSION: The town of Snowflake planning and zoning commission.
COUNCIL: The Snowflake town council, which also serves as the Snowflake board of adjustment.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN: A town approved plan for the development of a property.
DWELLING: Any structure or portion thereof which is designed or used for residential purposes, but
not including hotels, motels, boarding or lodging houses.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE: A building, or portion thereof designed for occupancy by two (2) or more
households living independently in which they may or may not share common entrances and/or other
spaces.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A detached dwelling unit with kitchen and sleeping facilities, designed
for occupancy by one family.
DWELLING UNIT: Any building or portion thereof which contains living facilities, including facilities for
sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation, for not more than one family, or a congregate residence for
six (6) or fewer unrelated individuals.
ESCORT: A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 133/240
another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease
for another person.
ESCORT AGENCY: A person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to
furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
FACTORY BUILT BUILDING: A residential or nonresidential building meeting the requirements of the
uniform building code (UBC), including a dwelling unit or habitable room thereof which is either wholly
or in substantial part manufactured at an off site location to be assembled on site, except that it does
not include a "manufactured home", a "recreational vehicle", or "mobile home", as defined herein. Also
referred to as a "modular building".
FAMILY: An individual, or two (2) or more individuals related by blood, marriage, or adoption, or a
group not exceeding six (6) unrelated individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit.
FLOOR AREA: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of every floor of all buildings on a lot measured
from the exterior faces of the exterior walls, or from the center line of walls separating buildings, not
including any space devoted to parking or loading and unloading, but including elevator shafts,
basements and the following areas if they have headroom of seven feet (7') or more: stair wells at
each floor, floor space used for mechanical equipment, penthouses, attic space (whether or not a floor
has actually been laid), interior balconies, mezzanines and enclosed porches.
HOME OCCUPATION: An accessory use which involves a business, occupation, or commercial
activity undertaken within a residential structure that is incidental and secondary to the use of that
structure as a dwelling unit:
A. Intent And Purpose: The town of Snowflake desires to enable its residents to use their
residence for home occupation activities and to protect surrounding areas from potential adverse
impacts generated by business activities. The action of approving a home occupation contains a
finding that the use will not generate impacts different from the use of the property as a
residential dwelling unit.
B. Licensing And Inspections: A home occupation must secure and maintain a Snowflake business
permit and a transaction privilege tax license from the Arizona department of revenue. As a
condition of issuing and maintaining a business permit, a home occupation permittee must allow
inspections to be conducted by representatives of the town to verify compliance with standards
and limits prescribed by this code. Such inspections shall occur between the hours of eight thirty
o'clock (8:30) A.M. and four thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M. and only upon twenty four (24) hours'
written notice to the permittee.
C. Use Of Residence: A home occupation must be conducted within the principal residential
structure and permitted accessory structures. Only an occupant-owner or occupant-lessee of a
premises may own and operate a home occupation. The use must not change the character of
the structure, with no outdoor business activities or outside storage permitted on premises.
D. Prohibited Home Occupations: The list of prohibited uses in a residential zoning district include,
but are not limited to:
1. Motor vehicle repair services;
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 134/240
2. Kennels, stables, pet grooming services, veterinarian clinics;
3. Medical and dental clinics;
4. Restaurants, clubs and drinking establishments;
5. Undertaking and funeral parlors;
6. Adult entertainment establishments, adult retail establishments, adult theaters;
7. Taxi services, transit, express mail or package carriers;
8. Storage of firewood for sale.
E. Home Occupation Operational Standards:
1. Operating Limits: No visible or audible indications of business activities, other than those
typical of a residential dwelling unit, shall be permitted before eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. or after
eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.
2. Advertising: Advertising signs on the exterior of the premises of a home based business are
prohibited, except for a single sign in a window not exceeding two (2) square feet in size
and/or identification signs (permanent or magnetic) on two (2) operable motor vehicles that
may be parked on the premises.
3. Vehicles:
a. No person operating a home occupation shall use or cause delivery vehicles to visit their
premises, except for passenger vehicles, mail carriers and express carriers, such as
vehicles used by United Parcel Service, and Federal Express. Business deliveries by
semitractor trailers are prohibited.
b. Home occupations are not required to provide parking beyond what is required for
residential use, but on street parking is prohibited.
c. A home occupation shall be limited to the parking or storage of two (2) vehicles and two (2)
empty or enclosed trailers on the premises to be used in the business. Vehicles, excluding
trailers, may not exceed a one ton capacity.
4. Employees: A home occupation shall have no more than one nonresident employee on the
premises at any time, unless they are there to pick up a paycheck, which should occur no
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 135/240
more frequently than once a week.
F. Enforcement:
1. The town of Snowflake will not enforce subdivision covenants, conditions and restrictions that
may be more or less restrictive than standards and limits prescribed by this code. Subdivision
covenants, conditions and restrictions are terms of contracts between private property owners.
CC&Rs and provisions of this code are independently enforceable against the property owner
in a court of jurisdiction.
2. Complaints alleging violations of home occupation standards and limits prescribed by this
code shall be submitted to the planning and zoning department in writing for potential
enforcement action.
3. The town will attempt to hold the identity of complainants confidential unless court
enforcement is necessary. In a court proceeding, the complaining party usually must be made
known to the offending party and subpoenaed as a witness in court, where he or she may be
confronted and cross examined.
4. If it is determined that a business, due to its noncompliance with the above provisions, does
not meet or no longer meets the definition of a "home occupation", then said business shall be
subject to all other applicable provisions of the town code, to include, but not be limited to, title
3 of this code and this title.
HOUSEHOLD: An individual or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption and
usual servants, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit; or a group of not more
than six (6) persons who need not be related living together as a single housekeeping unit.
KENNEL: Any establishment at which five (5) or more dogs, cats, or other domestic pets are bred or
raised for sale or boarded, cared for, commercially, or on a nonprofit basis; not including
establishments which are primarily intended to provide animal dental, medical or surgical care, or
quarantine quarters.
LAND DEVELOPMENT: The division of land into lots or parcels, the construction of structures, or
initiation of a use on a property.
LODGING, HOUSE: A building where, for compensation and by prearrangement for definite long term
periods, lodging only is provided for three (3) or more, but not exceeding twenty (20) persons.
LOT: Any lot, parcel, property, or tract of land, or combination thereof, shown on a recorded
subdivision plat or having a deed recorded by metes and bounds description.
LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting two (2) intersecting streets where the interior angle of intersection does
not exceed one hundred thirty five degrees (135°). The shorter of the two (2) street frontages of such
lots is the front of the parcel.
LOT COVERAGE: The percentage of the area of a lot which is occupied by covered structures.
LOT DEPTH: The shortest horizontal distance between the midpoint of the front lot line and the
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 136/240
midpoint of the rear lot line.
LOT, INTERIOR: Any lot which is not a corner lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The front lot line is the line demarcating the separation between the street right of
way and the front yard of the lot. On corner lots, the shorter frontage is the front of the lot.
LOT LINE, REAR: The rear line of a lot is a dividing line between two (2) lots, or between a lot and an
alley, provided the alley runs generally parallel to the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot line which is not a front or rear lot line; a line dividing a lot from an adjacent
lot.
LOT SIZE: The area contained within the lines separating a property from other ownerships.
LOT WIDTH: For rectangular lots, lots whose side lot lines are not parallel, and lots on the outside of
the curve of a street, the distance between the side lot lines measured at the required minimum front
yard line on a line parallel to the street or street chord; and for lots on the inside of the curve of a
street, the distance between side lot lines measured thirty feet (30') behind the required minimum front
yard line on a line parallel to the street or street chord.
MANAGER: The town of Snowflake town manager or his designee, who is also designated as the
town of Snowflake hearing officer (pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes, section 9-462.06(A)).
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, as further defined in Arizona Revised Statutes, section 41-
2142(23), built in accordance with the HUD act of 1974, as amended, at a site other than where it is
intended to be used; as opposed to a "factory-built" building, or "modular" building, which is
constructed in accordance with the uniform building code. Manufactured homes are built on a
permanent chassis, capable of being transported in one or more sections, and designed to be used
with, or without, a permanent foundation as a dwelling when connected to on site utilities. A
"manufactured home" is not a "mobile home", a "recreational vehicle", or a "factory built building", as
defined herein.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK: A parcel of land under single ownership on which three (3) or more
manufactured homes are occupied as residences, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for
use of the property. In addition to manufactured homes, such parks may include facilities intended to
serve the needs of persons residing within the park and buildings and structures customarily incidental
to the residential use of the property, including such things as storage sheds, carports, swimming
pools, awnings, and garages.
MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE: An area within a manufactured home park designed for the
accommodation of one manufactured home together with its accessory structures.
MOBILE HOME: A structure, as further defined in Arizona Revised Statutes, section 41-2142(25), built
prior to June 15, 1976, on a permanent chassis, capable of being transported in one or more sections,
and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation as a dwelling when connected to on
site utilities. Mobile homes are not permitted in the town of Snowflake.
MODULAR BUILDING: A uniform building code "factory built building".
NONCONFORMING USE: The lawful use of any building or lot existing on the effective date of the
ordinance codified herein, or amendments thereto as they become effective, which does not conform
to the use regulations of the zone in which it is located.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 137/240
NUDE MODEL STUDIO: Any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays
"specified anatomical areas" is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculpted,
photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. A
nude model studio does not mean a modeling class, or the facility for such class, operated:
A. By a proprietary school licensed by the state of Arizona; a college, junior college, or university
supported entirely or partly by taxation;
B. By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which
credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation; or
C. In a structure:
1. Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that
indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and
2. Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three (3) days in
advance of the class; and
3. Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time.
NUDITY OR A STATE OF NUDITY: The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals,
female genitals, or female breast.
PARKING SPACE: A permanently surfaced area, enclosed or open, of not less than nine feet (9') in
width and having an area of not less than one hundred eighty (180) square feet accessible to a street
or alley and permitting ingress and egress of an automobile.
PERSON: An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity.
RECORDED: Recorded with the county recorder.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicular type of unit, as defined in Arizona Revised Statutes, section
41-2142.30 which is:
A. A portable camping trailer mounted on wheels and constructed with collapsible partial
sidewalls which fold for towing by another vehicle and unfold for camping.
B. A motor home designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or
travel use and built on or permanently attached to a self-propelled motor vehicle chassis or on a
chassis cab or van that is an integral part of the completed vehicle.
C. A park trailer built on a single chassis, mounted on wheels and designed to be connected to
utilities necessary for operation of installed fixtures and appliances and has a gross trailer area
of not less than three hundred twenty square feet and not more than four hundred square feet
when it is set up, except that it does not include fifth wheel trailers.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 138/240
D. A travel trailer mounted on wheels, designed to provide temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping or travel use, of a size or weight that may or may not require special
highway movement permits when towed by a motorized vehicle and has a trailer area of less
than three hundred twenty square feet. This subdivision includes fifth wheel trailers. If a unit
requires a size or weight permit, it shall be manufactured to the standards for park trailers in A
119.5 of the American national standards institute code.
E. A portable truck camper constructed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational,
travel or camping use and consisting of a roof, floor and sides designed to be loaded onto and
unloaded from the bed of a pickup truck.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK: A property under single ownership on which three (3) or more
recreational vehicles are occupied as temporary residences, regardless of whether or not a charge is
made for such residency. Such parks may include a park office, recreational facilities, enclosed areas
for maintenance of equipment and facilities, a convenience store to serve the needs of the residents,
and other structures customarily incidental to the principal use, including storage sheds and garages.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT: The general agricultural, single-family, multiple-family residential, and
residential transitional zones of this ordinance or their successors.
RESIDENTIAL TREATMENT CENTER: A facility providing structured treatment with daily twenty four
(24) hour supervision for clients who require extensive therapeutic counseling and activity, staff
supervision, training, in activities of daily living or support and assistance.
SEMINUDE: A state of dress in which opaque clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region,
and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or
devices.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER: A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary
business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
A. Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or
B. Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more
of the persons is in a state of nudity or seminude.
SIGN: Any device for visual communication, including part or all of any structure, or natural object, that
is used for the purpose of bringing the subject concerned to the attention of the public, but not
including any sign of any governmental agency, or any flag, badge or insignia of any governmental,
civic, charitable, religious, patriotic, fraternal, or similar organization.
SIGN, FREESTANDING: Any nonmovable sign not affixed to a building and mounted on its own selfsupporting
frame, including the following types:
A. Ground: Any freestanding sign, other than a pole sign, placed upon or supported by the ground
independent of any other structures except footings.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 139/240
B. Pole: Any freestanding sign that is mounted on a pole or other support so that the bottom edge
of the sign face is six feet (6') or more above grade.
SIGN, OBSOLETE: Any sign which no longer correctly directs or exhorts any person, advertises a
bona fide business, lessor, owner, product, activity, or product available on the premises where such
sign is displayed.
SIGN, OFF-PREMISES: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service,
entertainment establishment, or other activity or phenomenon not exclusively related to the premises
on which the sign is located.
SIGN, ON-PREMISES: A sign which directs attention to a business, profession, or activity conducted
on the property on which the sign is located.
SIGN, PORTABLE: A sign that is not permanent, affixed to a building, structure or the ground.
SIGN, TEMPORARY: A sign or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric, plywood or
other light material and designed or intended to be displayed for a short period of time.
SIGN, WALL: A sign fastened to or painted on a structure in such a manner that the structure
becomes the supporting structure for, or forms the background surface of the sign, and which does not
project more than twelve inches (12") from the surface of such structure.
SITE PLAN, SCALE DRAWN: A drawing showing the proposed use of a property including:
A. Vicinity map showing the property in relation to known area landmarks and adjacent uses.
B. Topography showing contour lines for existing and proposed elevations at one foot (1') intervals;
lesser intervals may be authorized by the Town Engineer in areas of steeper grades.
C. Natural drainage and proposed stream flow showing finished floor elevations above the 100-
year flood elevation.
D. Legal description including all contiguous property under the same ownership.
E. Location of all existing and proposed outdoor lighting fixtures, fences, walls, signs, patios, pools,
outdoor play areas, service areas for mail delivery, trash disposal, etc., utilities, fire hydrants
(especially the location of the nearest existing hydrant), easements, septic disposal and parking
areas and structures showing heights and distances between structures and distances between
structures and lot lines.
F. Calculation of percentage of property to be covered by structures and by impervious surfaces.
G. Right-of-way dimensions of all abutting streets and proposed rights of way, and means of
access to the site.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 140/240
H. General Plan designations for the property, north arrow and property dimensions.
I. Survey, or preexisting monumentation adequate to locate property corners.
J. Landscape and parking plans with legends indicating quantities and types of plants, minimum
purchase size, and square footage of each type of ground treatment (i.e., bluegrass, cobble,
alternative grass mix, bark chips, etc.), open spaces, plazas and recreation amenities with
general construction materials noted, and slopes within the site. The plan should also note if the
site does not contain slopes greater than fifty to one (50:1). All depressed and mounted areas
must be identified with general contour lines and/or proposed elevations and notations for
detention areas. Parking spaces, circulation within the parking area, curb cuts, fencing,
screening materials, abutting, land uses, sign specifications and bumper guards should be
shown on every parking plan.
K. Other reports as required by the Town Engineer, including, but not limited to:
1. Soils engineering report, prepared by a registered engineer indicating the nature, distribution,
and strength of existing soils, conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures and
design criteria for corrective measures, when necessary, and opinions and recommendations
regarding the proposed grading and erosion control during and after construction.
2. Hydrology report showing drainage areas and estimated runoff, providing an indication of the
undeveloped peak discharge of surface water currently entering and leaving the property
during a 10-year design storm, peak discharge of runoff, surface water peak discharge from a
10-year design storm at various subbasins on the property, and a discussion of the drainage
management facilities and/or techniques which may be needed to rectify drainage problems.
3. Traffic-control and street lighting plan.
L. Site plans for projects intended to be developed in phases must also include a master plan for
the entire project and a development schedule indicating the approximate date upon which
construction of the project will begin, progressive stages of the development, and the anticipated
rate of development and the project's completion date.
M. Site plans for projects located in a flood zone must also provide a description of the extent to
which any watercourse will be altered or relocated, and:
1. Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest habitable floor (including
basement) of all structures; and, in FIRM Zone AO, elevation of existing grade and proposed
elevation of lowest habitable floor of all structures.
2. Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure will be floodproofed.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 141/240
3. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that floodproofing methods for
any nonresidential structure will either: be floodproofed so that below the regulatory flood level
the structure will be watertight with walls substantially impermeable; and, have structural
components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;
or, have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the regulatory flood
elevation (i.e., 1 foot above base flood elevation) or, have the lowest floor, including basement,
higher than the adjacent grade at least one foot (1') higher than the depth number on the
FIRM, or at least two feet (2') if no depth number is specified.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Human genitals in a state of sexual arousal.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Means and includes any of the following:
A. The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female
breasts;
B. Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or
sodomy;
C. Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
D. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections
A through C of this definition.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the
next floor above; or, if there is no floor above, the space between such floor and the ceiling above.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing
walls, or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any complete rebuilding of the roof or exterior walls,
or rebuilding which expands the height or area of such building.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected with fixed location on the ground or attached to
something having a fixed location on the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, towers,
swimming pools, walls, fences, and billboards.
STRUCTURE, PRINCIPAL: The structure which accommodates the principal use on a property.
STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY: Anything constructed or erected which is readily moveable and
intended to be used for a period not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days.
UBC: Uniform Building Code, as adopted by the Town of Snowflake.
USE: The purpose for which land or a structure is occupied, maintained, arranged, designed, or
intended.
USE, PRINCIPAL: The use of land or structures on a property which has the greatest impact or
significance, also main use, as contrasted with accessory use.
USED CAR LOT: Any property on which more than one vehicle is parked or stored and posted to
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 142/240
indicate that it is available for sale.
YARD: The open space at grade level between a building and the adjoining lot line which is
unobstructed by any portion of a structure from ground upward.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending across the front width of a lot, and being the minimum horizontal
distance between the front lot line and the principal structure.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending between the side yards of a lot or between the side lot lines in the
absence of side yards, and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the
rear of the principal structure. On corner lots and interior lots the rear yard is in all cases at the
opposite end of the lot from the front yard.
YARD, SIDE: The yard between the building and the side lot line of a lot extending from the front yard
to the rear lot line, or along the full depth in the absence of front and rear yards and being the
minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and the side of the principal structure. An "interior
side yard" is defined as the side yard adjacent to a common lot line.
ZONING CLEARANCE: Certification by the town manager that the proposed use or structure meets
the requirements of this ordinance. (Ord. 132, 6-10-1997; amd. Ord. 149, 6-23-1998; Ord. 05-245, 3-
22-2005; Ord. 10-323, 4-27-2010)
Chapter 4
USE DISTRICTS
10-4-1: SCOPE:
All land under the zoning jurisdiction of the town, except certain properties that are owned by public or
semipublic agencies, is hereby classified into one of the following zones. Property may only be used
for those purposes permitted in the zone in which it lies, as noted in this chapter, and for accessory
uses. The areas to which each district is applied are shown on the town of Snowflake official zoning
map, which is on file in the office of the town clerk. Unzoned public and semipublicly owned properties
may continue to be used for their current purposes. Upon abandonment of those purposes, without
any further action by the town, the adjacent zoning is to be applied to such lands in the same manner
as vacated rights of way are zoned when they are abandoned. (Ord. 180, 1-9-2001)
10-4-2: DESCRIPTIONS:
A. General Agricultural Zone (AG): Is applied to properties where uses permitted should preserve and
be compatible with agricultural uses. The principal land use in this zone is intended to be
agriculture, including the uses associated with the cultivation of crops and the raising of animals for
market or commercial agricultural purposes.
B. Residential Zones:
1. Single-Family Zones (R): Is applied to properties where uses permitted should promote,
preserve, and be compatible with single-family residences. The principal land uses in this zone
are single-family dwellings. This district is divided into subdistricts which are identified by the
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 143/240
maximum residential density they allow (2 acre, 1 acre, 10,000, 4,500, 2,500 square foot
minimum lot sizes). The purpose of the R-2 and R-4 zones is to provide for smaller lot singlefamily,
detached residential dwellings within a planned area development (PAD). The R-2 and R-
4 zones are intended to be used only in conjunction with PAD overlay zoning.
2. Multiple-Family Residential Zone (MF): Is applied to properties where uses permitted should
promote and preserve single-, double-, and multiple-family dwellings and group residential uses
such as apartments, boarding and lodging houses.
3. Residential Transitional Zone (RT): Is applied to properties which are between the general
commercial and residentially zoned areas. Properties in this zone may be developed in
conjunction with the commercial areas they abut. This district is intended to be predominantly
light commercial and residential in character, and to allow greater densities than the R zones.
Some of the areas zoned RT may be expected to be rezoned to the general commercial zone as
the commercial areas develop and require more depth to permit greater design flexibility. Uses
incidental or accessory to dwellings, and recreational, religious, and educational facilities are
also permitted.
C. Commercial Zones:
1. Neighborhood Commercial Zone (NC): Is applied to properties which are intended to be
developed to accommodate and preserve convenient shopping areas containing retail and
service establishments serving the daily needs and conveniences of neighborhood residents.
The uses in this zone must be wholly conducted within enclosed buildings; no outdoor storage,
collection centers, warehouses, or wholesaling is permitted.
2. General Commercial (GC): Is applied to properties which are intended to be developed to
accommodate and preserve commercial areas that provide for a full range of commercial uses to
serve the entire community. Outdoor storage of products, materials, vehicles, or equipment
related to a permitted rental, retail, or repair principal use on the same property is permitted.
D. Industrial Zones:
1. Light Industrial Zone (LI): This zone is applied to properties which are intended to be developed
with light industries which are not obnoxious or offensive due to the emission of odors, smoke,
gas, noise, vibration or from other causes.
2. Heavy Industrial Zone (HI): This zone is applied to properties which are intended to be
developed with heavy industrial uses. (Ord. 180, 1-9-2001)
10-4-3: TABLE:
A. Categories Of Uses: The following listed and similar uses are permitted in the indicated zones,
subject to the general provisions, special requirements and additional restrictions, and exceptions
stated in this ordinance. The abbreviations used in this schedule have the following meanings:
P: Use permitted.
SP: Use permitted with prior approval of a site plan (where site plans are required, at least 2
prints must be provided, drawn at a scale to show all required information, on a sheet, or sheets,
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 144/240
measuring 24 inches by 36 inches, or as required by the town manager).
SU: Use permitted with prior approval of a special use permit.
: Use not permitted (absence of symbol).
B. Use Classifications: The major headings for the classification of uses are based on the standard
industrial code and include:
1. Agricultural and natural resources.
2. Antennas and towers.
3. Manufacturing, assembling, processing, analyzing, packaging, creating, treating, and renovating
of goods, merchandise, food, products and equipment.
4. Eating and drinking establishments.
5. Educational and religious uses.
6. Offices, services, and research not primarily related to on site retail sales or manufacture of
goods or merchandise.
7. Parking lots.
8. Public and semipublic uses.
9. Recreation, entertainment, public assembly.
10. Recycling, salvage, junkyards.
11. Residential.
12. Sales, rental and servicing of goods, merchandise, and equipment.
13. Storage and warehousing.
14. Transportation.
C. Use Table:
USE/ZONE AG
R R-
4
R-
2
MF
RT
NC
GC
LI
HI
1. AGRICULTURAL AND NATURAL
RESOURCES:
Crop production generally P P P P P P P P P P
On site retail sales of site produced
seasonal goods exceeding 30 days
duration
P SU
SU
SU
SU
P P P P
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 145/240
Plant nurseries and greenhouses P SU
SU
SU
SU
SU
P P P P
Bulk sales of landscape construction
materials and rock products
SU
P P
Mining, quarrying, oil and gas extraction
and asphalt-concrete batch plants
including on site sales of products
SU
SU
SU
Temporary staging areas for public works
construction projects in excess of 6
months duration
SU
SU
SU
SU
P P
Commercial firewood sales lots P P P P P P
Apiculture (beekeeping) SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SERVICES AND ENTERPRISES
RELATED TO ANIMALS:
Raising of animals, livestock, excluding
feed lots
P P P
Animal feed lots SU
SU
Raising of poultry, rabbits and other small
animals for domestic use, including 4-H
club and other institutional type animals
P P SU
SU
SU
P P P
Keeping of up to 1 large animal for each
1/2 acre of property
P P SU
SU
SU
SU
SU
P P P
Kennels P SU
P P
Animal arenas, commercial stables,
equestrian center
P SU
P
Veterinarians, animal hospitals P P P P P
2. ANTENNAS AND TOWERS:
Public and private communication towers
and transmitters over 50 feet in height
P SU
SU
SU
SU
SU
SU
P P
Commercial satellite dishes and all other
commercial antennas
P SU
SU
SU
SU
SU
SU
P P
3. MANUFACTURING, ASSEMBLING,
PROCESSING, ANALYZING,
PACKAGING, CREATING, TREATING
AND RENOVATING GOODS,
MERCHANDISE, FOOD, PRODUCTS,
AND EQUIPMENT:
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 146/240
OPERATIONS AND RELATED
STORAGE CONDUCTED ENTIRELY
WITHIN ENCLOSED BUILDINGS
(EXCEPT SHIPPING AND LOADING):
Majority of dollar volume of business done
with walk-in trade
SP
SP
Majority of business not done with walk-in
trade
SU
SP
SP
Operations conducted partially or wholly
outside of enclosed buildings (including
storage) (including metal salvage yards
and junkyards)
SU
SU
SP
4. EATING AND DRINKING
ESTABLISHMENTS:
No substantial carryout or delivery service
and no drive-in service
P P
Delicatessen, bakeshop and sales of
other prepared food products where
substantial consumption is expected to
occur off-premises and not involving
drive-up or delivery service
P P P P P
Food establishments with drive-up
windows
SP
P P P
All other restaurants and eating
establishments
P P P P
Taverns, bars, nightclubs P P
Adult oriented businesses SU
SU
SU
5. EDUCATIONAL AND RELIGIOUS
USES:
Private primary, elementary and
secondary schools
SU
SU
SU
SU
SU
P
Public primary, elementary and secondary
school (includes associated grounds,
facilities, and administrative offices)
P P P P P
Trade or vocational schools SU
SU
P P
Colleges, universities, community
colleges (including associated facilities
like dorms, offices, athletic fields, stadia,
research facilities)
SU
SU
SU
Churches, synagogues and temples SU SU SU SU P P
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 147/240
(includes associated grounds, facilities
and administrative offices)
Art studios, galleries and centers, fine arts
conservatories, music schools, dance
studios and similar cultural and
instructional activities
P P
Libraries and museums P P P
Fraternal clubs and lodges and union
halls
SU
P P P
6. OFFICES, SERVICES AND
RESEARCH NOT PRIMARILY RELATED
TO ON-SITE RETAIL SALES OR
MANUFACTURE OF GOODS OR
MERCHANDISE:
Offices intended to attract and serve
customers or clients on premises (e.g.,
attorneys, physicians, counselors,
financial institutions, insurance, travel
agents, investment services, advertising
agencies, real estate, mortuaries)
P P P P
Offices with limited customer or client
traffic (e.g., corporate offices, newspaper,
radio and television offices and studios,
engineers, answering or dispatch service)
P P
7. PARKING LOTS:
VEHICLE AND EQUIPMENT PARKING
NOT INCIDENTAL OR ACCESSORY TO
ANOTHER USE LOCATED ON THE
SAME PROPERTY:
Overnight or long-term vehicle or
equipment storage lots (e.g., RV storage,
contractor equipment yard)
SU
P P
Off-site parking lots for commercial,
educational, religious and institutional
uses
P P P P
8. PUBLIC AND SEMIPUBLIC USES:
Emergency services (e.g., police and fire
stations, ambulance and rescue services)
SU
SU
SU
P P P P P
Government offices P P P P P
Neighborhood utilities including pump
stations, electric substations less than
SU
SU
SU
SU
SU
SU
SU
SU
P P
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 148/240
5,000 sq. ft. in area and all local utility
lines
Regional/community utilities including
treatment plants, major power generation
plants, major storage facilities, regional
transmission facilities, major overhead
power lines requiring tower support
structures
SU
SU
P
Cemeteries, crematoria and mausoleums
SU
SU
P P
9. RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT,
PUBLIC ASSEMBLY:
ACTIVITIES CONDUCTED PRIMARILY
WITHIN ENCLOSED STRUCTURES:
Bowling alleys, skating rinks, pool halls P P
Indoor racquet sports clubs, spas, athletic,
exercise and health clubs and similar
facilities not constructed as part of
planned developments
P P P P
Youth clubs, senior centers, community
centers
P P P P
Theaters P
Games, amusements, arcades P
Coliseums, stadiums P P
Indoor gun clubs P
Convention centers P
ACTIVITIES CONDUCTED PRIMARILY
OUTSIDE ENCLOSED BUILDINGS:
Outdoor recreational facilities (e.g., golf
and country clubs, driving ranges,
swimming and tennis clubs, etc., not
constructed as part of a planned
development)
SU
SU
SU
SU
SU
SU
Miniature golf courses, skateboard parks,
water slides, and similar uses
SU
P P
Motor racetracks SU
P P
Drive-in movie theaters SU
SU
SU
SU
Fairgrounds SU P P
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 149/240
Public parks and recreational facilities
located therein
P P P P P P P P
10. RECYCLING, SALVAGE,
JUNKYARDS:
Processing and sorting operations
conducted entirely within enclosed
structures and containing a total building
area of less than 5,000 sq. ft.
SP
SP
SP
SP
All other material recycling operations
excluding metal salvage yards and
junkyards
SU
SP
Refuse transfer stations SU
SU
SP
11. RESIDENTIAL:
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE (ANY ONE
OF THE FOLLOWING PER LOT):
Single-family detached site built or
modular home
P P P P P P P P
Manufactured home P P
TWO-FAMILY RESIDENCES:
Duplexes P P
Primary residence with accessory
apartment for an immediate family
member
SU
SU
P P P
MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENCES:
Multiple-family dwellings P P
Manufactured home parks SU
SU
SU
Overnight recreational parks SU
SU
P P
HOMES AND INSTITUTIONS
PROVIDING SPECIAL SERVICES,
TREATMENTS OR SUPERVISION:
Residential treatment centers, shelters,
halfway houses
SU
SU
P P
Hospital SU
P P
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 150/240
Daycare center SU
SU
SU
P P
Jails and detention facilities SU
SU
MISCELLANEOUS ROOMS FOR RENT
SITUATIONS:
Rooming houses, boarding houses SU
P P P
Bed and breakfast P P P P P
Caretaker, watchmen or servants'
quarters
SU
SU
SU
SU
P P P SU
SU
Hotels and motels SU
P P
Temporary residence in conjunction with
new construction, emergency repair or
night watchmen use
SU
SU
SU
SU
SU
SU
P P
12. SALES, RENTAL AND SERVICING
OF GOODS, MERCHANDISE AND
EQUIPMENT:
AUTOMOTIVE, MARINE, TRUCKS,
RV'S, AGRICULTURAL MACHINERY:
Sales and rentals, including servicing SP
SP
SP
Parts and accessories sales which may
include installation services
SP
P P
Service, minor repair and detail shops P P P
Paint and body work and major repair
(e.g., frame straightening, engine
rebuilding)
SU
SP
SP
Automobile oriented fuel sales with or
without accessory service bays or
accessory convenience sales
P P P P
Car washes P P P P
Truck fuel sales, truck servicing, overnight
trucking facilities and related services
SP
SP
HIGH VOLUME TRAFFIC
GENERATORS, CONDUCTED WITHIN
ENCLOSED BUILDINGS NOT RELATED
TO AUTOMOTIVE, MARINE, TRUCKS,
RV'S, AGRICULTURAL MACHINERY:
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 151/240
Retail sales servicing frequent
neighborhood needs (e.g., grocery, small
hardware and garden supply, pharmacy,
video rental, stationery, flowers, etc.)
P P P
Other retail sales P P
Miscellaneous rental merchandise and
equipment
P P
Servicing of goods, merchandise,
equipment (e.g., laundromat, small
appliance repair, shoe repair, tailoring)
P P
Personal services (e.g., barber and
beauty shops, therapeutic massage,
tanning salons)
P P P
Wholesale sales P P P
LOW VOLUME TRAFFIC GENERATORS
CONDUCTED WITHIN ENCLOSED
BUILDINGS NOT RELATED TO
AUTOMOTIVE, MARINE, TRUCKS,
RV'S, AGRICULTURAL MACHINERY:
Retail sales (e.g., furniture, appliances,
floor covering, building supplies, industrial
supplies)
P P P
Miscellaneous equipment, appliances and
furniture rental
P P P
Servicing of appliances, furniture, lawn
and garden, industrial, mechanical,
heating and cooling and other bulky
equipment or merchandise
P SP
SP
Services offered primarily off-site (e.g.,
janitorial, contractor, carpet cleaning,
catering, landscaping, utility services)
P P P P
Wholesale sales P P
HIGH VOLUME TRAFFIC GENERATORS
INVOLVING STORAGE OR DISPLAY
OUTSIDE FULLY ENCLOSED
BUILDINGS NOT RELATED TO
AUTOMOTIVE, MARINE, TRUCKS, RVs,
AGRICULTURAL MACHINERY:
Retail sales (e.g., lawn and garden variety
stores with regularly maintained outdoor
sales, building supplies)
P P P
Servicing merchandise and equipment P P SP
SP
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 152/240
Wholesale sales P SP
SP
LOW VOLUME TRAFFIC GENERATORS
INVOLVING STORAGE OR DISPLAY
OUTSIDE FULLY ENCLOSED
BUILDINGS NOT RELATED TO
AUTOMOTIVE, MARINE, TRUCKS, RVs,
AGRICULTURAL MACHINERY:
Retail sales and related services SU
SP
P
Miscellaneous goods and equipment
rental
SU
SP
P
On-site servicing of appliances, furniture,
lawn and garden, heating and cooling,
industrial, mechanical and other bulky
equipment or merchandise
SP
P
Services offered primarily off-site P P P
Wholesale sales P P
13. WAREHOUSING OR STORAGE OF
GOODS NOT INCLUDING SALE OR
USE OF THOSE GOODS ON THE SAME
PROPERTY WHERE THEY ARE
STORED, EXCEPT AS AN ACCESSORY
USE ACTIVITY:
All storage within completely enclosed
structures
P P P SP
SP
Outside storage or combination of inside
and outside storage
SU
SP
SP
Mini-warehouse/self-service storage
facilities intended for domestic storage
P P P
14. TRANSPORTATION:
Heliport, airport SU
SU
Bus stations, taxi business P
(Ord. 132, 6-10-1997; amd. Ord. 149, 6-23-1998; Ord. 180, 1-9-2001; Ord. 02-205, 1-22-2002; Ord.
08-308, 1-22-2008)
Chapter 5
OVERLAY ZONES
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 153/240
10-5-1: SCOPE; APPLICABILITY:
In order to provide for the more orderly development of certain properties which are unique because of
their size, location, geology, geography or other special circumstance, the following overlay zones
may be applied to certain properties in Town. The regulations imposed by these overlay zones apply
in addition to the regulations of the underlying zone and in case of conflict, the overlay zone
regulations govern. (Ord. 132, 6-10-1997)
ARTICLE A. HISTORIC DISTRICT
10-5A-1: PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS:
A. Purpose: A historic district is applied to properties which, because of their historic significance or
the significance of adjacent properties, have special value to the community. A historic district is
intended to enable the properties so designated to be preserved and protected from incompatible
uses and to recognize their unique values. This article shall be applied upon the written request to
participate ("opt in") given by the owner(s) of the subject real property. Before an owner chooses to
participate ("opt in") or declines to participate ("opt out") in the district, the owner shall meet with
the historic review committee in order to review the recommendations of the historic review
committee.
B. Definitions: As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in this section:
COMMITTEE: The historic review committee created under this article.
DESIGN GUIDELINES: Those guidelines that will be formulated by the "committee" and approved
by the town council.
HISTORIC DISTRICT: Those areas that have a special character or historic interest or value as
part of the development, heritage, or cultural characteristics of the town, and which have been
designated or will be designated as a historic district under this article.
IMPROVEMENT: Any building, structure, place, sign, landscaping, work of art, or other object that
constitutes a physical betterment or addition of real property, or any part of such betterment.
LANDMARK: Any building or other improvement which has a special character or special historic
interest or value as part of the development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the town. A
landmark may be in the historical district or may be outside the boundaries of the historic district. A
landmark is any building listed in the national register.
LANDMARK SITE: Any building or parcel of land determined by its owner to be of historic
significance due to a substantial value in the history or where historical events have occurred.
OWNER CONSENT: No building, lot, property, site, landmark or landmark site will be governed by
this article without the written consent of the owner. Before an owner chooses to participate ("opt
in") or declines to participate ("opt out") in the district, the owner shall meet with the historic review
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 154/240
committee in order to review the recommendations of the historic review committee. (Ord. 09-316,
5-26-2009)
10-5A-2: PERMITTED DEVELOPMENT:
All uses permitted in the historic district(s) and its underlying zone are permitted in areas to which this
zone has been applied, with the exception that manufactured homes or recreational vehicles and
multi-family dwellings including duplexes and fourplexes are prohibited. (Ord. 09-316, 5-26-2009)
10-5A-3: HISTORIC REVIEW COMMITTEE:
A. Composition: A historic district committee is hereby established, consisting of five (5) members,
from the following organizations:
Town council - One member from the town council serving on the committee.
Designee of the planning and zoning commission - One member of the planning and zoning
commission serving on the committee.
Three (3) at large persons including, but not limited to, the Snowflake Heritage Foundation, the
Snowflake fine arts committee or the academy restoration committee.
With the exception of the town council representative and the planning and zoning representative,
or designees, the committee will select the chair of the committee, subject to confirmation by the
town council. Selected members will serve through the expiration of the mayor's term. Vacancies
shall be filled for the unexpired term by the appointment of the mayor, subject to the approval of
the town council in the same manner as any public appointment.
B. Time Of Commencement: The committee will be organized within sixty (60) days from the
enactment of this article. The committee shall meet at least once a month. The town of Snowflake
will provide the meeting place. A report of the activities and the recommendations of the committee
will be made at the request of the mayor and the council but no less than at least semiannually.
C. Duties Of The Committee:
1. Designation: The committee is established to recommend preservation of buildings, landmarks,
landmark sites, and historic districts. The committee shall take recommendations or requests of
owners of buildings, properties or sites, inside or outside of a historic district. Recommendations
will be taken to the town council for official designation. Once designated, such buildings,
landmarks, landmark sites, and historic districts shall be subject to all the provision of this article.
For purposes of this article such designations may be placed on any site, natural or improved,
including any building improvement or structure located thereon, or any area of particular
historic, architectural or cultural significance to the town of Snowflake, based on the following:
a. Exemplifies or reflects the cultural, political, economic, social or natural history of the
community; or
b. Are identified with historic persons or with important events in local history; or
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 155/240
c. Embody the distinguishing characteristics of any architectural type or are inherently valuable
for a study of a period, style, method of construction, including use of indigenous materials or
local craftsmanship; or
d. Are representative of the notable work of a master builder, designer, or architect whose
individual genius or creativity as exemplified or influenced by his/her time period.
e. Are listed on the national register. Any building on the national register will be retained or
removed as a landmark by the written request of the owner of said building. Upon meeting
with the historical review committee, and upon review of the recommendations of the
committee, the owner may opt in or out in writing. The owner may grant the town a permanent
status of the property in writing if the owner opts in. The owner may also execute and record
covenants that run with the land preserving the historic value of the property if the owner opts
in.
2. Regulations Of Construction, Reconstruction, And Exterior Alterations:
a. An owner, tenant, or person in charge of a designated building, landmark, or landmark site, or
structure within a historic district may reconstruct or alter all or any part of the exterior of such
property or attachment thereto or construct any improvement upon such property or cause or
permit any such work to be performed upon such property as permitted by this code. However,
if a person or organization owning a building, historic site, or landmark desires to preserve it
under the terms and conditions of this article, and makes application to the historic review
committee or otherwise agrees with the town of Snowflake that the building, site, landmark, or
other property is to be preserved, then and in that event, the following shall apply:
(1) Prior to the approval and granting a building or demolition permit, within the areas
designated by the committee and approved by the town council, the granting of a "certificate
of appropriateness" by the committee, the following will be considered:
(A) Whether, in the case of its designated landmark or landmark site, the proposed work
would detrimentally change, destroy, or adversely affect any exterior architectural feature of
the improvement upon which said work is to be done;
(B) Whether, in the case of the construction of a new improvement upon a landmark site,
the exterior of such improvement would adversely affect, or not harmonize with the
external appearance of other neighboring improvements;
(C) Whether, in the case of any property located in a historic district, the proposed
construction, reconstruction, or exterior alteration does not conform to the objectives of
the historic preservation plan for said district; or
(D) Whether the proposed construction, reconstruction or exterior alteration is in
conformance with architectural design guidelines with emphasis on contextual issues
including compatibility of size, volume proportions, materials, detailing, colors and
expressiveness.
b. If the historic review committee or its designated agent determines that the proposed
construction, reconstruction, or exterior alteration will not have a negative effect, the
committee or its designated agent may issue the certificate of appropriateness. Upon issuance
of such certificate, the building inspector may issue the building permit.
c. Should the certificate of appropriateness not be issued due to the failure of the proposal to
conform to the above guidelines or the historic committee has not acted upon the proposal
within forty five (45) days of submittal, the applicant may appeal such decision to the town
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 156/240
council. Appeals shall be filed in writing to the town clerk and shall specify the grounds of the
appeal. The town council's decision will be final.
3. Regulation For Demolition:
a. An application for a permit (such will be deemed written approval of the owner) to demolish all
or part of an improvement in a historic district or a landmark shall not be given until the historic
review committee has an opportunity to evaluate the request based on the following criteria
and has met with the owner(s):
(1) Whether the building or structure is of such architectural or historic significance that its
demolition would be detrimental to the public interest and contrary to the general welfare of
the people of the town.
(2) Whether the building or structure, although not itself a landmark building, contributes to the
distinctive architectural or historic character of the historic district as a whole, and therefore,
should be preserved for the benefit of the people of the town.
(3) Whether demolition of the subject property would be contrary to the purpose and intent of
this article and to the objectives of the historic preservation plan for the applicable district as
duly adopted.
(4) Whether retention of the building or structure would promote the general welfare of the
people of the town, by encouraging study of local history, architecture and design, or by
developing understanding of the town culture and heritage.
(5) Whether the building or structure is in such a deteriorated condition that it is not structurally
or economically feasible to preserve or restore it.
(6) Whether any new structure proposed to be constructed would be compatible with the
buildings and environment of the district in which the subject property is located.
(7) If the historic review committee fails to act on a request to demolish a structure or
improvement, within forty five (45) days' receipt, then the town council shall hear the
request.
(8) All decisions of the historic review committee are subject to the approval or disapproval by
the vote of the town council.
D. Recognition Of Buildings, Landmarks And Landmark Sites: At such time as the landmark or
landmark site has been properly designated, the historic review committee may, with the owner's
permission, cause to be prepared and erected on such property at town expense, a suitable
plaque declaring that such property has historic value, and is a landmark, or landmark site. Such
plaque shall be so placed as to be easily visible to passing pedestrians. In the case of a landmark,
the plaque shall state the name of the building or landmark, the date of its construction, and other
information deemed proper by the historic committee.
E. New Or Remodeled Buildings: Before new buildings are constructed on State Route 277 or on Main
Street (State Route 77), the person or entity proposing the new construction shall meet with the
historic review committee for its recommendations. The historic review committee shall base its
recommendations on styles, consistent with pioneer building styles, such as victorian, colonial,
adobe, rock, or wood log construction. The historic review committee's recommendations are
advisory and for the purpose of developing the appearance of the pioneer era. A person or entity
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 157/240
that seeks to remodel a present structure in order to conform to the pioneer theme, may follow the
same procedure as set out herein. The town manager, upon approval of the town council, may give
such incentives to new construction or proposed remodeling as is consistent with state law.
F. Conflict Of Interest: Any member of the historic committee who has a financial or apparent familial
interest in property, purchase or sale, construction, reconstruction or alteration affected by the
provisions of this article shall disqualify himself/herself from participating in the design review
process for that particular project. This provision shall not apply if the owner of the building,
landmark, or site waived the conflict of interest.
G. Maintenance Of Premises:
1. Every person or entity in charge of premises governed by this article shall keep in good repair all
of the exterior portions of such improvement and all interior portions thereof which, if not so
maintained may cause or tend to cause the exterior of such improvement to fall into a state of
disrepair. This provision shall be in addition to all other provisions of law requiring such
improvement to be kept in good repair.
2. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the making of necessary construction,
reconstruction, alteration, or demolition of any improvements on premises governed by this
article, or in a historic district pursuant to order of any governmental agency or pursuant to any
court judgment, for the purpose of remedying emergency conditions determined to be dangerous
to life, health, or property. In such cases, no approval from the historic review committee shall be
required.
H. Penalties: Any person or entity that opts into the historic district who violates any provisions of this
article shall be subject to a forfeiture of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each
separate violation. Each and every day during which a violation continues shall be deemed to be a
separate offense.
I. Article Not Exclusive Remedy: This article does not foreclose other remedies contained in this code
or by law. (Ord. 09-316, 5-26-2009)
ARTICLE B. PLANNED DEVELOPMENT
10-5B-1: PURPOSE:
This Zone is applied to properties which, because of their special aesthetic, topographic, or other
characteristics, are critical to the comprehensive development of the Town. This Overlay District is
intended to enable and encourage the planned development of areas of land under unified ownership
and to promote land development patterns which will maintain and enhance the physical, social and
economic values of the areas where they exist. (Ord. 132, 6-10-1997)
10-5B-2: PERMITTED DEVELOPMENT:
No building permit or land division may be approved for areas included within this Zone without prior
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 158/240
approval of a planned development permit; and only permits which are consistent with approved
development plans may be issued. (Ord. 132, 6-10-1997)
ARTICLE C. RESIDENTIAL RESERVE
10-5C-1: PURPOSE:
This Zone is applied to properties which, because of their existing uses, surrounding areas, or special
topography or location provide special amenities for single-family residential development in the Town.
(Ord. 132, 6-10-1997)
10-5C-2: PERMITTED DEVELOPMENT:
All uses permitted in the underlying zone are permitted in areas covered by this overlay, except for
manufactured homes. (Ord. 132, 6-10-1997)
ARTICLE D. MANUFACTURED HOMES
10-5D-1: PURPOSE:
This zone is applied to properties which, because of their existing uses, surrounding areas, special
topography, or are located within areas of known expansive soils, provide certain amenities that are
conducive to the placement of residential single-family manufactured homes within the town. (Ord. 11-
332, 2-8-2011)
10-5D-2: PERMITTED DEVELOPMENT:
All uses permitted in the underlying zone are permitted in areas covered by this overlay. This overlay
is not permitted in combination with a historic district or a residential reserve overlay. (Ord. 11-332, 2-
8-2011)
Chapter 6
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
10-6-1: ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES:
Accessory structures and uses are permitted in all zones but may not be constructed or established
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 159/240
on a property until the principal use, or construction of the principal structure, has commenced; nor
may they be located in any front yard. (Ord. 132, 6-10-1997)
10-6-2: ENVIRONMENTAL STANDARDS:
A. Air:
1. No emission of smoke from any source may be permitted to exceed a greater density than the
density prescribed by state statute. State statute allows for forty percent (40%) opaque
emissions for nonpermit required individuals or businesses. Permit required individuals or
businesses must follow their Arizona department of environmental quality approved permit. All
measurements shall be taken according to the opacity method of determining visible emissions
as specified by federal reference method "9".
2. No emission of fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors, gases or other forms of air pollution are permitted
which can cause damage to health, animals or vegetation, or other forms of property, or which
can cause excessive soiling.
B. Glare, Heat, Odor, Radioactive Material:
1. Glare And Heat: Activities producing intense glare or heat must be performed within completely
enclosed buildings in such a manner as to avoid creating a nuisance or hazard beyond the
property line of the property on which it is occurring.
2. Odor: No use of property may emit perceptible noxious odors at the property line which are
perceptible to a committee of citizens designated by the town council.
3. Radioactive Material: Notwithstanding any other town ordinance, manufacturing activities
involving the use, storage, or disposal of radioactive material are expressly prohibited. The
foregoing is not intended to prohibit manufacturing activities involving the use, storage, or
disposal of radioactive material which does not become an integral part of the manufactured
product, or is exempt from the licensing requirements of or permitted under a general license
issued by the Arizona atomic energy commission, or its successor. Nor is the foregoing intended
to prohibit the use of radioactive material in medical diagnosis or therapy, or in medical,
educational, or industrial research and development. For the purposes of this subsection,
"research and development" means either:
a. Theoretical analysis, exploration or experimentation; or
b. The extension of investigative findings and theories of a scientific or technical nature into
practical application for experimental and demonstration purposes, including experimental
production and testing of models, devices, equipment, materials and processes.
C. Vibration:
1. Exemptions: This subsection does not apply to:
a. Vibration resulting from the operation of any equipment or facility of a surface carrier engaged
in interstate commerce by railroad.
b. Vibration resulting from the operation of any road vehicle.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 160/240
c. Vibration resulting from roadway maintenance and repair equipment.
2. Maximum Intensity: Ground vibration measured at the boundary of a property where it is being
generated may not exceed -01 inches per second (0.0025 meters per second) in RMS velocity.
3. Method Of Measurement: Vibration measurement procedures shall conform to the methods
described in this subsection or to procedures approved by the Arizona department of
environmental quality. Instrumentation used to measure ground vibration shall be capable of
measuring RMS value of the vibration velocity over the frequency range of 10_1,000 hertz.
Measurement valued shall be recorded for a sufficient period to provide a representative sample.
Attachment of the vibration transducer to the ground shall be by magnetic screw attachment to a
steel bar of a minimum of nine inches (9") (22.9 cm) in length, driven flush with the ground
surface. (Ord. 132, 6-10-1997)
(Ord. 132, 6-10-1997)
10-6-3: Zone standards
Use standard AG R R-4 R-2 MF RT NC GC LI HI
Lot size 
5 acres
10,000
4,500
2,500
8,000
8,000
8,000
20,000
40,000
190,000
Maximum
density
n/a n/a n/a n/a 14/ac.
14/ac.
14/ac.
n/a n/a n/a
Maximum
lot
coverage
25%
40% 45% 55% 50% 50% 50% 60% 60% 60%
Minimum
lot width (in
feet)
300
80 45 25 60 60 60 60 60 60
Maximum
height1 (in
feet)
42 35 30 30 35 35 35 35 35 352
Notes:
1. See subsection A2 of this section.
2. See subsection A2c of this section.
(Ord. 05-257, 11-22-2005)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 161/240
2. Exceptions:
a. Corners: Nothing may be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to remain on any corner lot
which materially impedes vision between two and one-half feet (21/2') and ten feet (10') above
grade the corner triangle, which includes the area from the corner back twenty five feet (25') in
each direction.
b. Mechanical And Similar Structures: Chimneys, church steeples, refrigeration coolers,
ventilating fans, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, ornamental towers or spires, wireless towers,
monuments, stage towers or scenery lofts, tanks, water towers, mechanical grain elevators,
silos, farm buildings, and necessary mechanical appurtenances, and similar structures may be
erected to a height of one hundred feet (100'), provided they are set back from any lot line at
least one foot (1') for each foot in height.
c. Increase; Conditions: This height limit may be increased to a maximum of forty eight feet (48')
if the size of any adjacent yard is increased one foot (1') for each foot over the thirty five foot
(35') height limit that is allowed.
B. Yard Setbacks:
1. Minimum Setbacks: Minimum required property line (yard) setbacks for structures (in feet) by
zone:
AG R R-4 R-2 MF RT NC GC LI HI
Front yard 20 20 20 15 20 15 15 10 20 40
Side yard 10 10 5 5 5 5 5 5 20 40
Rear yard 30 30 25 10 25 25 5 10 20 40
2. Exceptions: Every part of a required yard must be open to the sky and unobstructed, except
that:
a. Accessory Structures: Accessory structures may be built in required rear yards if they do not
occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of the required rear yard, and are not closer than three
feet (3') to any side or rear lot line. Accessory structures that serve as garages with alley
access must be set back at least ten feet (10') from any alley. On corner lots accessory
structures may not be closer to any street than a distance equal to the depth of the required
yard.
b. Ordinary Projections: Ordinary projections of window sills, cornices, eaves, chimneys and
other ornamental features may project up to two feet (2') into any required yard.
c. Compressor Units And Similar Devices: Compressor units, condensing units, cooling towers,
evaporative condensers, and similar devices may not be located in any required yard.
3. Side Yard Setbacks: Side yard setback for R-4 and R-2 corner lots shall be ten foot (10')
minimum. (Ord. 180, 1-9-2001)
10-6-4: DEVELOPMENT REVIEW:
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 162/240
A. Intent And Purpose: The principal purpose of development review is to establish development
standards for the town, and provide project review procedures to determine compliance with the
provisions of the technical codes and development policies of the town. Further, development
review is intended to promote an aesthetically pleasing and economically viable community. (Ord.
180, 1-9-2001)
B. Development Review Required:
1. All applications for permits for the construction of any building or structure in the following zoning
districts shall be required to comply with the development review procedures set forth in this
subsection B.
MF district - multiple-family
RT district - residential transitional
NC district - neighborhood commercial
GC district - general commercial
LI district - light industrial
HI district - heavy industrial
The initial review shall be coordinated by the planning department and shall include the
recommendations of other town departments as necessary.
2. The planning director or his designee, may approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove
proposed plans for the following:
a. Duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes, which are not part of a project containing more than one
building.
b. Commercial structures which meet the requirements of all applicable ordinances and do not
exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet in size.
3. The planning and zoning commission shall review and approve, conditionally approve, or
disapprove all applications for proposed projects not included in subsection B2 of this section.
4. The planning director may refer any application for development review directly to the planning
and zoning commission with or without a recommendation.
5. Any proposed plan shall be approved, conditionally approved, or disapproved within thirty (30)
days after a completed application has been submitted, unless the applicant shall request such
time be extended. (Ord. 05-255, 8-9-2005)
C. Development Plan Required:
1. All applications for development review shall be accompanied by a development plan which
shall include the following:
a. Site Plan: Fully dimensioned and including the location of all proposed and existing structures,
parking areas, landscape areas, walls, sidewalks, and other elements of the proposed project.
b. Landscape Plan: Including a schematic representation of the location of all plant materials and
screening walls.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 163/240
c. Building Elevations: North, south, east and west for all on site structures, noting all exterior
finish materials and color.
d. Drainage Plan: Prepared by a professionally licensed engineer.
e. Details: Of all screening, decorative and perimeter walls. (Ord. 148, 6-23-1998)
D. Design Standards:
1. Building Elevations:
a. All roof mounted mechanical equipment or ductwork which projects vertically more than one
and one-half feet (11/2') above the roofline shall be screened from public view and/or
residential zoning districts by means of a parapet wall or a single enclosure which is designed
and detailed consistently with the building design and encloses all such equipment.
b. No wall mounted mechanical equipment shall be visible from a public street or adjacent
residential zoning districts.
c. No ground mounted mechanical equipment shall be visible from a public street or adjacent
residential zoning districts.
d. Gutters, downspouts and similar items shall be painted to match or complement the color of
the building.
2. Site:
a. All required parking areas and parking spaces shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the following:
(1) Design: All parking areas and parking spaces shall meet the requirements as set forth in
section 10-6-8 of this chapter.
(2) Surface: All required parking areas, parking spaces and driveways shall have a dust free
surface.
(3) Vehicular Contact: Bumper blocks or curbing shall be utilized to protect screening walls
and refuse enclosures from vehicular contact.
3. Landscaping And Walls:
a. The required front yard and side yard setbacks shall be landscaped to provide for a minimum
of ten percent (10%) landscaping in their site plans including a minimum of a three foot (3')
wide landscape strip across any area of street frontage not used for driveways.
b. Any commercial or industrial development which is proposed for a site having a property line
which is coterminous with a residential site or zone shall provide a six foot (6') high masonry
wall.
c. All side and rear yards in residential transitional, commercial and industrial developments
which are visible from a public street from other than the front yard shall provide a six foot (6')
high screening wall.
d. Duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes, or greater, which are part of a project containing more than
one building shall provide a six foot (6') high screening wall built to specifications that have
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 164/240
been approved by the town manager and zoning director. Said approval shall be in writing.
4. General Provisions:
a. All outdoor refuse collection areas shall be screened from view by appropriate screening walls
and when feasible, located at the rear of the site.
b. As required by this section, screening walls shall be constructed of wood or masonry or an
alternative approved by the planning and zoning commission and/or the town council.
c. All proposals and plans shall be consistent with all applicable provisions of this code as it now
exists or may be hereafter amended.
d. Access to the site and circulation thereon shall be safe and convenient for pedestrians,
cyclists and vehicles. (Ord. 05-255, 8-9-2005)
E. Modifications Of Minimum Standards:
1. The planning and zoning commission may permit modifications to the minimum standards set
forth in subsection D of this section where reasonably required by the location of the lot or
unique circumstances of the lot.
2. In approving any modification, the planning and zoning commission shall make the following
findings. All findings shall be supported by verifiable evidence.
a. Required Findings:
(1) That the proposed modification(s) will yield a project design which is equally or more
desirable in terms of function, aesthetics, view, and general appropriateness than that which
would result by requiring strict adherence to the terms and regulations of subsection D of
this section.
(2) That the proposed modification(s) shall in no way impair the health, safety and welfare of
future occupants of the proposed development, adjacent developments or residents of the
town.
(3) The strict adherence to certain terms and regulations of this section is not required in order
to protect the property value of adjacent and nearby residents.
(4) That the proposed modification(s) is consistent with the policies and goals embodied in the
general plan.
F. Appeal To Planning And Zoning Commission: In the event the applicant or any interested person is
aggrieved by the decision of the planning director, an appeal in writing with the appropriate appeal
fee as set by resolution of the town council may be submitted to the planning and zoning
commission within fifteen (15) calendar days of the decision. Following the filing date of an appeal,
the planning and zoning commission shall affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the planning
director.
G. Appeal To Town Council: In the event the applicant or any interested person is aggrieved by the
decision of the planning and zoning commission, a written appeal with the appropriate appeal fee
as set by resolution of the town council may be submitted to the town council within fifteen (15)
calendar days of the decision of the planning and zoning commission.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 165/240
H. Approval As Prerequisite To Issuance Of Permit: No permit for the construction of any building or
structure shall be issued in any case hereinabove mentioned until such plans, drawings, or
sketches have been approved by the planning director or the planning and zoning commission or,
on appeal, by the town council. All buildings, structures and grounds shall be developed in strict
conformance with said plans, drawings, or sketches as finally approved.
I. Revocation Of Permit: The planning director may issue a stop work order and the planning and
zoning commission may, after a public hearing with notice to the permittee, revoke any approval
given pursuant to this section for noncompliance with any of the conditions imposed through the
approval process. Such revocation shall be deemed revocation of the permit. Written notice of
intention to revoke shall be mailed to the permittee not less than thirty (30) days before the
planning and zoning commission hearing date. Said revocation may be appealed in the manner
provided in subsection G of this section.
J. Lapse Of Approval Period: The development review approval is conditioned upon the rights or
privileges acquired thereby being utilized within one year after the effective date of approval and
should the rights or privileges not be executed or utilized within said year, or when a building
permit has not been issued within said year, or when some form of construction work is involved
which has not actually commenced within said year, or if so commenced, is not diligently pursued
to completion, said approval shall automatically lapse except that if said utilization or construction
has been delayed by town delay in approving plans, then the planning director shall grant and
record a commensurate extension. The planning director may, upon the request of the permittee,
for any cause, grant a reasonable extension of time, in addition to the one year period hereinabove
provided. Such a request for extension shall be filed with the planning director fifteen (15) days
prior to the expiration of the one year approval period. Only one such extension shall be granted
and said extension shall in no case exceed six (6) months. (Ord. 148, 6-23-1998)
10-6-5: LOADING SPACES:
A. General: Loading spaces must be provided on the same lot as the use which requires them.
B. Size: Each loading space must have a clear height of fourteen feet (14') and must be directly
accessible to the building it serves through a usable door not less than three feet (3') in width, and
eighty inches (80") high. Loading spaces must be at least four hundred (400) square feet in area
with minimum dimensions of twenty feet by ten feet (20' x 10').
C. Commercial Uses; Except Industrial Zones: One loading space is required on site for commercial
uses with a floor area of up to twenty five thousand (25,000) square feet, and an additional space
is required for every additional twenty five thousand (25,000) square feet of floor space, or fraction
thereof.
D. Industrial Uses And Commercial Uses; Industrial Zones: One loading space is required for any
such uses with a floor area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet, and an additional space is
required for every additional ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor space, or fraction thereof.
(Ord. 132, 6-10-1997)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 166/240
10-6-6: MANUFACTURED HOME, RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK DESIGN:
Applications for zoning clearances or special use permits for recreational vehicle and manufactured
home parks must be accompanied by scale drawn site plans prepared by an architect, professional
engineer, or other person qualified to do the work, as approved by the town. Such site plan must
indicate how the following requirements will be met:
A. Space Requirements: Space requirements for each unit pad in feet:
Front Side Rear
Min. Space
Size
Min.
Width
Min.
Depth
Max. Pad
Coverage
MH parks 10 7 71 3,200 sq. ft. 40 --- 75%
Recreational
vehicle parks
72 72 72 1,500 sq. ft. 30 50 60%
Notes:
1. See subsection A1 of this section.
2. See subsection A2 of this section.
1. Rear Yard Boundaries: Rear yard boundaries abutting interior park streets must be at least ten
feet (10').
2. Reduction: This setback may be reduced if a minimum fourteen foot (14') separation can be
maintained between all RV's and all manufactured homes, including appurtenances such as
awnings and carports, and fifteen feet (15') separation can be maintained between any
permanent structure and any mobile unit.
B. Roadways: All park roadways must be built and continuously maintained with valley gutters and in
a dust-free condition by application of a four (4) aggregate base course (ABC), crowned with a one
and one-half percent (11/2%) side slope and covered by double penetration and chip seal coat with
a fog coat, or other dust-free surface, and must have a minimum width of twenty feet (20').
C. Fencing: All parks must be enclosed by a six feet (6') high sight-obscuring fence.
D. Off-Street Parking: Two (2) parking space shall be provided for each manufactured home pad, and
additional overflow parking must be provided equal to ten percent (10%) of those required for
pads. (Ord. 132, 6-10-1997)
10-6-7: NOISE:
A. Intent And Purpose: It is the intent and desire of the Town Council to control excessive noise
occurring within the Town limits. The purpose of this Section is to provide for the health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the Town of Snowflake.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 167/240
B. General Provisions:
1. Unless otherwise defined herein, all terminology shall be in conformance with applicable
publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body.
2. Instrumentation used in making sound level measurements shall be a sound level meter with an
A-weighting scale and associated octave band filters. The instrument shall be manufactured in
accordance with ANSI standards. Measurement shall be made using a flat network of the sound
level meter.
C. Maximum Permissible Sound Levels:
1. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any source of sound at any location within the
Town limits or allow the creation of any noise on property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise
controlled by such person, which causes the noise level to exceed the applicable limits given for
any affected land use category in Table I.
2. The noise standards for the categories of land use as presented in Table I and set forth in terms
defined shall, unless otherwise specifically indicated, apply to each property or portion of
property substantially used for a particular type of land use reasonably similar to the land use
types shown in Table I. Where different land uses occur on a single property, the more restrictive
noise limits shall apply.
3. Where doubt exists when making identification of a land use, the Town Engineer or his designee
may make the interpretation.
4. Sound levels shall be measured at the boundary or at any point outside the boundary of the
property containing the source of sound.
Table I
ZONE
Maximum Noise Level (dBA)
10 P.M. - 6 A.M. 6 A.M. - 10 P.M.
Residential Zones 45 60
Commercial Zones 55 70
Industrial Zones 65 80
Noise Level Adjustments: The maximum permissible daytime noise levels listed above are subject to
the following adjustments for duration:
Noise has an "on time" of no more
than:
And "off time"* between successive "on times" of at
least:
0.5 minutes 1/2 hour
5.0 minutes 1 hour Add 7 dBA to permitted level
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 168/240
10.0 minutes 2 hours
20.0 minutes 4 hours
*"Off time" is when the level of the primary noise being measured does not exceed that of the
background noise in any octave band.
D. Exemptions: The following activities or sources are exempt from the noise standards set forth in
Table I:
1. Activities covered by the following: emergency signaling devices, domestic power tools, airconditioning
and air-handling equipment for residential purposes, refuse collection vehicles.
2. The unamplified human voice.
3. Aircraft operations.
4. Construction or routine maintenance of public service utilities.
5. Houses of worship bells or chimes.
6. The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency, or
the emission of sound in the performance of emergency work. (Ord. 132, 6-10-1997)
10-6-8: PARKING:
A. General: Off-street parking shall be provided with adequate provision for ingress and egress by
standard sized vehicles at the time of erection of any principal building, or initiation of any principal
use, or at the time properties or buildings are changed in use, altered, enlarged, converted, or
increased in capacity. Commercial and industrial off-street parking must be designed so that no
such parking is perpendicular to any immediately accessible right of way. Parking space must be
provided in number in relation to use as noted below:
1. Table:
USE
ONE PARKING SPACE IS REQUIRED FOR EACH UNIT
NOTED BELOW
Church 5 seats in the main meeting room
Theater 4 seats
Skating rinks, etc., clinics and
other places of public
assembly
300 square feet of floor space in the building
Funeral home, private club,
lodge, fraternal organization
500 square feet of floor space in the building
Boarding and lodging houses,
fraternities, etc.
2 beds
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 169/240
Hotel 1 per guest room up to 20; 1 per 4 guest rooms from 21 to 40;
6 in excess of 40; all located on the hotel property
Motel 1 per guest room
Hospital 3 hospital beds, plus 1 for each 3 employees other than
doctors, plus 1 for each doctor.
Schools, colleges,
universities, etc.
3 employees, plus 1 for each 10 students for which there is
capacity
Homes for aged, convalescent
centers and other residential
charitable or philanthropic
institutions
5 beds, plus 1 for each 3 employees
Office buildings, commercial
and government buildings,
restaurants, bars, etc.
300 square feet of floor space1
Industrial buildings 3 employees on any one shift, or 1 space for each 500 sq. ft.
of floor space where employee number is indeterminate; and 1
space for each truck and other company vehicles maintained
on the site
Notes:
1. See subsection A2 of this Section.
2. Two (2) or more establishments may provide necessary parking spaces on a single parcel of
land provided the land is not in a residential zone.
B. Parking Stall Dimensions:
1. Regular Stalls:
a. Perpendicular to aisle; nine feet by eighteen feet (9' x 18').
b. Parallel to aisle; nine feet by twenty three feet (9' x 23').
c. Other designs; as required by the town manager.
2. Handicapped Stalls: Handicapped stalls must be provided as required by the Americans with
disabilities act, Public Law 101-336 and state statute.
C. Design Of Parking Areas:
1. Driveways: Every parking area must have one or more accessways, the width of which shall be:
a. Private parking: Minimum ten feet (10').
b. Commercial parking:
(1) One-way enter/exit; twelve feet (12').
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 170/240
(2) Two-way enter/exit; twenty four feet (24').
2. Slopes: Driveway and ramp slopes may not exceed twenty percent (20%).
3. Space Accessibility:
a. Each required parking space shall be individually and easily accessible based on good
engineering practice.
b. No spaces serving more than two (2) dwelling units, or other than residential uses, may be
designed so that vehicle egressing them must back onto a public street or sidewalk.
c. All portions of a public lot or garage must be accessible to other portions thereof without
requiring the use of any public street.
D. Screening: A three foot (3') high fence, wall or landscape buffer at the edge of the public right of
way and adjacent to rural or residentially zoned property must be provided for all parking areas of
twenty (20) or more required parking spaces.
E. Surfacing: Off street parking spaces shall be surfaced with concrete, asphalt or other dust
controlling material or substance approved by the town. (Ord. 132, 6-10-1997)
10-6-9: SWIMMING POOLS:
Swimming pools must be enclosed as required by Arizona Revised Statutes, section 36-1681. (Ord.
132, 6-10-1997)
10-6-10: TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES; STREET LIGHTING:
A. Traffic Control Devices: Developers of projects that will generate additional traffic and require the
installation of a traffic signal, regulatory sign, or other traffic control device are responsible for
installing such traffic control devices as are required by their approved development plans.
B. Street Lighting: Developers of projects which abut public streets are responsible for providing any
additional street lighting required as a result of the approval of their development plans to ensure
acceptable levels of street lighting. (Ord. 132, 6-10-1997)
10-6-11: OUTDOOR VEHICLE PARKING; STORAGE:
A. Trucks; Construction Equipment: Storing more than one truck having a rated capacity of one and
one-half (11/2) tons (except farm trucks) or any construction equipment such as bulldozers,
graders, cement mixers, compressors, dump trucks, and others on property zoned for residential
uses is prohibited, except that construction equipment may be stored on a lot during construction
of a building thereon.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 171/240
B. Inoperable Vehicles: Outdoor storage of more than one inoperable vehicle as an accessory use on
any property is prohibited. (Ord. 132, 6-10-1997)
C. Recreational Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for any person to authorize, permit, allow, or to park,
place, store, or occupy, a recreational vehicle within the town of Snowflake except as specifically
authorized by this subsection. Recreational vehicles may be:
1. Parked, placed, or stored in a public or private storage facility licensed or permitted for such
uses.
2. Parked or placed on a public right of way in compliance with all other state or local regulations
pertaining to use of public rights of way.
3. Parked, placed, or stored on private residential property at a distance equal to or greater than
the distance of the established property setbacks within the designated zoning district. No
permanent utility connections may be made to the RV and the RV is not in violation of any other
law or valid and applicable deed restrictions or covenants running with the land. As the town of
Snowflake does not enforce deed restriction or covenants, placement of RVs on said properties
must be cleared with the appropriate regulatory agency. In the case of multi-unit dwellings, RVs
may be parked, placed, or stored in designated storage areas as specified by the owner,
landlord, or manager, and in compliance with specific zoning setbacks.
4. Parked or placed on a residential property for a maximum of forty eight (48) hours prior to or
after use, for the purpose of loading, preparing, or making ready, and/or unloading, winterizing,
or preparing for storage provided no utility connections are made to the RV.
5. Occupied on a residential property in front of and/or adjacent to a primary residence or upon
such primary resident's property when the owner/occupant of the RV is temporarily visiting the
occupant of the primary residence and the RV is not in violation of any other law or valid and
applicable deed restrictions or covenants running with the land. RV placement shall also be
regulated by additional specific conditions as follows:
a. A single RV may be located on a residential property for a period of up to fourteen (14)
consecutive days.
b. A single RV or the cumulative total of all RVs may be located on a residential property for a
maximum of twenty eight (28) days in any calendar year.
c. The owner/occupant of the recreational vehicle parked, placed, or occupied shall provide
evidence to any town representative upon request that he/she is a legitimate guest at the
residence.
d. No permanent sewer or septic connections shall be made to the RV.
6. Parked, placed, stored, or occupied for temporary recreational purposes in designated camping
areas not to exceed fourteen (14) consecutive days or twenty eight (28) total days in any given
year.
7. Parked, placed, stored, or occupied in a manufactured home or RV park which is legally
permitted and established for temporary or long term occupancy while connected to utilities.
8. Parked, placed, stored, or occupied, in residential areas, as a dwelling unit while connected to
utilities during exigent circumstances such as fire, earthquake, or temporary occasions of
inclement weather involving power outages.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 172/240
9. Parked, placed, stored, or occupied by an authorized emergency service agency or disaster
assistance organization during a temporary emergency or disaster.
10. Parked, placed, stored, or occupied for temporary use activities after the authorization of a
special use permit or temporary use permit as shown in the table in section 10-4-3 of this title
and specified in section 10-8-2 and/or 10-8-6 of this title.
11. Parked, placed, stored, or occupied as specified herein including additional provisions of title
13 of this code.
12. Failure to comply with this subsection is subject to civil, administrative, or criminal fines.
Administrative fines shall be established on the town's comprehensive fee schedule.
The computation of time under the provisions of this subsection shall commence on the date and
time the recreational vehicle is parked, placed, stored, or occupied on any property. (Ord. 11-
333, 3-15-2011)
10-6-12: ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESSES:
A. Purpose: It is the purpose of this section to regulate adult oriented businesses to promote the
health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the town, and to establish reasonable
and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of adult oriented businesses within the town.
The provisions of this section have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or
restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including adult oriented materials.
Similarly, it is not the intent or effect of this section to restrict or deny access by adults to adult
oriented materials protected by the first amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and
exhibitors of adult oriented entertainment to their intended market.
B. Location Requirements: Adult oriented businesses may be located in the general commercial, light
industrial, and heavy industrial zones as allowed by special use permit by the appropriate zoning
district regulations of this zoning ordinance. However, no adult oriented business shall be located
within one thousand feet (1,000') of:
1. A church or synagogue or temple.
2. A public or private elementary or secondary school.
3. A residential zone.
4. A lot used for a residential use.
5. Another adult oriented business.
6. A public park.
7. A public or private daycare center or preschool facility.
For purposes of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects from the nearest portion of the lot used for the adult oriented
business and the nearest property line of the lot used for the purposes enumerated above.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 173/240
C. Number In Building: No more than one adult oriented business may be located in the same
building.
D. Alcohol Prohibited: No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, or consumed on the premises
where an adult oriented business is located.
E. Nonconformity: Any adult oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date of this
ordinance that is in violation of subsections B and C of this section, shall be a nonconforming use.
If two (2) or more adult oriented businesses are within one thousand feet (1,000') of one another,
and otherwise in a permissible location, the adult oriented business which was first established and
continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the latter established
business is nonconforming. In any event, no increase in the floor area of any nonconforming adult
oriented business shall be permitted in any building or on any lot containing another adult oriented
business or a dwelling unit.
F. Encroachment Of Other Uses: An adult oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is
not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the lawful establishment of the
adult oriented business, of a use enumerated in subsection B of this section.
G. Variance To Location Requirements:
1. An applicant may make application for a variance from the location requirement of subsection B
of this section in the same manner as found in section 10-8-7 of this zoning ordinance, as
amended. (Ord. 149, 6-23-1998)
2. The town council, in making a finding about a variance request from the location requirement of
subsection B of this section, shall also consider the following: (Ord. 149, 6-23-1998; amd. Ord.
09-315, 4-28-2009)
a. That the location of the proposed adult oriented business will not downgrade the property
values or quality of life in the adjacent areas or encourage the development of urban blight;
and
b. That the location of an additional adult oriented business in the area will not be contrary to any
program of neighborhood conservation, nor will it interfere with any efforts of urban renewal,
restoration, or historic preservation.
H. Parking Restrictions:
1. Adult arcade: One space for each arcade machine plus one space for each employee per shift.
2. Adult bookstore: One space for each three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area.
3. Adult Cabaret: One space for each fifty (50) square feet of gross floor area where the public is
served, plus an additional ten percent (10%) of the off street parking required herein for use by
employees.
4. Adult Motel: One and one-tenth (11/10) parking spaces shall be provided for each guest room.
When auxiliary commercial uses are included, the following additional standards are required:
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 174/240
a. One parking space for every sixty (60) square feet of gross floor area where the public is
served.
b. One parking space for every four hundred (400) square feet of gross floor area of commercial
accessory use.
c. One space for every six (6) seats, if seats are fixed; or one space for fifty (50) square feet for
places of public assembly.
5. Adult Motion Picture Theater: One off street parking space for every four (4) seats, if seats are
fixed; or one space for each thirty (30) square feet of open assembly area where seats are not
fixed, excluding platform and stage areas.
6. Adult Theater: One off street parking space for every four (4) seats, if seats are fixed; or one
space for each thirty (30) square feet of open assembly area where seats are not fixed,
excluding platform and stage areas.
7. Adult Video Store: One space for each three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area.
8. Escort Agency: One space for each three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area.
9. Nude Model Studio: One space for each three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area.
10. Sexual Encounter Center: Parking spaces shall be not less than thirty percent (30%) of
maximum occupancy as determined by the uniform building code as adopted by the town. (Ord.
149, 6-23-1998)
10-6-13: FACTORY BUILT BUILDINGS; MANUFACTURED HOMES:
All factory built buildings and manufactured homes (as defined in section 10-3-2 of this title) that are
placed within the town, or relocated within the town, shall be subject to the following provisions (in
addition to the provisions of the applicable zoning district):
A. Placement Standards:
1. Factory Built Buildings (Modular Buildings):
a. The tongue is to be removed.
b. All factory built buildings shall be similar to site built homes in design and construction, and
shall be constructed to the requirements of the uniform building code (UBC).
c. All factory built buildings are to be permanently installed on a privately owned, nonrental site
or lot of record outside of a manufactured home park where the land and the factory built
building to be installed thereon are held in common ownership.
d. All factory built buildings are to be securely anchored to a permanent foundation constructed
of reinforced masonry or concrete acceptable to the town.
e. Standard skirting shall be provided around the entire perimeter of the home between the
home and the ground. A stem wall shall be deemed an appropriate skirting, provided it
completely encloses the home between the home and the ground (excluding door access to
the crawl space).
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 175/240
f. Factory built buildings are to be placed so that the orientation of the wide side of the home is
parallel to the front lot line. In addition, the use of pitched roofs, nonmetal roofing materials
(such as tiles) and finished exteriors (nonmetal) is also required.
g. Placement of all factory built buildings shall be a permitted use in the AG, R-2 acre, R-1 acre
and R-10,000 square foot minimum zoning districts, and shall be subject to issuance of a
building permit.
2. Manufactured Homes:
a. The tongue is to be removed.
b. All manufactured homes are to be securely anchored to a pad acceptable to the town,
preferably a concrete pad.
c. Standard skirting shall be provided around the entire perimeter of the home between the
home and the ground. All homes must have masonry skirting on approved foundation with
mortared joints. (Ord. 04-237, 9-28-2004)
d. Manufactured homes shall be constructed with pitched roofs, nonmetal roofing materials
(such as tiles) and finished exteriors (nonmetal) or metal roofs as would be allowed for site
built construction. (Ord. 08-312, 10-14-2008)
e. Placement of all manufactured homes shall be subject to issuance of a manufactured home
permit.
f. Multisection manufactured homes shall be a permitted use in the AG, R-2 acre and R-1 acre
zoning districts only. Single section (singlewide) manufactured homes shall be allowed as a
conditionally permitted use in the AG and R-2 acre zoning districts only, and a permitted use in
manufactured home parks only.
g. All homes must be set as low as possible with a maximum of thirty inches (30") from the
bottom of the floor joists to the land bearing surface.
h. In all home installations, the bottom of the floor joists shall be a minimum of eight inches (8")
above finished grade at all points.
i. All homes are to have porches or decks (covered or uncovered). These porches must be
compatible with the dwellings in the area and must be a minimum of thirty two (32) square feet
(4 x 8 feet). Porches and decks are required for primary entries with a minimum of one front
and one back.
j. All homes with a standard roof pitch will have eaves of six inches (6") or greater. Manufactured
homes with Spanish style architecture will be exempted from this eave requirement.
k. If a garage, carport or room addition is constructed, the external material and roofing used on
the garage, carport or addition shall be the same as or as near as practicable to the same as
the external material and roofing of the home.
l. All homes must have a roof pitch of not less than three inches (3") of vertical rise for each
twelve inches (12") of horizontal run. Roofing materials shall be shingles or other materials
customarily used for congenital dwellings and approved by the planning and zoning director.
m. The homeowner(s) must file an affidavit of affixture to cause the home to become real
property.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 176/240
n. All manufactured homes placed within the town limits and all preowned manufactured homes
relocated to a new location within the town limits must be no older than seven (7) years and in
a "like new" condition, including, but not limited to, no significant mars or defects in roofing,
siding, paint or other components and no missing parts. If the town planning and zoning
director determines repairs need to be made on a relocated manufactured home, a certificate
of occupancy shall not be issued until said repairs are completed. All repairs must be
completed within sixty (60) days of relocation of the manufactured home. (Ord. 04-237, 9-28-
2004)
Chapter 7
SIGNS
10-7-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter provides a set of standards for the design and construction of signs in the town of
Snowflake in order to: protect and improve the economic, scenic, and aesthetic values of the
community; allow adequate and appropriate signs to effectively identify each business location and
type of business conducted; prevent unsafe, oversize, or excessive signs which obscure the buildings,
trees, and the natural beauty of the town; promote public safety, welfare, convenience, and enjoyment
of travel, and free flow of traffic throughout the community. (Ord. 07-282, 1-23-2007, eff. 2-23-2007)
10-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
PLATE LINE: The horizontal line of a building at a height that would normally be the horizontal framing
member resting on top of the studs on the first or ground floor.
SHOPPING CENTER: A group of three (3) or more commercial establishments and/or professional
offices associated by common agreement or under common ownership which comprises contiguous
land parcel units with common parking facilities.
SIGN: Any device for visual communication, including part or all of any structure, or natural object, that
is used for the purpose of bringing the subject concerned to the attention of the public, but not
including any sign of any governmental agency, or any flag, badge or insignia of any governmental,
civic, charitable, religious, patriotic, fraternal, or similar organization.
SIGN AREA: That area in square feet of the smallest rectangle, square, circle, or triangle that
encompasses the sign. The area of any two (2) faced sign with parallel faces, or "V" type signs having
an interior angle of forty five degrees (45°) or less, shall be the area of the single face. All other
multiple faced or paneled signs shall be the total area of all faces or panels. Sign area shall include
the mounting surface, and for multiple-unit signs, the area shall include the lettering and the vertical
and horizontal spacing between letters that comprise the word or words that convey the message.
SIGN, CANOPY: A type of building mounted sign mounted under and supported by a permanent
canopy, arcade, or portal, and the faces of which sign are perpendicular to the nearest facade.
SIGN, DEVELOPMENT: Any temporary sign erected on the premises of an existing construction
project and designating the architect, contractor, designer or builder, or developer or the name and
nature of the project.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 177/240
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL: Any sign, which is designed and erected solely for the purpose of traffic or
pedestrian direction and placed on the property to which or on which the public is directed, and which
contains no advertising.
SIGN, FREESTANDING: Any nonmovable sign not affixed to a building and mounted on its own selfsupporting
frame, including the following types:
A. Ground: Any freestanding sign, other than a pole sign, placed upon or supported by the ground
independent of any other structures except footings.
B. Pole: Any freestanding sign that is mounted on a pole or other support so that the bottom edge
of the sign face is eight feet (8') or more above grade.
SIGN HEIGHT: The vertical distance from the crown of the nearest adjacent road to the highest point
of the sign or the vertical distance from the natural grade of the property where the sign is located to
the highest point of the sign, whichever is greater.
SIGN, OBSOLETE: Any sign which no longer correctly directs or exhorts any person, advertises a
bona fide business, lessor, owner, product, activity, or product available on the premises where such
sign is displayed.
SIGN, OFF PREMISES: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service,
entertainment establishment, or other activity or phenomenon not exclusively related to the premises
on which the sign is located.
SIGN, ON PREMISES: A sign which directs attention to a business, profession, or activity, conducted
on the property on which the sign is located.
SIGN, POLITICAL: Any temporary sign, which supports the candidacy of any candidate for public
office or urges action on any other matter on the ballot of primary, general, or special elections.
SIGN, PORTABLE: A sign that is not permanent, affixed to a building, structure or the ground.
SIGN, PROJECTING: A type of building mounted sign, other than a wall sign or canopy sign, which
projects from and is supported by a wall of a building.
SIGN, PROPERTY SALE, RENTAL, OR LEASE: Any sign advertising the availability for sale, rental,
or lease of land or buildings.
SIGN, TEMPORARY: Any sign or banner, which is not intended for permanent use, expressly used to
announce community functions, grand openings, or establishment of new commercial projects.
SIGN, WALL: A sign flush to the exterior surface of a building, applied directly on the building, in a
window, or a signboard attached flush to the building, projecting no more than twelve inches (12")
from the building surface. (Ord. 07-282, 1-23-2007, eff. 2-23-2007)
10-7-3: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all signs placed or maintained within the town of
Snowflake with the exception of the following:
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 178/240
A. Governmental signs: Signs required by law or signs of a duly constituted governmental body, such
as traffic signs, warning signs, or no trespassing signs.
B. Public utility signs: Signs placed by a public utility for the safety, welfare, or convenience of the
public, such as signs identifying high voltage, public telephone, or underground cables.
C. Vehicle signs: Signs upon a vehicle, provided that any such vehicle with a sign face of over two (2)
square feet is not conspicuously parked so as to constitute a sign; nothing herein contained shall
prevent such a vehicle from being used for a bona fide delivery and other vehicular purposes.
D. Temporary holiday decorations. (Ord. 07-282, 1-23-2007, eff. 2-23-2007)
10-7-4: PERMITS:
A. Permit Required; Exceptions: A sign permit shall be required before a sign may be placed,
constructed, reconstructed, or altered within the town of Snowflake, with the exception of the
following:
1. Nameplate signs and address signs as allowed in residential zones.
2. Repainting or maintenance of signs, provided there is no change in size or shape. (Changes in
wording, composition or color shall be allowed without a permit.)
3. Property "For Sale", rental, or lease signs.
4. Temporary construction signs.
5. Dedication plaques: Nonilluminated names of buildings, dates of creation or construction,
monument citations, commemorative tables and the like when carved into stone, concrete,
metal, or any other permanent type construction and made an integral part of a permitted
structure or made flush to the ground.
B. Application: An application for a sign permit shall be filed with the planning and zoning department
on a form prescribed by the planning and zoning department. The application shall include the
following:
1. Sketch showing size, height and shape of sign.
2. Message to be contained on proposed sign(s).
3. Description of materials used, method of mounting, and method of lighting if applicable.
4. Any existing or planned landscaping.
5. Existing signs including, but not limited to; relationship of new signage to existing signage,
square footage of existing signage.
6. Calculation in square feet of total sign area.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 179/240
7. Any other information the planning and zoning department might need to evaluate the sign
proposal.
8. Payment of the filing fee in an amount established by a schedule adopted by resolution of the
town council. No part of the filing fee shall be returnable. Payment of the filing fee shall be
waived when the petitioner is an official agency of the town, county, state or federal government.
C. Plan Review: Upon receipt of a completed application for a sign permit, the planning and zoning
department shall review the sign plans and deny, approve, or conditionally approve said plans,
basing his/her decision on the conformity of the proposal with the provisions of this chapter.
D. Inspections: As part of a sign permit, should the town of Snowflake planning and zoning
department deem it necessary, a structural inspection will be required at the owner's expense.
(Ord. 07-282, 1-23-2007, eff. 2-23-2007)
10-7-5: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
A. General:
1. If, at the time of the adoption of this chapter, any sign which is being used in a manner or for a
purpose which was otherwise lawful, but does not conform to the provisions of this chapter, shall
be deemed nonconforming. Such sign may continue only in the manner and to the extent that it
existed at the time of such adoption, amendment or extension.
2. Any sign and/or sign structure which becomes nonconforming subsequent to the effective date
hereof shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter.
B. Alterations: A nonconforming sign and/or sign structure shall not be altered, reconstructed,
replaced, or relocated other than to be brought into compliance with this chapter, except for:
1. Reasonable repair and maintenance required to restore the structure to its original state.
2. Change in wording.
C. Removal Or Replacement: Removal of a nonconforming sign and/or sign structure, or replacement
of a nonconforming sign with a conforming sign, is required when:
1. Blown Down, Taken Down Or Destructive Action: Any such sign or substantial part is blown
down, destroyed, or for any reason or by any means is taken down, altered, and/or removed
besides routine maintenance. For the purpose of this section, "substantial" is defined as fifty
percent (50%) or more of the entire sign structure.
2. Damage Or Destruction: The condition of the sign, and/or sign structure or building it is mounted
on is destroyed or damaged by a fire, flood, windstorm, or similar abnormal event, and the cost
of restoration of the sign to its condition immediately prior to such deterioration or event exceeds
fifty percent (50%) of the cost of reconstruction of the sign structure. The planning and zoning
department shall determine the cost of restoration.
3. Use Of Sign Or Building Vacated: The use of the sign and/or the property on which the sign is
located has ceased, become vacant, or been unoccupied for a period of one hundred eighty
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 180/240
(180) consecutive days or more. In the event this should occur, such conditions will be
considered as evidence of abandonment, required removal of such sign by the owner of the
property, his/her agent, or person having the beneficial use of the property, building, or structure
upon which such sign or sign structure is erected within thirty (30) days after written notification
from the planning and zoning department. If within the thirty (30) day period, such sign(s) is (are)
not removed, enforcement action will result.
4. Existing Nonconforming Sign: Any sign permit issued by the town shall specify and require that
any nonconforming signs located on the lot where the new sign is to be placed shall be modified
or removed to comply with this chapter. This requirement shall not apply to nonconforming off
site signs.
5. Construction Permit For Site: Any construction permit, which invokes certificate of occupancy
requirements in relation to:
a. Any building addition and/or an increase of use in terms of gross floor area, seating capacity,
or other units of measurement indicating an intensification of use.
b. Any exterior structural remodeling of the building facade which affects signage.
c. Any construction, shall specify and require that any nonconforming sign, except a
nonconforming off site sign, located within the boundaries of the development site authorized
by said permit shall be brought into conformance with the provisions of this chapter provided
that, if the nonconforming sign is a prohibited sign type as described in this chapter, except for
a nonconforming off site sign, it shall be removed.
6. Separation Provision: Nothing in this chapter shall require a sign which is nonconforming solely
due to not satisfying a separation standard (e.g., spacing between ground signs, separation from
buildings, or residential areas), to eliminate that nonconformity if meeting that standard on the
site is not possible. This provision shall not be construed to exempt such signs from the
provisions requiring reduction of height and area nonconformities. (Ord. 07-282, 1-23-2007, eff.
2-23-2007)
10-7-6: PROHIBITED SIGN TYPES:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to specify sign types and other devices which are prohibited
within the jurisdiction of the town of Snowflake.
B. Applicability: Any sign not specifically authorized by this chapter is prohibited unless required by
law. The following signs and conditions are prohibited:
1. Any sign located within, on, or projecting over a property line which borders a public or private
street, highway, alley, lane, parkway, avenue, road, sidewalk, or other right of way, except as
provided in this chapter. The property owner or owner of the sign shall be notified to remove the
prohibited sign. If the owner does not comply within thirty (30) days, the planning and zoning
department may have the sign removed and the cost assessed to the owner of the sign, or
enforcement action may be taken.
2. Any sign attached to any public utility pole or structure, streetlight, tree, fence, fire hydrant,
bridge, curb, sidewalk, park bench, or other location on public property, except as provided
herein.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 181/240
3. Any sign placed, which by reason of its location, obstructs the clear view of traffic, obstructs the
view of any authorized traffic sign, signal, or other traffic control device or which by reason of
shape, color, or position interferes with or could be confused with any authorized traffic signal or
device.
4. Any sign which is placed so as to prevent or inhibit free ingress to or egress from any door,
window, or any exitway required by the currently adopted building code or by fire department
regulations.
5. Any sign or lighting device, whether on the exterior of the building, or on the inside of a window
which is visible beyond the boundaries of the lot or parcel, or from any public right of way, with
intermittent, flashing, rotating, blinking, or strobe light illumination except for "time and
temperature" signs. Also prohibited are signs containing an electronic message device, unless
an approved special use permit is obtained.
6. Any sign which emits audible sound, odor, smoke, steam, laser or hologram lights, or other
visible matter, including any sign that employs motion picture projection.
7. Any sign mounted, attached, or painted on a trailer, boat, or motor vehicle when parked, stored,
or displayed conspicuously on the public right of way in a manner intended to attract attention of
the public for advertising purposes. Such signs or devices are considered portable signs within
the meaning of these regulations and are prohibited.
8. Any fixed aerial displays that do not conform to the requirements herein.
9. Any off site sign and/or portable sign including, but not limited to: sandwich, A-frame, or tire rim
sign, or vehicle used as a sign or sign structure; and/or string of lights arranged in the shape of a
product, arrow, or any commercial message, except for:
a. Directional or off site sign as established and specified by the town council. A directional sign
indicating a business location shall be construed as a portion of the cumulative total of
allowable signage for that business. When a directional or off site sign for a business, not
located adjacent to a state highway is requested, such signage shall:
(1) Be construed as part of the total allowable signage for the business seeking the permit.
(2) Not exceed eight (8) square feet in area.
(3) Be located within two thousand five hundred feet (2,500') from the advertising business.
(4) Be allowed only on private property or within any right of way with the written permission of
the owner of such property.
(5) Not exceed two (2) in number on any one property, lot, or parcel.
(6) (As pertaining to temporary signs to announce community and/or civic activities) remain
posted for a time period not to exceed twenty one (21) days.
(7) Expressly exclude business signs that are permanently painted on or magnetically
attached to motor vehicles, trailers or other rolling apparatus that is regularly and
consistently used to conduct normal business activities.
(8) Not be attached to existing signs, outdoor light poles, or other structures.
(9) Not be attached to a tree or other natural object.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 182/240
(10) (As pertaining to business signs) not be located in agricultural, residential, or mobile
home zones, except as provided herein.
(11) Not utilize any sign with movement of the sign body such as rotating, moving up and
down, or any other type of action involving a change in position of the sign body or segment
thereof, whether by mechanical or any other means, excluding barber pole signs. (Ord. 07-
282, 1-23-2007, eff. 2-23-2007)
10-7-7: REGULATIONS IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS:
A. Maintenance: All signs shall be maintained in a state of good order and repair, and if any outdoor
advertising sign becomes a danger to the public, or becomes deteriorated or is abandoned, the
property owner or owner of the sign shall be notified to remove or repair the sign. If the owner does
not comply within thirty (30) days, the planning and zoning department may have the sign removed
and the cost assessed to the owner of the property on which such sign is located, or enforcement
action may be taken.
B. Building And Electrical Codes: All signs shall be constructed, designed, or attached to structures in
conformance with the building and electrical codes adopted by the town of Snowflake.
C. Signs In Public Rights Of Way: Only signs erected by the town, county, state, or federal
government shall be in any way supported by a public building or structure or located within a
public right of way.
D. Freestanding Signs In Parking Areas: Freestanding signs located within a parking area shall
incorporate a suitable barrier and/or landscaping, as determined by the planning and zoning
department, around such sign as to prevent vehicles from coming into contact with the sign. The
barrier will be set at a distance also determined as suitable by the planning and zoning
department.
E. Charitable, Fraternal, Or Religious Organization: Two (2) on site signs shall be permitted for
charitable, fraternal, or religious institutions. The total area of such signs shall not exceed thirty two
(32) square feet. (Note the height regulations of subsection G of this section.)
F. Entrance Or Exit Signs: Two (2) utility signs not more than two (2) square feet each denoting
"entrance" or "exit" with business logo shall be permitted at each entrance, if necessary for that
purpose.
G. Height Limitations At Streets, Driveways, And Sidewalks: When located within a distance of twenty
five feet (25') of a street and twenty five feet (25') of a driveway or other street, or within two feet
(2') from a sidewalk, no sign shall be placed between a height of three feet (3') and eight feet (8')
above the level of said street, driveway, or sidewalk. When located over a sidewalk, no part of any
sign shall be less than eight feet (8') above said sidewalk. When located over any driveway, no
part of any sign shall be less than fourteen feet (14') above said driveway.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 183/240
H. Location: No freestanding, projecting, or canopy sign shall be located closer than ten feet (10') from
any abutting lot.
I. Lighting: Lighting shall be so installed so as to avoid any glare or reflection into any building used for
residential purposes or into any street, alley, or driveway if such glare or reflection might create a
traffic hazard. All exposed neon, freon, incandescent, or similar type of illumination shall be no less
than ten feet (10') in height. Below this ten feet (10') in height, any such lighting shall be shielded
by transparent or translucent protective material.
J. Political Signs: Political signs shall be permitted, but shall not be placed in the public right of way or
upon power or telephone poles. Political signs may be erected no earlier than sixty (60) days prior
to any primary or general election; they shall be removed within ten (10) days after the election to
which the sign pertains or after the termination of a candidacy, whichever occurs first.
K. Address Signs: Parcels and structures assigned an address shall indicate that particular street
number on their particular freestanding sign, or on the particular structure if a freestanding sign is
not utilized. In the case of freestanding shopping center signs, the shopping center's main street
number shall be presented, while each individual business within the shopping center will present
their particular number on their building frontage. The numbers shall be a minimum of four inches
(4") in height and a maximum of six inches (6"). Address numbers shall not exceed the height of
any sign or building. Street numbers will not be construed as part of a business' allowable sign
area.
L. Advertising At Public Transit Stops: Advertising for sponsors of public transit stops shall be
permitted according to industry standards for bus benches and/or weather protective shells.
M. Directory Signs: Directory signs are subject to criteria, design standards and locations as
established by the town of Snowflake town council. (Ord. 07-282, 1-23-2007, eff. 2-23-2007)
10-7-8: REGULATIONS IN ALL AGRICULTURAL AND RESIDENTIAL ZONING
DISTRICTS:
A. Nameplates: One nameplate not exceeding three (3) square feet in area indicating the names of
the occupants and one set of numbers not exceeding one square foot in area indicating the street
address shall be allowed for each dwelling unit.
B. Business Signs: Excluding signs referenced in section 10-3-2 of this title pertaining to "home
occupation", one sign not exceeding eight (8) square feet in area shall be allowed in AG
(agricultural) zoning districts for each street frontage and for each professional office or business in
which such office or business is permitted. Business signs in all other agricultural and residential
zones are prohibited. (Note the height regulations of subsection 10-7-7G of this chapter.)
C. "For Sale", Rental, Lease Signs: Temporary property sale, rental, or lease signs not exceeding a
total of six (6) square feet in area shall be allowed for each street frontage of the property to which
the signs refer. Such signs shall be removed within twenty (20) days after the sale, rental, or lease
to which they refer. (Note the height regulations of subsection 10-7-7G of this chapter.)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 184/240
D. Subdivision Sale Sign: One subdivision sale sign for each street frontage with a maximum of two
(2) signs per subdivision at least two hundred feet (200') apart shall be allowed, with a maximum of
one hundred (100) square feet of sign area per sign. These signs shall be valid for either a period
of five (5) years or at which point more than ninety percent (90%) of the lots are sold within the
subdivision. The time period may be extended upon written request and with approval of the
planning and zoning department if no more than seventy five percent (75%) of the subdivision lots
have sold. The extension may occur for either a period of two (2) years or at which point more than
seventy five percent (75%) of the lots are sold within the subdivision. Signs shall be removed after
the expiration of time or sale of the above listed lot percentages. (Note the height regulations of
subsection 10-7-7G of this chapter.)
E. Subdivision Identification Signs: One sign, containing only the name of the subdivision, not
exceeding forty eight (48) square feet in area, may be erected on each side of any entrance to a
subdivision. (Note the height regulations of subsection 10-7-7G of this chapter.)
F. Apartment House Identification Signs: One sign containing the name of the apartment house, not
exceeding forty eight (48) square feet in area, may be allowed on each street frontage of any
apartment complex. These signs shall be only wall signs or freestanding signs. Freestanding signs
shall not exceed four feet (4') in height. (Note the height regulations of subsection 10-7-7G of this
chapter.)
G. Height: No wall, projecting, or canopy sign shall project above the top plate line of the building to
which it is attached and no freestanding sign shall exceed twelve feet (12') in height. (Note the
height regulations of subsection 10-7-7G of this chapter.) (Ord. 07-282, 1-23-2007, eff. 2-23-2007)
10-7-9: REGULATIONS IN COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL ZONES:
A. Number: On a premises other than a shopping center a maximum of three (3) signs shall be
permitted on any one street frontage and a maximum of four (4) when a building has more than
one street frontage. (Building frontage shall be deemed to exist when the entire length of a building
side faces and can be seen from a street or mall.)
B. Size: A total sign area of eighty (80) square feet will be allowed for buildings with fifty five (55) or
less linear feet of building frontage. Buildings with more than fifty five (55) linear feet of building
frontage will be allowed one and one-half (11/2) square feet of sign area per linear foot of building
frontage. The total maximum sign area for any building frontage shall be two hundred (200) square
feet. (Note the height regulations of subsection 10-7-7G of this chapter.)
C. Industrial Signs: Permanent industrial signs shall be permitted only within industrial zones subject
to the following regulations:
1. An industrial sign shall only advertise businesses on the particular site of the industrial sign.
2. No industrial sign shall have a vertical dimension greater than twelve feet (12') or a horizontal
dimension greater than twenty feet (20').
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 185/240
3. No industrial sign shall exceed twenty five feet (25') in height nor be less than ten feet (10') in
height.
4. No industrial sign shall be closer than three hundred feet (300') from another industrial sign on
the same lot, nor closer than three hundred feet (300') from a residential zoning district, nor
closer than twenty feet (20') from a right of way, nor closer than twenty five feet (25') from an
intersection of two (2) rights of way.
5. All permits for industrial signs are subject to the requirement that the owner and/or builder
thereof remove the sign in the event of an expansion of the existing town right of way.
D. Shopping Center Signs:
1. Shopping centers shall be allowed one freestanding sign not exceeding eighty (80) square feet
per street frontage. This sign shall identify the shopping center and/or individual shops only and
shall not be used for advertising products or services. Only shopping center signage may be
utilized as a freestanding sign if the criteria for the definition of "shopping center" are met as
defined in this chapter. If a freestanding sign identifies businesses in a shopping center, each
identification sign shall be construed as one of the allowable signs. Individual businesses in a
shopping center shall have no more than two (2) signs for any one building frontage, with a
maximum of three (3) total allowable signs per any one business. (Street frontage shall be
deemed to exist when the entire length of a building side faces and can be seen from a street or
mall.) Individual shops in a shopping center shall be allowed one and one-half (11/2) square feet
per linear foot frontage of business. A second such freestanding shopping center sign (of the
same or less size) shall be permitted for a lot whose street frontage measures greater than four
hundred feet (400'). Where such second sign is permitted, it shall be at least one hundred feet
(100') from the other sign. No more than two (2) shopping center signs for any one building
frontage, with a maximum of three (3) total shopping center signs shall be allowed. (Note the
height regulations of subsection 10-7-7G of this chapter.)
2. Out parcel pads of a shopping center shall adhere to the signage requirements of subsection A
of this section with a maximum of three (3) signs as specified for one street frontage.
E. "For Sale", Rent, Or Lease Signs: One temporary property sale, rental, or lease sign not exceeding
thirty two (32) square feet in area shall be allowed for each lot to which said sign refers. Such signs
shall not exceed twelve feet (12') in height (note the height regulations of subsection 10-7-7G of
this chapter), and shall be removed within twenty (20) days of the sale, rental, or lease of which
they refer.
F. Temporary Construction Signs: Construction signs shall be allowed, subject to the following
regulations:
1. One temporary sign, not to exceed thirty two (32) square feet in area shall be allowed for each
lot or parcel of property to designate that the same is to be occupied at a future date by the
business or concern designated thereon.
2. One nonilluminated temporary sign, not to exceed thirty two (32) square feet in area for each
contractor and thirty two (32) square feet for each subcontractor, shall be allowed for each lot or
parcel of property to designate that such contractor or subcontractor is engaged in the
construction or repair of a building on such lot or parcel of property.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 186/240
3. Each such temporary construction sign shall be removed from the lot or parcel of property upon
which the same is placed within twenty (20) days after any occupancy of the building
constructed on the premises, or in the event of repairs to the building, within twenty (20) days
after completion of such repairs.
4. No sign shall exceed twelve feet (12') in height. (Note the height regulations of subsection 10-7-
7G of this chapter.)
G. Parking Lot Signs: A maximum of one sign per street frontage advertising a public parking lot which
shall not exceed a total area of thirty two (32) square feet. (Note the height regulations of
subsection 10-7-7G of this chapter.)
H. Window Signs: Window signs which are temporary in nature such as "sale", "open" and "closed",
etc., and service identification signs such as "MasterCard", "Visa", "American Express", etc., shall
be allowed in addition to other sign allowances, provided such signs are placed on the inside of the
window and consist of no more than twenty five percent (25%) of any one window area.
I. Temporary Signs: Temporary signs shall be permitted in commercial and/or industrial zones for uses
specified in the above definition of a temporary sign.
1. A sign permit is required for all temporary signs.
2. Only one temporary sign shall be permitted per business for any one event at the business
location.
3. Temporary sign area shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in area. (Ord. 07-282, 1-23-
2007, eff. 2-23-2007)
Chapter 8
PERMIT PROCESSING; EVALUATION CRITERIA
10-8-1: SCOPE:
The following permits may be approved to allow the conduct of uses or the construction of structures
that are not otherwise permitted by this Ordinance. (Ord. 132, 6-10-1997)
10-8-2: TEMPORARY USE PERMITS:
A. General Conditions: Temporary use permits may be issued by the Town Manager for the following
and similar temporary uses:
1. Temporary buildings and uses related to construction; such as temporary real estate offices,
construction site temporary buildings, manufactured homes and travel trailers, building materials,
construction equipment, and lumber storage and cutting lumber needed during the period of
construction. Such temporary facilities may only be installed on the property being developed or
sold, and may only remain on the site during the period of construction or sale. Such facilities
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 187/240
may only be permitted for one year, although the Town Manager may, upon receipt of a written
request, approve subsequent extensions if the need for the facilities continues to exist. Such
temporary facilities must be removed from the subject property within ten (10) days of
completion of the construction, or sale, whichever occurs first. Such temporary facilities are also
subject to all setback, height, yard, parking and lot coverage regulations of the zone in which
they are located.
2. Temporary or seasonal events, such as, but not limited to, circuses, carnival grounds, Christmas
tree lots, pasture rotations, revivals, horse shows, rodeos, music festivals, used car lots, flea
markets, swap meets, and charity events: The Town Manager may, upon receipt of a written
request, approve zoning clearance for such uses.
B. Application Processing: Temporary use permit applications for buildings and related construction
must be accompanied by a site plan and the applicant's statements describing how the proposed
temporary use would:
1. Be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood.
2. Not seriously interfere with existing uses on adjacent properties, or with the purpose of the zone
in which it would be located.
3. Not impose an undue burden on any public improvements, facilities, utilities, or services
available to the area. (Ord. 132, 6-10-1997)
10-8-3: SITE PLANS:
A. General Provisions: Site plans not associated with any other permit may be approved by the Town
Manager.
B. Evaluation Criteria: Site plans may be approved by the Town Manager, provided the following
findings can be made:
1. That the effect of the development of the site on traffic conditions on abutting streets will not be
significant, or will be satisfactorily mitigated;
2. That the layout of the site with respect to locations and dimensions of signage, storm water and
surface water drainage facilities, water and wastewater facilities, vehicular and pedestrian
entrances, exits, drives, walkways, off-street parking areas, truck loading, internal circulation,
pavement surfacing, outdoor lighting, and provisions for the future extension of intersecting
streets is adequate and safe;
3. That the plan is appropriate in terms of the general silhouette and location of building mass on
the site, the exterior design in relation to adjacent structures in terms of height, bulk, area
openings, breaks in facades facing streets, line and pitches of roofs, placement of structures on
the property, and in relation to natural plant coverage, and surrounding development
neighborhood; and
4. Where dwelling units are involved, that adequate outdoor living space will be provided for each
dwelling unit proposed for the site. (Ord. 132, 6-10-1997)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 188/240
10-8-4: MODIFICATIONS TO NONCONFORMITIES:
A. General Requirements:
1. Except as otherwise required by law, a lot, structure, or use legally established before the
adoption of the Ordinance codified herein, and in conflict with the Ordinance codified herein, is
considered a legal nonconformity and may be maintained or continued unchanged.
2. Any legally existing lot which is nonconforming because of the width or area requirements of this
Ordinance may be used for any use permitted in the zone within which it lies, and any permitted
structure may be built upon it, provided the use or structure can be developed to meet all other
applicable regulations.
3. In other than criminal proceedings, the owner, occupant, or user shall have the burden of
showing that a nonconforming lot, use, or structure was lawfully established prior to the effective
date of the Ordinance codified herein.
B. Discontinuance:
1. Uses: Any lot or structure, or portion thereof, occupied by a nonconforming use, which is or
hereafter becomes vacant and remains unoccupied by the same nonconforming use for one
year, shall not be thereafter be occupied, except by a use which conforms to this Ordinance.
2. Structures: Any nonconforming structure destroyed by fire, explosion, act of God, or act of the
public enemy to the extent of seventy five percent (75%) or more of its value, according to an
appraisal thereof by competent appraisers, then and without further action by the Town, must be
discontinued and the future use thereof, from and after the date of such destruction, shall be
subject to all the regulations of this Ordinance.
C. Expansion: A nonconforming use or structure may be enlarged, extended, structurally altered,
changed or modified with approval of a permit by the Planning and Zoning Commission after a
public hearing has been held on the proposed action. Nonconforming uses and structures may be
expanded up to fifty percent (50%), provided such expansion can meet all applicable development
standards.
D. Permit Application; Processing: Applications for permits to modify a nonconforming use or structure
may be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission after a public hearing. Such
applications must include:
1. A scale drawn site plan showing the existing and proposed development of the property.
2. Statements demonstrating how the proposed modification will meet the criteria for such
modifications.
3. The names and addresses of all abutting property owners who will be notified by the Town of the
public hearing date for consideration of the application.
E. Permit Evaluation Criteria: A permit for a modification to a nonconformity may be approved by the
Planning and Zoning Commission if it can be shown that it will:
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 189/240
1. Assure:
a. Adequate control of disruptive activities both inside and outside of premises which might
prove a nuisance to surrounding properties;
b. Compatibility with existing surrounding uses and structures; and
2. Not result in:
a. Significant increases in vehicular or pedestrian traffic in adjacent areas;
b. Additional nuisances arising from the emission of odor, dust, gas, noise, vibration, smoke,
heat, or glare;
c. Contributions to the deterioration of the neighborhood, or the reduction of property values.
(Ord. 132, 6-10-1997)
10-8-5: PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS:
A. General Provisions: Planned area developments may be permitted in order to provide developers
with the flexibility to develop larger scale projects with special designs and mixes of uses to take
into consideration unique geographic characteristics, adjacent land uses, or other particular
community objectives related to the project site.
B. Permit Application; Processing: A permit for a planned area development (PAD) may be approved
by the town council in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 10-9-2 of this ordinance.
The town council may attach such conditions of approval to the plan that it deems necessary to
make the proposed plan acceptable to the town. Planned area developments must meet the use
limitation and development standards of the zone in which they are proposed, except that specific
development standards may be modified in the approved development plan. Planned area
development permit applications must be filed by all owners of the property to be developed and
must include:
1. A scale drawn site plan for the proposed project.
2. Evidence that the proposed project meets the following criteria:
a. The proposed use of the particular location is necessary or desirable to provide a service or
facility which will contribute to the general well being of the area.
b. The arrangement of structures and open space will assure that adjacent properties are not
significantly adversely affected.
c. The development is planned as one complex land use rather than as an aggregation of
individual and unrelated buildings and uses.
d. The property proposed for the planned development is adequate in size for the proposed
development to accomplish the purposes of this section.
C. Concept Plan: An applicant may choose to submit a concept plan for approval prior to submitting a
scale drawn site plan. In that case, the applicant will have to go through the same approval
process for the scale drawn site plan after approval of a concept plan.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 190/240
D. Special Development Regulations:
1. Uses: Planned developments may include those uses permitted in the zone within which they
are located, as well as neighborhood commercial uses.
2. Density: Up to a ten percent (10%) density bonus may be permitted for residential planned area
developments that provide particular benefits to the community.
E. Amendments: Amendments to approved planned area development plans may be made by
following the same procedures required for initial approval. (Ord. 132, 6-10-1997)
10-8-6: SPECIAL USES:
A. General Provisions: Permits for uses allowed only by special use permit may be approved by the
town council upon recommendation by the planning and zoning commission after a public hearing.
The planning and zoning commission may recommend and the town council may attach such
conditions of approval to a permit for a special use to make it meet the criteria noted below.
Special use permits may be approved for the noted uses under special conditions and in specific
locations, even though such uses may not be allowed under the general conditions of the zone in
which they will be located.
B. Application Process: Applications for special use permits must be accompanied by a scale drawn
site plan and the applicant's statements describing how the proposed use would meet the criteria
for approval of such a permit. Drainage and traffic plans and other information relating to the
proposed use may also be required at the discretion of the town. (Ord. 04-242, 1-11-2005)
C. Evaluation Criteria: No special use permit shall be issued unless evidence is available to indicate
that the proposed use will:
1. Be located, designed, and operated in a way that will be compatible with the livability and
appropriate future development of abutting properties and the surrounding neighborhood;
2. Not seriously interfere with existing uses on adjacent properties, with the character of the area,
or with the purpose of the zone in which it is proposed;
3. Not impose an undue burden on any public improvements, facilities, utilities, or services
available to the area.
D. Amendments And Expiration:
1. If a special use is abandoned or discontinued for one year, the permit for the use becomes void
without further action by the town and the use may not be reestablished without approval of a
new permit.
2. The granting of a special use permit does not exempt the applicant from compliance with other
relevant provisions of related ordinances. Failure to observe those provisions, or the conditions
of approval of the permit, are a violation of this ordinance.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 191/240
3. Amendments to special use permits are processed in the same way that applications for initial
permits are processed.
4. Uses which were permitted outright before adoption of the ordinance codified herein, but which
require a special use permit under this ordinance, may not be modified without approval of a
special use permit.
5. Special use permits, and the conditions which were imposed upon them when they were
approved, continue in force upon sale or transfer of ownership of the land, premises, or
operations, and all successors and assigns are required to observe the requirements made
when the permit was issued. (Ord. 132, 6-10-1997)
10-8-7: VARIANCES:
The town council may allow a departure from the development standards contained in this ordinance
upon recommendation by the planning and zoning commission, after a public hearing. A variance shall
not be authorized unless the town council finds, upon sufficient evidence, that:
A. Special Circumstances: There are special circumstances or conditions applying to the property
referred to in the application; and
B. Preexisting: Such special circumstances or conditions are preexisting and not created by the
property owner or applicant; and
C. Necessity: The authorizing of the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of
substantial property rights; and
D. Materially Detrimental: The authorizing of the variance will not be materially detrimental to persons
residing or working in the vicinity of the property, to the neighborhood, or the public welfare in
general. (Ord. 09-315, 4-28-2009)
Chapter 9
AMENDMENTS
10-9-1: INITIATION:
Zoning ordinance amendments may be initiated by the Town Council, the Planning and Zoning
Commission, Town staff, or, by any individual upon submittal of a completed application and payment
of the required application fee. (Ord. 132, 6-10-1997)
10-9-2: PROCEDURE:
Amendments to this Ordinance or to the Town Official Zoning Map may be approved by the Town
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 192/240
Council following the procedures described in Arizona Revised Statutes, section 9-462.04. Prior to the
Town Council's consideration of any such amendment, the Planning and Zoning Commission must
hold a public hearing and make a recommendation to the Town Council. (Ord. 132, 6-10-1997)
Title 11
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS1
Reserved
Footnotes - Click any footnote link to go back to its reference.
Footnote 1: A.R.S. title 9, chapter 4, article 6.2.
Chapter 1
ADMINISTRATIVE AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
11-1-1: AUTHORITY:
A. Statutory Provisions: Provisions of this Title are supplemental to those of Arizona Revised Statutes,
section 9-463 et seq., as amended, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended.
B. Land Subject To Provisions: Any land in the incorporated territory of the Town coming within the
definition of a subdivision as herein set forth shall be subject to all of the provisions of this Title.
C. Intent: The intent of these regulations is to provide for the orderly growth and harmonious
development of the Town, to secure adequate traffic circulation through properties having optimum
utility and livability; to secure adequate provisions for water supply and distribution, drainage and
flood control, sanitary sewerage and other health requirements; to ensure and facilitate provision of
sites for schools, recreation and other public purposes; to promote conveyance of land by accurate
legal description; and to establish procedures which will achieve these intents on a basis of mutual
understanding and equitable relationships between public and private interests. (1986 Code § 13-
1-1)
11-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this Section:
ASPHALT: A material made from bituminous materials and aggregates. See specifications in office of
Public Works Director.
ATTORNEY: The Town Attorney for the Town of Snowflake.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 193/240
COMMISSION: The Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Snowflake.
CONCRETE: A material made from Portland cement and natural or manufactured aggregate. See
specifications in the office of the Public Works Director.
EASEMENT: A grant by the owner for the use of land for specific conditions, uses and purposes.
50-YEAR FLOOD: A flood that has a two percent (2%) chance of occurring during any one year,
based upon criteria established by the Arizona Department of Water Resources. All hydrologic design
shall be in conformance with the current Arizona Department of Transportation hydrologic design
procedures.
HEALTH OFFICER: The Health Officer of Navajo County.
IMPROVEMENT: Such street work, sidewalks, utilities and flood-control devices on the land to be
used for public or private streets, highways and easements, as are necessary for the general use of
the residents in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic and drainage needs.
PERSON: Any of the following, either singly or combinations thereof, of individuals, firms,
copartnerships, joint ventures, associations, clubs, social clubs, fraternal organizations, corporations,
estates or trusts.
PUBLIC SALE: That point in the transfer or exchange of property at which time title is transferred or
upon close of escrow.
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT: The Public Works Department of the Town of Snowflake.
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR: An employee of the Town authorized to direct the Public Works
Department.
RECORDER: The Recorder of Navajo County.
RESUBDIVISION: The division, or the change in boundaries which have been previously fixed by a
recorded subdivision map, of tracts or parcels, resulting in four (4) or more additional lots, tracts or
parcels.
SERVICE AREA: An area provided for in the subdivision design at the rear of retail, commercial or
multi-family dwelling uses of sufficient size and accessibility to facilitate the provision of necessary
services.
STREETS AND ROADS: A. Alley: A secondary means of access to property located at the rear or
side of property.
B. Arterial Highways: Rural routes of County-wide importance, spaced at intervals consistent with
population density, to collect traffic from local roads and bring all developed rural areas within a
reasonable distance of a higher level of service than the local roads. Additional arterial roads
may provide direct service to the communities not directly served by the freeway and major
highway systems and to other locally important traffic generators.
C. Cul-De-Sac: A local street open at one end only with special provisions for turning around, and
the further extension of which is precluded by the subdivision design.
D. Expressway: A divided arterial highway for through traffic with full or partial control of access
and generally with grade separations at intersections.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 194/240
E. Freeway: Those roads and streets with full control access and which serve corridors of major
traffic flow not already served by the interstate freeways.
F. Highway: A right of way designated for vehicular traffic, including expressway, freeway, road or
street.
G. Highway, Belt: An arterial highway for carrying traffic partially or entirely around an urban area
or portion thereof for which the minimum right-of-way width shall be one hundred ten feet (110').
H. Highway, Divided: A highway with separated roadways for traffic in opposite directions.
I. Right Of Way: A general term denoting land, property or interest therein, usually in a strip
acquired for or devoted to a highway, road, street, alley or utility drainage.
J. Roads, Local: Roads primarily for access to abutting lands, such as farms, rural subdivisions or
other low intensity purposes.
K. Roadside Strip: The area adjoining the outer edge of the roadway or street and extending to the
right-of-way line, and in which sidewalks, approved plantings, approved utility structures and
bank slopes may be located.
L. Roadway: The portion of a street or highway, including shoulders and auxiliary lanes, for
vehicular travel.
M. Street Or Road, Frontage: A local street or road auxiliary to and located on the side of an
expressway, freeway, major highway or secondary highway for service to abutting property and
adjacent area for access control.
N. Streets, Collector: Those streets which provide for traffic movement within neighborhoods and
between major streets and local streets and for direct access to abutting property. The spacing
for collector streets is approximately one-half (1/2) mile, and they may also serve secondary
traffic generators, such as schools, parks and apartment areas with high population density.
O. Streets, Commercial: Access streets serving substantial traffic volumes on relatively short trips
in areas where land use is primarily retail sales or offices. These streets will normally be
constructed with highly developed illumination and drainage and provisions for parking and
pedestrian movements.
P. Streets, Commercial, Major: A street serving property intended for commercial use and carrying
through traffic.
Q. Streets, Dead-End: A local street open at one end only, with temporary special provisions for
turning around and which may be further extended into adjoining property.
R. Streets, Industrial: Access streets serving substantial traffic volumes and particularly high
proportions of commercial vehicles on areas where land use is predominantly industrial,
wholesale trade and goods movement.
S. Streets, Industrial, Major: Streets serving property intended for industrial use and carrying
through traffic.
T. Streets, Local: Those streets providing direct access to commercial, industrial or other abutting
land and for local traffic service to collector or major streets.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 195/240
U. Streets, Private: Streets serving only property within the subdivision, which is not dedicated to
public use, and to which access by the public is controlled by the subdivision design and by
either posting or gating.
V. Streets, Residential: Other streets in municipalities. In general, these streets provide access to
residential property.
W. Streets, Restricted: Short local streets where, due to unusual conditions as determined by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the Town Council, it is impractical to provide
a wider right of way.
SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT PLAN: A simple drawing of the proposed subdivision showing
streets, alleys, utility and drainage easements. Subdivisions will be shown in relation to existing and
planned streets within one thousand feet (1,000') of the subdivision prepared to scale.
SUBDIVISION (OR SUBDIVIDED LANDS): Improved or unimproved land or lands divided for the
purpose of financing, sale or lease, whether immediate or future, into four (4) or more lots, tracts or
parcels of land, or, if a new street is involved, any such property which is divided into two (2) or more
lots, tracts or parcels of land, or, any such property, the boundaries of which have been fixed by a
recorded plat, which is divided into more than two (2) parts. "Subdivision" also includes any
condominium, cooperative, community apartment, town house or similar project containing four (4) or
more parcels, in which an undivided interest in the land is coupled with the right of exclusive
occupancy of any unit located thereon, but plats of such projects need not show the buildings or the
manner in which the buildings or airspace above the property shown on the plat are to be divided.
"Subdivision" does not include the following:
A. The sale or exchange of parcels of land to or between adjoining property owners if such sale or
exchange does not create additional lots.
B. The partitioning of land in accordance with other statutes regulating the partitioning of land held
in common ownership.
C. The leasing of apartments, offices, stores or similar space within a building or trailer park, nor to
mineral, oil or gas leases.
UTILITIES: The installation of facilities, furnished for the use of the public: electricity, gas, sewer,
water, fire hydrants, steam, telephone, cable television or other facilities, owned and operated by any
person, firm, corporation, municipal department or board duly authorized by State or municipal
regulations.
VICINITY MAPS: A simple drawing of the subdivision showing its location in relation to established
Town, County, State or interstate highway drawn to legible scale. (1986 Code § 13-2; 1997 Code)
11-1-3: DUTIES OF PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION:
A. Specified: The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make investigations and reports on the
design and improvement of proposed subdivisions, and, subject to the provisions of this Title, shall
recommend to the Town Council proposed maps of subdivisions prepared and filed according to
this Title, to designate the kinds, nature and extent of the improvements to be installed in
subdivisions and shall report directly to the subdivider or owner, the action taken on the tentative
maps. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall then recommend its action to the Town Council,
who shall give its final recommendation of the preliminary subdivision plat. (1986 Code § 13-1-2)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 196/240
B. Advisors: There are professionals to act in an advisory capacity to the Planning and Zoning
Commission, and such advisors may consist of the following members: a registered professional
engineer as situations may require, Town Public Works Director, County public health officials,
County Assessor, Town Attorney and other agencies and authorities or other professional advisors
as may be necessary. The advisors shall meet as the matters to be considered by each may be
required. (1986 Code § 13-1-3)
11-1-4: APPEALS AND VARIANCES:
In cases of appeal or variances, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall: (1986 Code § 13-4-11)
A. Scope: Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is an error in any
order, requirement, decision, grant or refusal made by the any official in the administration of this
Title. (1986 Code § 13-4-11; 1997 Code)
B. Filing; Hearing: Appeals shall be made in writing and filed with the Planning and Zoning
Commission setting forth the particulars and the reason for the appeal. Hearing on such cases
shall be at such time as set by the Planning and Zoning Commission, and upon not less than
fifteen (15) days or more than thirty (30) days' notice to the applicant and officials concerned.
(1986 Code § 13-4-11)
C. Decision: Hear, approve, disapprove or approve with modifications, upon appeal, or upon
recommendation of the hearing officer in specific cases, such variance from the terms of these
regulations as will not be contrary to the public interest. (1986 Code § 13-4-11; 1997 Code)
D. Conditions: In granting a variance, the Planning and Zoning Commission may attach thereto such
conditions regarding the development of the subdivision as it may deem desirable in the interest
and furtherance of the purpose of the Title.
E. Findings: In order for the property to come within the provisions of this Section, it shall be
necessary that the Planning and Zoning Commission find the following facts with respect thereto:
1. That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting said property;
2. That the modification is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property
right;
3. The granting of the modification will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other
property in the vicinity;
4. No grant or variance shall be authorized unless the Planning and Zoning Commission
specifically finds that the condition or situation for which the variance is sought is not so typical
or recurrent in nature as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of a general regulation
for such conditions or situation.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 197/240
F. Presence At Meeting: The subdivider or his agent and his engineer shall be present at the meeting.
The subdivider's engineer may act as his agent.
G. Appeal To Council: An appellant may further appeal a decision or any conditions thereto, as
rendered by the Planning and Zoning Commission to the Town Council for the same reasons and
in like manner as prescribed in subsection A of this Section. (1986 Code § 13-4-11)
Chapter 2
STANDARDS OF DESIGN
11-2-1: CONFORMANCE:
A. Generally: All subdivisions shall conform to the following standards of subdivision design, except in
those cases where the Planning and Zoning Commission determines that the size or shape of the
land, topographical conditions or proposed land use make compliance therewith impractical. Upon
such determination, the Planning and Zoning Commission must make the further findings required
in Section 11-1-4 of this Title before any variation from these standards of subdivision design will
be allowed. (1986 Code § 13-3-1)
B. General Plan: All subdivision plans shall conform to the requirement of any plan adopted by the
Town as a general plan, land use plan, or element thereof, and to all other requirements
established by law, this Code or ordinance. (1986 Code § 13-3-2)
11-2-2: STREET DESIGN:
A. General:
1. Alignment To Existing Streets: The street system in the proposed subdivision shall relate in
alignment to the existing streets in the area adjoining the subdivision.
2. Consideration To Future Subdivision: The proposed street plan shall give consideration to the
future subdivision of adjoining unsubdivided property.
3. Serve Proposed Use Of Abutting Land: All streets shall be designed to serve the proposed use
of the land abutting them.
4. Improvements: If a subdivision borders on a street, the subdivider shall be required to improve
the streets in accordance with the requirements of the Public Works Department and the guide
for improvement of subdivision perimeter streets. (1986 Code § 13-3-3)
B. Special:
1. Access Along Major Highways: Along expressways and major highways, access to private
property shall be provided by means of one or more of the following:
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 198/240
a. Frontage road;
b. Street separate from the expressway or major highway by a tier of lots or by;
c. Cul-de-sac streets entered from a street other than the expressway or major highway.
2. Design Provisions: Design of streets shall make provision for railroads, parkways, expressways,
grade separations, flood control channels, irrigation facilities and hillside property. (1986 Code
§ 13-3-4)
C. Private: Private streets may be platted with the concurrence of the Town Council and the Planning
and Zoning Commission under the following conditions:
1. Satisfactory Easements: That easements satisfactory for meeting established minimum
standards of design and construction are provided;
2. Maintenance: That provision, satisfactory to the Public Works Department, is made for
maintenance of streets;
3. Access: That adequate provision is made for access of emergency vehicles, utility vehicles and
vehicles providing services such as garbage and trash pickup;
4. Declaration Of Responsibility: That clear statements be contained in both deed restrictions and
homeowner's association bylaws that those streets be declared private and remain the
permanent responsibility of the homeowner's association and be so posted;
5. Public Health And Welfare Maintained: That the health, safety and welfare of the public will not
be impaired thereby. (1986 Code § 13-3-5)
11-2-3: CURB AND GUTTER REQUIREMENTS:
The requirement for Schedule A1 subdivision improvement standards for curbs and gutters within a
proposed urban residential subdivision may be waived when the subdivision meets the following
criteria:
A. Grade: The subdivision road grade shall not be more than three percent (3%).
B. Flood Water: The design of the subdivision will preclude the flow of flood water on the roadways.
C. Pavement Border: A pavement border as per Standard 16A, "Pavement Border", Navajo County
Highway Department, or such treatment as may be approved by the Public Works Department.
(1986 Code § 13-3-6)
11-2-4: STREET AND HIGHWAY WIDTHS:
The minimum right of way for residential and secondary streets shall be as follows:
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 199/240
A. Area Service Highway: A highway so designated on the General Plan for which the minimum rightof-
way width shall be one hundred feet (100');
B. Collector Street, High Volume: The minimum right-of-way width shall be eighty feet (80');
C. Collector Street, Residential: The minimum right-of-way width shall be sixty (60) or more feet as
approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission;
D. Cul-De-Sac Streets: Shall not serve more than twenty (20) lots, or be longer than four hundred feet
(400'); roads shall be at least fifty feet (50') wide with a minimum of one hundred feet (100')
turnarounds;
E. Major Commercial Streets: Shall have a minimum right-of-way width of one hundred feet (100') to
provide for four (4) 12-foot traffic lanes, two (2) 8-foot parking lanes, one 16-foot center separation
for turning lanes and two (2) 10-foot roadside stripes;
F. Residential Streets: Shall have a minimum right of way of fifty feet (50') when no utilities are being
installed in the right of way. Where utilities are being installed with the road right of way, the
minimum width shall be increased to sixty feet (60'). (1986 Code § 13-3-7)
11-2-5: FRONTAGE ROADS:
The minimum right of way where frontage roads are involved shall be as follows:
A. Residential And Agricultural Uses: Roads serving residential and agricultural uses; an additional
forty feet (40');
B. Other Uses: Roads serving all other uses; an additional sixty feet (60'). (1986 Code § 13-3-8)
11-2-6: STREET GRADES:
A. Maximum: Street grades between six percent (6%) and ten percent (10%) will be approved only for
such distances as topographical conditions make lesser grades impractical. A grade exceeding ten
percent (10%) will be approved only when conclusive evidence shows that a lesser grade is
impractical.
B. Minimum: The minimum street grade should not be less than two-tenths of one percent (0.2%).
C. Flat Grades: Flat grades may be considered when adjacent lots or blocks are designed for ponding
storm water.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 200/240
D. Approval Required: All grades shall be approved by the Public Works Director. (1986 Code § 13-3-
9)
11-2-7: STREET ALIGNMENT:
A. Curves: Curves in residential streets in comparatively level locations shall have a preferred center
line radius of three hundred feet (300'), a minimum center line radius of two hundred feet (200')
and in steep hillside locations a minimum radius of one hundred fifty feet (150'). All other streets
and highways shall have a minimum center line radius of one thousand feet (1,000').
B. Jogs: Street jogs of less than one hundred fifty feet (150') shall not be permitted. (1986 Code § 13-
3-7)
11-2-8: INTERSECTIONS:
A. Connections: All street connections shall be at approximate right angles.
B. Corners: Street corners shall provide for a minimum twenty five foot (25') foot curb radius with the
property line corner radii designed so as not to reduce the widths of the roadside strips. (1986
Code § 13-3-11)
11-2-9: ALLEYS:
A. Width: Where alleys are not required by this Code, but are provided for in the subdivision design at
the rear of lots back to back, they shall be twenty feet (20') wide and improved.
B. Intersections: Alley intersections shall have corner cut-backs of not less than ten feet (10').
C. Cul-De-Sacs: Cul-de-sac alleys shall have a turn around at least forty five feet (45') in diameter.
Dead-end alleys are not permitted.
D. Paved Service Areas: Paved service areas may be substituted for alleys at the rear of lots intended
for retail business. Service areas used for refuse collection shall be adequately concealed. (1986
Code § 13-3-12)
11-2-10: PEDESTRIAN WAYS:
Paved pedestrian ways six feet (6') wide shall be provided approximately midway across blocks over
one thousand two hundred feet (1,200') in length or where deemed by the Planning and Zoning
Commission to be necessary for public safety and convenience. (1986 Code § 13-3-13)
11-2-11: BLOCKS:
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 201/240
Blocks shall not be more than one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') in length unless deemed
necessary for public safety and convenience. (1986 Code § 13-3-14)
11-2-12: LOTS DIVIDED BY BOUNDARY LINE:
A. Through Lots: Through lots are not desirable.
B. Prohibited: No lot shall be divided by a city, county, school district or other taxing agency boundary
line.
C. Lot Depth-To-Width Ratio: The depth-to-width ratio of the useable area of lots of less than one acre
should not be greater than three to one (3:1). (1986 Code § 13-3-15)
11-2-13: PUBLIC SERVICE INSTALLATIONS:
A. Line Location: Public service lines, to include electrical, telephone and cable TV facilities, shall be
located in accordance with the provisions of the Arizona Corporation Commission Order U-48, at
the front of lots or side lines of lots as necessary, in alleys or easements provided for that purpose;
unless requested differently by the public utility company.
B. Within Right Of Way: Electric or telephone service may be located within the road right of way,
provided they are installed underground and all transformers, pedestals, etc., extending above the
ground be located behind the right of way.
C. Lot Lines: Lot lines shall be so designated that easements will be located in practical locations and
will be suitable for the proposed use.
D. Street Lights: Street lights shall be required in high density commercial or residential areas. (1986
Code § 13-3-16)
11-2-14: DANGEROUS AREAS:
A. Restrictions: Areas which by reasons of geological or topographical conditions, unstable surface
conditions, ground water or seepage conditions, hazard of flood inundations, erosion or any other
condition deemed by the Planning and Zoning Commission to be dangerous or to create
unsatisfactory living conditions, shall not be subdivided except under restrictions as to the use of
all or any part thereof as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
B. Water Control; Basis: Design for the control of waters falling on a subdivision and storm waters
crossing a subdivision shall be based on a storm generating a 50-year flood. (1986 Code § 13-3-
17)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 202/240
11-2-15: PROPERTY EXCLUSIONS:
A. When Required: Portions of an adjacent property within the ownership of the subdivider shall not be
excluded from within the boundaries of a subdivision when needed or required for dedications or
improvement of any traffic, drainage or flood control facility, utility or other access use.
B. Size And Shape Conformance: Portions of property within the ownership of the subdivider, but not
included within the boundaries of a subdivision, shall be of such size and shape as to conform to
the provisions of this Title or any element of a general plan. (1986 Code § 13-3-18)
11-2-16: PERMANENT ACCESS:
A. Minimum: No subdivision shall be recorded unless two (2) permanent, public access streets, or
more as deemed necessary by the Planning and Zoning Commission, are provided from the
subdivision to a city, county, State or Federally-maintained road. Public access means a dedication
to the County or a permanent written easement from the State or Federal governments.
B. Dedication; Approval: Roads dedicated to the Town for the purpose of providing access shall be
approved by the Public Works Director prior to recording and final approval by the Town Council.
(1986 Code § 13-3-19)
11-2-17: FLOOD CONTROL FACILITIES:
A. Design: Flood control facilities including flood channels, flood easements and storm drains will be
designed to provide adequate protection against a 50-year flood and shall be approved by the
Public Works Director.
B. Streets; Highways: Streets and highways shall not be used as flood channels. (1986 Code § 13-3-
20)
11-2-18: PROTECTIVE FENCE:
A. Types Approved: Protective fence for subdivisions shall be a chainlink galvanized wire fence,
masonry wall or a protective wall or fence or other acceptable materials along any canal, drain,
highway or other feature deemed by the Planning and Zoning Commission or Public Works
Director to be hazardous to the occupants of the subdivision.
B. Abutting Specific Lands: All subdivisions abutting forest land, government land, range land or as
required by the Public Works Department shall be fenced.
C. Cattle Guards: Steel and concrete cattle guards shall be placed on all fence lines at all access
roads entering the subdivision from an opened or free area, as specified in subsection B of this
Section. (1986 Code § 13-3-21)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 203/240
11-2-19: MONUMENTS:
All subdivision monuments and stakes shall be in place at the conclusion of subdivision improvement
work. (1986 Code § 13-3-22)
Footnote 1: See subsection 11-6-2A of this Title.
Chapter 3
TENTATIVE MAPS
11-3-1: PRELIMINARY STEPS:
A. Consultation: In order to avoid unnecessary and costly revision, the subdivider or his engineer is
urged to consult early and informally with the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Public Works
Department and the County Health Department for advice and assistance before the preparation of
the preliminary plat and formal application for its approval. This will enable him to become
thoroughly familiar with various requirements and any regulations which might affect the area.
B. Tentative Map: The initial action in the development of a subdivision located in the incorporated
territory of the Town shall be in the preparation of a tentative map.
1. The size of the tentative maps shall be twenty four by thirty six inches (24 x 36") and shall be
drawn to a fifty (50), one hundred (100) or two hundred foot (200') to the inch scale, whichever is
most appropriate to clearly present necessary details.
2. The tentative map or maps shall show or be accompanied by such data as are specified in
Sections 11-3-5 through 11-3-8 of this Chapter. (1986 Code § 13-4-1)
11-3-2: SUBMITTAL:
A. Filing; Distribution: The subdivider shall file ten (10) copies of the preliminary map or maps, along
with the map checking fee, in the office of the Town Clerk. The Town Clerk shall cause to be
transmitted copies of the preliminary plat to the Planning and Zoning Commission, Public Works
Department, the County Health Department and all interested utilities. The officials shall review the
plat for matters within their jurisdiction and promptly report their recommendations to the Planning
and Zoning Commission, who shall check the plat for conformity to this Chapter.
B. Date: The date of filing will be a minimum of ten (10) days prior to the date the subdivider desires a
formal hearing by the Planning and Zoning Commission. (1986 Code § 13-4-2; 1997 Code)
11-3-3: DATE OF FILING FIXED:
The date of filing a preliminary map shall be fixed as the date on which all of the maps and information
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 204/240
required by this Chapter have been filed, as determined by the staff, and the required fees have been
paid. (1986 Code § 13-4-3)
11-3-4: MAP CHECKING FEE:
The tentative map shall be accompanied by a map checking fee. The map checking fee shall be
shown on a separate fee schedule as determined by the Town Council. (1986 Code § 13-4-4)
11-3-5: IDENTITY OF SUBDIVIDER:
When submitting the tentative map, the subdivider shall certify in writing to one of the following:
A. That he is the record owner of the property;
B. That the identified record owner of the property consents in writing to the filing of the map. (1986
Code § 13-4-5)
11-3-6: INFORMATION REQUIRED:
The following information shall be delineated on the tentative map, except those items determined by
the staff as not being pertinent to a particular tract:
A. Title of map and legal description of property.
B. Name and address of owner and subdivider.
C. Name and address of person preparing map.
D. Approximate acreage and overall dimensions.
E. North point, scale and date.
F. Subdivision boundary line and vicinity map.
G. Names, book and page number of adjoining subdivision.
H. Names, locations and widths of adjacent streets.
I. Identifying landmarks and existing structures, both above and below around.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 205/240
J. Proposed names, locations and widths of streets.
K. Approximate grades of proposed and existing streets.
L. Streets and rights of way providing permanent access to the property.
M. Excavations within two hundred feet (200') of the subdivision.
N. Approximate radii of curves.
O. Widths of alleys and easements.
P. Names and addresses of utility companies and locations of existing and proposed public utilities.
Q. Elevations of sewer at proposed main connections.
R. Existing culverts and drain pipes.
S. Watercourses and channels including proposed facilities for control of storm waters.
T. Land subject to overflow and inundations for flood hazard.
U. Railroads and other rights of way.
V. Lands and parks to be dedicated to public use.
W. Dimension of reservations.
X. Proposed lot lines and approximate dimensions.
Y. Adjoining property and lot lines.
Z. Contours with maximum interval as follows:
Slope Interval
0 - 2% 1'
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 206/240
3 - 9% 2'
10% Plus 5'
AA. Existing use of property immediately surrounding tract.
BB. Source of water supply, size and location of water lines.
CC. Method of sewage disposal.
DD. Method of fire protection. (1986 Code § 13-4-6)
11-3-7: SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION:
Reports and written statements on the following matters shall accompany the tentative map:
A. Development Plan: Subdivision development plan when the subdivision is larger than forty (40)
acres or is developed in phases.
B. Water Service And System: A written statement from the Navajo County Health Officer stating that:
1. A water company under permit has agreed in writing to serve all lots in the subdivision; or
2. The subdivider has an acceptable well and water delivery system.
C. Solid Waste Disposal And Sewage: A written statement from the Navajo County Health Officer
stating the type of solid waste disposal and sewage disposal that will be permitted. To aid in this
determination, the Health Officer will require soil percolation tests or other pertinent information. If
sanitary sewer facilities and a sewage disposal plant are proposed, the method by which the
operation and maintenance will be accomplished and financed.
D. Street Improvement: Type of street improvement.
E. Utilities: Utilities to be installed.
F. Storm Water Control: Proposed method of control of storm water, including data as to grade and
dimension.
G. Covenants: Protective covenants proposed to be recorded.
H. Private Street Maintenance: If private streets or other ways of necessity are proposed, the method
by which their maintenance will be accomplished and financed.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 207/240
I. Tree Planting: Proposed tree planting if within public rights of way.
J. Wells; Statement: Where the minimum lot size of all lots is in excess of two and one-half (21/2) net
acres in area, the subdivider shall not be required to have a water company under permit or to
furnish water to each lot, but shall furnish a statement of quantity and quality of any wells existing
on the property or the estimated cost and feasibility of drilling wells if none exist.
K. Engineer Certification: The name and address of the professional engineer who will provide the
certification of completed improvements and inspection pursuant to Section 11-6-4 and subsection
11-6-9B of this Title.
L. Other Required Information: Such other supplemental information as the Planning and Zoning
Commission may require. (1986 Code § 13-4-7)
11-3-8: BOUNDARY SURVEY:
A. Required: A boundary survey of the subdivision including all courses and distances necessary to
compute a closure on the preliminary plat.
B. Data: Sufficient data to prove the method by which the boundary was determined, including a
description of all corners found or set, adjoining maps or property lines and records. (1986 Code
§ 13-4-8)
11-3-9: CORNER STAKES:
Upon filing a tentative map, the subdivider shall immediately place a conspicuous stake and flag at
each corner, angle point to curve point of the property proposed to be subdivided. Said stake shall
extend at least three feet (3') above the ground, except where the corner is on a roadway. (1986 Code
§ 13-4-9; 1997 Code)
11-3-10: PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION ACTION:
Within sixty (60) days after the date of filing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall approve,
conditionally approve or disapprove said map and the action of the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall be noted on two (2) copies of the tentative plat. Conditions resulting in conditional approval or
disapproval will be noted and referenced. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider and the other
retained for the Planning and Zoning Commission's records. (1986 Code § 13-4-10)
11-3-11: TIME LIMITS FOR ACTION:
The time limits for acting and reporting on tentative maps as specified in this Chapter may be
extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the Town Council or Planning and Zoning
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 208/240
Commission as the case may be. If no action is taken within these time limits, the tentative map as
filed shall be deemed to be approved and it shall be the duty of the Planning and Zoning Commission
to certify the approval. (1986 Code § 13-4-12)
11-3-12: RESUBDIVISION; TENTATIVE MAP REQUIRED:
A tentative map showing data and information required by this Chapter shall be required when the
resubdivision of lots, tracts or parcels previously recorded as a subdivision or portion of a subdivision
resulting in four (4) or more additional lots, tracts or parcels. (1986 Code § 13-4-13)
11-3-13: REFILING FOLLOWING DISAPPROVAL:
In the event that a tentative map is disapproved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, a new
tentative map of the same area or portion thereof may be filed within six (6) months of the date of
disapproval. A refiling after six (6) months shall be treated as a new submission. (1986 Code § 13-4-
14)
Chapter 4
FINAL MAPS
11-4-1: PREPARATION:
A. Compliance With Tentative Map: After approval of a tentative map by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, the subdivider may, within one year, cause a final map of the subdivision or any part
thereof to be prepared in accordance with a completed survey of the subdivision and in compliance
with the approved tentative map within the provisions of this Chapter.
B. Monuments: The survey and final map shall be made by a registered civil engineer or licensed land
surveyor who shall set sufficient durable monuments so that another engineer or surveyor may
readily retrace the survey. He shall also set such additional monuments as may be required by the
Public Works Department. (1986 Code § 13-5-1)
11-4-2: CONFORMANCE TO STANDARDS OF DESIGN:
The final map shall conform in all respects to the standards of design set forth in Chapter 2 of this
Title, unless any nonconformance has been specifically shown on the approved tentative map and
approved in the conditions of approval attached. (1986 Code § 13-5-2)
11-4-3: STREET NAMES:
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 209/240
Streets shown on the final map shall be named as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission
and the Town Council. (1986 Code § 13-5-3)
11-4-4: MAP REQUIREMENTS:
A. Scale: The final map shall be clearly and legibly delineated upon tracing material of acceptable
quality. All lines, letters, figures, dedications, certificates, acknowledgements and signatures shall
be made in black, waterproof India ink or equal. The net size of each sheet shall be twenty four by
thirty six inches (24 x 36"). A marginal line shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving
an entirely blank margin of one-half inch (1/2"), except the left margin which shall be two inches
(2"). The scale of the map shall be large enough to show all details of the subdivision or part
thereof to be recorded and enough sheets shall be used to accomplish this end.
B. Numbering Sheets: If more than one sheet is required, each sheet shall be numbered, the relation
of one sheet to another clearly shown and the number of sheets shall be set forth on each sheet.
C. Scale, North Point, Sheet Number: The scale, north point and sheet number shall be shown on
each sheet of the final map. The scale shall be fifty (50), one hundred (100) or two hundred feet
(200') to the inch.
D. Map Notes: A statement labeled "Map Notes" shall be shown on one sheet of the final map. Such
statements shall include the basis of bearings, what monuments were found, what monuments and
points were set, a key to symbols and abbreviations and such other information deemed to be
necessary.
E. Surveys: Surveys made in preparation of final maps shall be made in accordance with standard
practices and principles of surveying. A traverse of the boundaries of the subdivision and all lots
and blocks shall close within a limit of error of one foot (1') in twenty five thousand feet (25,000').
(1986 Code § 13-5-4)
11-4-5: DATA REQUIRED:
The following additional data shall be shown on each final map:
A. Dates: Dates of survey and preparation of map.
B. Street Names And Locations: Locations and names, without abbreviations, of all proposed streets
and alleys; proposed public areas and easements; adjoining streets.
C. Lot Dimension: Dimensions of all lots; lots containing one acre or more shall show net acreage to
the nearest hundredth of an acre. Ditto marks shall not be used.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 210/240
D. Street Lines And Lengths: Center lines of all streets and lengths, tangent radius and central angle
or radial bearings of all curves; and the bearings of radial lines to each lot corner of a curve; the
width of each street, the width of the portion being dedicated and the width of existing dedication.
E. Line Bearing And Length: Sufficient data to determine readily the bearing and length of each line.
F. Survey Control Points: Suitable primary survey control points.
G. Adjacent Subdivision Ties: Ties to and recording references to adjacent subdivisions and section
corners, or two (2) known monuments as appropriate.
H. Easement Data: Center line data, width and side lines of all easements to which the subdivision is
subject. Distances and bearings on the side lines of lots which are cut by an easement shall be
shown as to indicate clearly the actual lengths of the lot's lines. The width of the easements and
the lengths and bearings of the lines thereof and sufficient ties to locate the easements definitely
with respect to the subdivisions shall be shown. The easement shall be clearly labeled and
identified and, if already of record, proper reference to the records given. Easements being
dedicated shall be so indicated in the certification of dedication. Easements shall be shown on the
map by broken lines.
I. Boundary Evidence: Clear indication of stakes, monuments or other evidence on the ground to
determine the boundaries of the subdivision. (1986 Code § 13-5-5)
11-4-6: CENTER LINES AND BOUNDARIES:
Wherever the surveyor has established the center line of a street or alley, that data shall be
considered in making the surveys and in preparing the final map, and all monuments found shall be
indicated and proper reference made to field books or maps of public record relating to the
monuments. If the points were reset by ties, that fact shall be stated. The, final map shall show Town
and County boundaries adjoining the subdivision. (1986 Code § 13-5-6)
11-4-7: LOT DESCRIPTION AND IDENTIFICATION:
A. Numbering: Lots shall be numbered consecutively on each final plat with no omissions or
duplications. Each lot shall be shown in its entirety on one sheet. Lots used for streets, alleys or
recreational purposes shall be lettered.
B. Corner Marking: All lot corners shall be marked with pipe or iron rods and marked with the
engineer's or surveyor's number before recording of final plat; minimum: pipe one-half inch (1/2") ID
x fifteen inches (15"), deformed rod one-half inch (1/2") x fifteen inches (15"). (1986 Code § 13-5-7)
11-4-8: FILING; ACCOMPANYING DOCUMENTS:
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 211/240
Two (2) mylar copies of the final map shall be filed for checking in the office of the Town Clerk and
shall be accompanied by the following:
A. Distribution: Five (5) positive prints thereof, which shall be distributed as follows:
1. Two (2) to the Planning and Zoning Commission;
2. Two (2) to the Public Works Department; and (1986 Code § 13-5-8)
3. One to the County Health Officer.
4. Water and sewer designs, where applicable, will be submitted to the Arizona Department of
Environmental Quality (ADEQ).
B. Improvement Plans And Specifications: Plans and specifications of the proposed improvements,
including street, sewer, electric and water utilities, drainage, flood control and improvements
meeting adopted Town construction standards and specifications. (1986 Code § 13-5-8; 1997
Code)
C. Covenants: A copy of the protective covenants to be recorded. Said covenants shall provide for the
raising and expenditure of funds necessary for the maintenance of any private streets shown on
the map.
D. Water Distribution System: Two (2) mylar copies and three (3) positive prints of a map showing the
proposed water distribution system, signed by the Public Works Director. The distribution system
shall comply with all applicable State and County regulations. (1986 Code § 13-5-8)
11-4-9: CHECKING BY TOWN STAFF:
After issuance of a receipt for the final map and accompanying supplemental data, the staff will
examine it as to sufficiency of affidavits and acknowledgements, correctness of surveying data,
mathematical data and computations and such other matters as require checking to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. (1986 Code § 13-5-9)
11-4-10: CERTIFICATES AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS:
The final map shall show all certificates and acknowledgements. They shall appear on the final map,
or they may be combined on a separate linen of the same size on the final map. (1986 Code § 13-5-
10)
11-4-11: EXTENSION OF TIME:
A. Authority; Appeal: Upon application by the subdivider, an extension for submission of the final map
of up to one year may be granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission. In the event the
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 212/240
Planning and Zoning Commission denies a subdivider's application for extension, the subdivider
may appeal to the Town Council.
B. Recording Time Limit: Failure to record a final map within one year from the approval or conditional
approval of the tentative map, or any extension of approval of the final map granted by the Town
Council or Planning and Zoning Commission, shall terminate all proceedings. The Town Council or
Planning and Zoning Commission may approve an additional extension of time for recording the
final map if circumstances exist beyond the control of the subdivider.
C. Application: Any application of a subdivider for such extension of time for the recording of a final
map shall be made in writing to the Planning and Zoning Commission not less than thirty (30) days
prior to the expiration of the one year allowed. All persons appearing as owners or authorized
agents of the subdivision shall execute the request for extension. (1986 Code § 13-5-11)
11-4-12: RESUBDIVISION MAP:
A final map showing data required by Section 11-4-5 of this Chapter shall be submitted when the
resubdivision of lots, tracts or parcels previously recorded as a subdivision or portion of the
subdivision results in four (4) or more additional tracts or parcels. (1986 Code § 13-5-12)
11-4-13: REVERSION TO ACREAGE MAP:
A. Marking: Maps filed for the purpose of reverting subdivided lands to acreage shall be conspicuously
marked under the number, "The Purpose of this Map is a Reversion to Acreage".
B. Procedures; Certificates: Procedures and certificates for the purpose of reversion to acreage may
be obtained from the Planning and Zoning Commission. (1986 Code § 13-5-13)
11-4-14: APPROVAL:
A. Conditions: No record of survey or plat for record may be filed until all improvements are completed
(see Section 11-6-9 of this Title) or a bond equal to their value has been posted with the Town
Clerk, or a trust agreement filed with a required completion upon sale of sixty percent (60%) of the
lots or four (4) years, whichever shall occur first.
B. Endorsement: When the final map is found to be in the correct form and the certificates and
acknowledgements are sufficient, and the improvements certified as complete (see subsection A of
this Section), the Planning and Zoning Commission shall endorse their approval and transmit it,
together with the deed restrictions, to the Town Council for their approval and recording. (1986
Code § 13-5-14)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 213/240
Chapter 5
DEDICATION AND IMPROVEMENTS
11-5-1: DEDICATION:
A. Offer: All streets, highways, alleys and parcels of land shown on the final map and intended for any
public use shall be offered for dedication. Such dedications shall be free of all and any
encumbrances incurred subsequent to the date of filing of the tentative map.
B. Private Streets Indicated: The fact that any streets and ways are private shall be clearly indicated
on the map.
C. Special Easement Dedications: When in the opinion of the Planning and Zoning Commission the
location of the proposed subdivision is such that a significant impact may develop between future
residents of the subdivision and existing land uses in the vicinity, appropriate special easements
dedicated to adjacent property owners may be required of the subdivider prior to recording of the
final map. (1986 Code § 13-6-1)
11-5-2: IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS:
All improvements shall be according to the subdivision improvement standards as established in
Chapter 6 of this Title, except as provided herein. (1986 Code § 13-6-2)
11-5-3: IMPROVEMENT PLANS:
A. Required: All improvements made, constructed or installed in subdivisions shall be according to full
and detailed plans and specifications as approved in writing by the Public Works Director prior to
the commencement of said improvement work.
B. Approval: Such plans and specifications as required by the Public Works Department shall be
submitted to and shall be approved by the Public Works Department before submitting the final
map to the Town Council.
C. Applicability: This Section shall include all work done in the subdivision whether such work is
required by the Town or is done at the option of the subdivider.
D. Dead-End Streets: Plans for improvements of streets which temporarily dead end at the subdivision
boundary shall include data sufficient to determine that the future extensions of such streets are
feasible where necessary. (1986 Code § 13-6-3)
11-5-4: EVIDENCE OF TITLE:
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 214/240
At the time the final map is filed in the office of the Town Clerk, as provided in Section 11-4-8 of this
Title, it shall be accompanied by the evidence of title, which shall be in the form of a certificate of title,
a preliminary title report or a policy of title insurance issued by a title company authorized by the laws
of the State to write the same, showing the names of persons having any interest and any record title
interest in the land to be subdivided, together with the nature of their respective interests therein.
(1986 Code § 13-6-4)
11-5-5: CONSTRUCTION AND INSPECTION:
All improvements in the public right of way shall be constructed under the general inspection and
approval of the Town. Primary responsibility for control of the quality of the improvements remains with
the subdivider, and he shall, upon completion of the improvement, provide a certificate from a
registered professional engineer that all work has been completed in accordance with approved plans
and specifications as specified in Chapter 6 of this Title. It should not be expected that inspection by
representatives of the Town will in any way eliminate the need for regular inspection during the entire
construction period by the subdivider's project engineer. The Public Works Department shall be
notified at least three (3) working days prior to restart of construction. (1986 Code § 13-6-5)
11-5-6: SOIL AND MATERIALS TESTS:
The Public Works Department shall have the right to enter upon the sites of improvements for the
purpose of inspecting them and shall be furnished with soil and materials tests by a competent
laboratory as may be required to determine the acceptability of such materials. The costs of these
tests shall be borne by the subdivider. (1986 Code § 13-6-6)
11-5-7: PROTECTIVE COVENANTS AND RESTRICTIONS:
A copy of the recorded protective covenants and restrictions will be provided for the Planning and
Zoning Commission upon recordation of the final map. (1986 Code § 13-6-7)
Chapter 6
IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
11-6-1: GENERAL:
A. Improvements installed in subdivisions shall be constructed in full conformance to this title and to
the subdivision construction standards of the county of Navajo.
B. In the absence of a standard for an improvement proposed by the public works department, the
department may establish a standard in keeping with good construction and engineering practice.
(1986 Code § 13-7-1)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 215/240
11-6-2: LOT SCHEDULES:
A. Schedule A; Less Than One Acre:
1. Streets: The minimum improvement for subdivision streets as required by this schedule are
hereby established when included in the proposed subdivision design at the option of the
planning and zoning commission and the public works director.
a. Collector street _ residential area with sixty feet (60') of right of way: concrete curbs and
gutters with forty four feet (44') between curbs (two 12-foot lanes, two 10-foot lanes, asphalt
paving).
b. Frontage street _ or road with forty feet (40') of right of way: concrete curbs and gutters with
twenty eight feet (28') between curbs (two 14-foot lanes), restricted parking or with thirty feet
(30') between curbs, (two 11-foot lanes, one 8-foot lane); two feet (2') separation from highway
right of way; asphalt pavement.
c. Major commercial street _ with one hundred feet (100') of right of way: concrete curbs and
gutters with eighty feet (80') between curbs (four 12-foot lanes, two 8-foot lanes, one 16-foot
left turn lane); five foot (5') concrete sidewalk adjacent to curbs; asphalt pavement.
d. Residential streets _ with fifty feet (50') of right of way: concrete curbs and gutters with thirty
eight feet (38') to the back of the curbs (two 11-foot lanes, two 8-foot lanes); asphalt
pavement.
e. Street name signs and traffic control signs.
f. Barricade at end of dead end street may be required.
2. Curbs And Gutters: Different types of curbs, gutters or combination of the two (2) may be
required to accommodate drainage issues. If any modification is made to the typical detail
outlined in the MAG specification manual (detail #220) approval must be obtained by the town
engineer or the public works director.
B. Schedule B; One Acre Or More, Less Than Two And One-Half:
1. Streets: The minimum improvements for subdivision streets as required by this schedule are
hereby established when included in proposed subdivision design, at the option of the planning
and zoning commission and the public works director.
a. Collector street _ residential area with sixty feet (60') or eighty feet (80') of right of way as
approved by the public works director; with concrete retainer curbs and gutters, thirty six feet
(36') of asphalt pavement plus shoulders.
b. Frontage street _ or road with forty feet (40') of right of way: thirty two feet (32') of asphalt
pavement; concrete curbs and gutters; two feet (2') separation from major highway right of
way.
c. Major commercial street _ with one hundred feet (100') of right of way: concrete curbs and
gutters with eighty feet (80') between curbs (four 12-foot lanes, two 8-foot lanes, one 16-foot
left turn lane); five foot (5') concrete sidewalks adjacent to curbs; asphalt pavement.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 216/240
d. Residential streets _ with fifty feet (50') of right of way: concrete curbs and gutters, twenty six
feet (26') of asphalt pavement plus shoulders.
e. Street name signs and traffic control signs.
f. Barricade at end of dead end streets may be required.
2. Curbs And Gutters: Different types of curbs, gutters or combination of the two (2) may be
required to accommodate drainage issues. If any modification is made to the typical detail
outlined in the MAG specification manual (detail #220) approval must be obtained by the town
engineer or the public works director.
C. Schedule C; Lots More Than Two And One-Half Acres:
1. Streets: The minimum improvements and right of way for subdivision streets as required by this
schedule are hereby established as follows:
a. Collector street _ residential area with sixty feet (60') or sixty six feet (66') of right of way as
approved by the public works director: concrete curbs and gutters, twenty four feet (24') of
asphalt pavement plus shoulders.
b. Frontage Street _ or road with forty feet (40') of right of way: concrete curbs and gutters,
twenty four feet (24') of asphalt pavement, four foot (4') shoulders; two feet (2') separation
from major highway right of way.
c. Major commercial street _ with one hundred feet (100') of right of way: concrete curbs and
gutters with eighty feet (80') between curbs (four 12-foot lanes, two 8-foot lanes, one 16-foot
left turn lane); five foot (5') concrete sidewalks adjacent to curbs; asphalt pavement.
d. Residential streets _ with fifty feet (50') of right of way: concrete curbs and gutters, twenty four
feet (24') of BST pavement plus shoulders.
e. Street name signs and traffic control signs.
f. Barricade at end of dead end streets may be required.
2. Waiver: In the event the requirement for pavement, curbs and gutters is waived by the planning
and zoning commission and the town council, streets shall be installed to a width and of a
material as approved by the public works director. (Ord. 01-194, 5-22-2001)
11-6-3: ACCEPTANCE OF STREETS AND ROADS:
Subdivision streets will be accepted for maintenance by the town only when they are constructed,
without cost to the town, to meet the minimum Navajo County construction standards and the
minimum standards as set forth in this title. (1986 Code § 13-7-5)
11-6-4: DOMESTIC WATER SUPPLY:
A. Less Than Two And One-Half Acres: Subdivisions having lots of less than two and one-half (21/2)
net acres in area shall be provided with a complete water distribution system which will adequately
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 217/240
serve the subdivision in the opinion of the town.
B. More Than Two And One-Half Acres: In subdivisions having lots of more than two and one-half
(21/2) acres, the subdivider shall provide a statement as to the availability of a water source and
the anticipated costs to the buyer of obtaining such water. (1986 Code § 13-7-6)
11-6-5: FIRE PROTECTION:
Fire hydrants and a fire distribution system shall be provided in accordance with the recommendations
or requirements of the town and its fire department. (1986 Code § 13-7-7)
11-6-6: SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
A. Connection To Public System: Subdivisions shall be provided with a sanitary sewer connection to
each lot when the nearest boundary of the subdivision is within one thousand four hundred feet
(1,400') of a public sanitary sewer system.
B. Unavailability: Whenever a public sanitary sewer system is not available to a subdivision, proper
provision shall be made for the disposal of sewage in accordance with the standards and
requirements of the Navajo County health department. (1986 Code § 13-7-8)
11-6-7: FLOOD PROTECTION AND TRACT DRAINAGE:
A. Minimum Facilities: The minimum facilities for the control of flood waters crossing, flowing into or
falling upon a subdivision shall be designed on the basis of a 50-year flood.
B. Streets And Highways: Streets and highways shall not be used as flood channels. (1986 Code
§ 13-7-9)
11-6-8: PROTECTIVE FENCE:
Protective fence requirements for subdivisions are established as a five foot (5') chainlink galvanized
wire, masonry, wood or other acceptable material for fencing, along any canal, drain, expressway or
other feature deemed by the planning and zoning commission or the public works department to be
hazardous. (1986 Code § 13-7-10)
11-6-9: SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Completion: All streets, improvements, stakes and monuments shall be completed and in place or a
bond, trust, improvement district or some other appropriate security as approved by the town
council shall be provided to ensure completion of the subdivision improvements prior to the sale of
any land or lots appurtenant to such streets and improvements.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 218/240
B. Certificate: Following the completion of all required improvements including, but not limited to, lot
staking, survey monuments, streets, drainageways, public water supply, water distribution, sanitary
sewer, sewage disposal and solid waste disposal facilities, a certificate shall be executed by a
professional engineer registered to practice in the state, certifying that said improvements have
been made under his direction in accordance with the provisions of these subdivision regulations
and in accordance with the plans of such as approved by the public works department upon which
approval of the final plat was based and shall be submitted to the public works director. (1986
Code § 13-7-11)
11-6-10: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
The minimum improvements for streets as shown in this title evolve from the county of Navajo,
Arizona, construction standards and specifications as adopted. Changes, modifications or revisions of
the construction standards shall cause the subdivision improvement standards to change accordingly.
(1986 Code § 13-7-12)
Chapter 7
ENFORCEMENT; LIABILITY
11-7-1: BUILDING PERMIT; WHEN NOT ISSUED:
No building permit shall be issued for the erection or use of any structure or part thereof to be located
in a subdivision, that is not in accordance with the provisions of this Title. Any such permit issued shall
be void and of no effect. (1986 Code § 13-8-1)
11-7-2: LEGAL PROCEEDINGS; ABATEMENT:
Any building or structure erected or maintained on a lot or parcel of land that is subject to this Title,
created or established after November 9, 1983, that is contrary to the provisions of this Title shall be
and same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance, and the Town Attorney shall, upon
order of the Town Council, immediately commence action or proceedings for the abatement, removal
and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law; and shall take such other steps, and shall
apply to such court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such building
or structure. (1986 Code § 13-8-2)
11-7-3: REMEDIES CUMULATIVE:
All remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. The conviction and
punishment of any person hereunder shall not relieve such person from the responsibility of correcting
prohibited conditions or removing prohibited buildings, structures or improvements, nor prevent the
enforced correction or removal thereof. (1986 Code § 13-8-3)
11-7-4: LIABILITY:
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 219/240
No liability shall be created on the part of the Town or any district, office, department or employee
thereof for any damages that may result from the application of these regulations or any administrative
decision thereunder. (1986 Code § 13-8-4)
Title 12
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT
Reserved
Footnotes - Click any footnote link to go back to its reference.
Footnote 1: A.R.S. title 9, chapter 4, article 6.2.
Chapter 1
SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS
12-1-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the residents of
Snowflake by establishing uniform requirements and standards for industrial uses within the Town.
(Ord. 108, 3-8-1994)
12-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires:
DEVELOPER OR INDUSTRIAL USER: Any corporation, business, company, partnership, sole
proprietorship or any other entity or individual which establishes or maintains any of the industrial uses
or related uses listed under Section 12-1-3 of this Chapter.
TOWN ENGINEER: The Town Engineer of the Town of Snowflake or his designee.
USE: Any of the industrial uses or related uses listed under Section 12-1-3 of this Chapter. (Ord. 108,
3-8-1994)
12-1-3: USES REQUIRING PLAN:
A. Filing: The Town Engineer shall require the filing of a site plan if such a plan has not previously
been submitted by the developer. If a site plan has been previously filed, the Town Engineer may
require the developer to submit an updated site plan.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 220/240
B. Uses Specified: A site plan, as described hereafter in Section 12-1-4 of this Chapter, shall be
required for any of the following uses or any related uses:
1. Ball bearing manufacturing.
2. Boxes or cabinets, manufacturing.
3. Chocolate and cocoa products manufacturing.
4. Feed (grains) manufacturing and processing.
5. Flour and grain mills, storage and elevators.
6. Fuel distributing station, gasoline (bulk plant).
7. Ice manufacturing and storage.
8. Paint and varnish manufacturing.
9. Septic tank, cesspool service or cleaning equipment yard.
10. Wood products, manufacturing, bulk.
11. Meat packing and smoking; slaughtering prohibited except for rabbits and poultry.
12. Petroleum products, packaging and storage, including butane distributors, subject to the
provisions of the Uniform Fire Code.
13. Automobile parts, supplies, salvage or wrecking.
14. Cement and paving materials mixing plant.
15. Manufacture, fabrication or assembly, including contractor's facilities, of building materials and
construction equipment; acoustical materials, air conditioners, heating and ventilating
equipment, bolts, cement and concrete products, ceramics, decorative metals and wrought iron,
doors, drills, fences, fire escapes, hardware and machine and road building equipment, plaster,
plastics, plumbing supplies and sewer pipes, pumps, scaffolds, screens, screws, tile, welding
equipment, windows; or other similar items.
16. Exterminator and insect poison, manufacturing.
17. Foundry for casting lightweight, nonferrous metal, not causing noxious odors or fumes.
18. Gasoline and petroleum bulk storage tanks.
19. House movers, equipment, storage or wrecking yards.
20. Junk yards.
21. Metals crushing for salvage.
22. Millwork (woodworking, manufacturing).
23. Planing mills.
24. Plating works, bulk (galvanizing).
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 221/240
25. Manufacture of brick and all clay, cinder, concrete, synthetic, cast stone, plastic and pumice
stone products.
26. Rock crushing.
27. Sandblasting yard.
28. Seed treatment, processing, extraction of oil.
29. Steel fabrication (plate, structural, misc. iron, reinforcing).
30. Storage yards, bulk material.
31. Tanks, fabrication.
32. Retail commercial operations directly relating to the primary industrial use may be permitted,
provided they do not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the gross floor area.
33. Extraction of sand, gravel, and other natural resources.
C. Changes Or Alterations In Use: If a use is changed or altered in any significant manner, or the use
is terminated or removed for a period of at least six (6) months or the production of the use is
substantially decreased for at least six (6) months, then the Town Engineer may require the
developer to submit a site plan before starting or resuming operation or production. (Ord. 108, 3-8-
1994)
12-1-4: PLAN SUBMITTAL:
A. Scale; Copies: Two (2) prints of a site development plan shall be submitted to the Town Engineer
for review. Site plans shall be drawn at a scale approximate to show all required information on a
sheet or sheets of twenty four by thirty six inch (24 x 36") proportions. Ten (10) copies of all other
plans or support documents required by this Chapter shall also be submitted.
B. Information Required: The site plan shall contain the following information:
1. Location sketch with adjacent land uses.
2. Topography, contour lines for existing and proposed elevations at one foot (1') intervals.
3. Natural drainage and proposed stream flow by directional arrows. If applicable, show that
finished flow level is above the 100-year flood area.
4. Legal description of the site to include total area of the site.
5. Location of all existing and proposed structures, including distances from all structures to all lot
lines.
6. Percentage of lot covered by impervious surfaces.
7. Percentage of the site covered by any and all structures.
8. Right-of-way dimensions of all abutting streets whether public or private and access to the site.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 222/240
9. Parking and circulation areas.
10. Locations, dimensions and description of all existing or proposed easements.
11. Location for any nonvehicular access strips.
12. The future land use designation for the site.
13. Exterior lighting, if any; the type, height and areas of illumination.
14. Outdoor play areas, if any.
15. Service areas for uses such as mail delivery and trash disposal.
16. All existing and proposed utility locations.
17. The location of the nearest fire hydrant.
18. Streets or alley right of ways to be dedicated.
19. The height of all buildings.
C. Supporting Documents: The following documents shall be included with the site plan:
1. Landscape Plan: For any project, the Town Engineer may require a separate submittal of this
plan drawn to scale, indicating the following information:
a. Identify all walks or paths, vehicular drives, parking lots, building entrances, freestanding light
fixtures, service or loading areas, signs and locations, open spaces, plazas and recreation
amenities with general construction materials noted.
b. All slopes within site are to be called out (i.e., 2:1, 3:1, 4:1, etc.). If site is totally on slopes less
than 50:1, state in a general note. All depressed and mounted areas shall be identified with
general contour lines and/or proposed elevations. Note any area to be used for detention.
c. A legend shall be included which shows symbols on plan, quantity, type of plant, minimum
purchase size and any necessary comments such as ground cover spacing or necessary
guying and staking. The legend shall also reflect square footage of each type of ground
treatment (i.e., bluegrass, cobble, alternative grass mix, bark chips).
Note: Plants should be shown at mature size on plans.
2. Parking Plan: A parking plan, drawn to scale, shall be submitted. The Town Engineer may
require a separate submittal for this plan based on the scale of the project. The plan shall show
all those elements necessary to indicate that the requirements are being fulfilled and shall
include, but not be limited to:
a. Delineation of all parking spaces;
b. Circulation necessary to serve spaces;
c. Access to streets, alleys and properties to be served;
d. Curb cuts;
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 223/240
e. Type of landscaping, fencing or other screening materials;
f. Abutting land uses;
g. Grading, drainage, surfacing and subgrading details;
h. Location of lighting fixtures;
i. Delineations of all structures and obstacles to circulation on the site; and
j. Specifications of signs and bumper guards.
3. Building Drawings: Drawings of all proposed buildings shall be submitted to the Town Engineer.
Drawings shall comply with the provisions of the latest Uniform Building Code.
4. Soil Engineering Report: If required by the Town Engineer, a soil engineering report prepared by
a registered engineer shall be submitted. The report shall include data regarding the nature,
distribution and strength of existing soils; conclusions and recommendations for grading
procedures and design criteria for corrective measures when necessary; and opinions and
recommendations covering adequacy of the site to be developed by the proposed grading. The
soil engineering report will include suggestions concerning erosion control on the project site
during construction as well as upon completion.
5. Site Hydrology Report: If required by the Town Engineer, a site hydrology report shall be
prepared and shall include the following:
a. A map and calculations showing the drainage area and estimated runoff of the area being
served by any drainage facility within the proposed grading and drainage plan;
b. Indication of the undeveloped peak discharged of surface water currently entering and leaving
the subject property due to the 10-year design storm, adjusted to the subject drainage basin;
c. Indication of developed peak discharge of runoff which will be generated due to the design
storm within the subject property;
d. Determination of the developed peak discharge of water that will be generated by the design
storm at various sub-basins on the subject property; and
e. A discussion of the drainage management facilities and/or techniques which may be
necessary to rectify drainage problems.
6. Traffic-Control Devices And Street Lighting:
a. Whenever, as the result of additional traffic generated by a proposed development, the Town
determines the need for a traffic signal or regulatory sign, the developer shall be responsible
for installing all said devices and signs.
b. For all public streets adjacent to the site, the developer shall be responsible to provide any
additional street lights required to ensure an acceptable level of lighting.
7. Proof Of Ownership; Proof Of Agency:
a. The information required to establish proof of ownership shall consist of a copy of a title report
issued not more than thirty (30) days prior to the date of submittal of the site plan to the Town
Engineer. The report shall be issued by a title company authorized to conduct business in the
State.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 224/240
b. If the land is owned by a corporation, proof of agency shall consist of a corporate resolution
designating an individual to act as agent. The corporate resolution must be certified by the
secretary of the corporation and authenticated by the corporate seal or acknowledged in the
form prescribed by Arizona Revised Statutes, section 33-506.2.
c. If the land is owned by a partnership, proof of agency shall consist of a written document from
the partners designating an individual to act as agent. The document must be certified and
acknowledged in the form prescribed by Arizona Revised Statutes, section 33-506.3.
d. If the land is owned by an individual, proof of agency shall consist of a written document from
the owner designating an individual to act as agent. The document must be certified and
acknowledged in the form prescribed by Arizona Revised Statutes, section 33-506.1.
8. Development Schedule:
a. The developer shall submit a development schedule, indicating, to the best of the developer's
knowledge, the approximate date upon which construction or development of the project will
begin, progressive stages of development, if any, anticipated rate of development and
completion date.
b. For any development proposed to be constructed in phases, the developer shall submit a
master plan for the entire project which must be approved before any submittal of the project
can be approved or constructed. (Ord. 108, 3-8-1994)
12-1-5: CONSIDERATIONS FOR APPROVAL:
The Town Engineer shall consider the following matters and others, where applicable, prior to
approving the development plan:
A. Traffic Safety And Congestion:
1. The effect of the site development on traffic conditions on abutting streets.
2. The layout of the site with respect to locations and dimensions of vehicular and pedestrian
entrances, exits, drives and walkways.
3. The arrangement and adequacy of off-street parking facilities to prevent traffic congestion.
4. The location, arrangement and dimensions of truck loading and unloading facilities.
5. The circulation patterns within the boundaries of the development.
6. The surfacing and lighting of off-street parking facilities.
7. The continuation of streets as prescribed in the Traffic Circulation Plan.
B. Outdoor Advertising: The number, location, color, size, height, lighting and landscaping of outdoor
advertising signs and structures in relation to the creation of traffic hazards and the appearance
and harmony with adjacent development.
C. Buildings And Site Layout:
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 225/240
1. The general silhouette and mass, including location on the site, elevations and relation to natural
plant coverage all in relationship to the neighborhood.
2. The exterior design in relation to adjoining structures in height, bulk and area openings, breaks
in the facade facing on the street, line and pitch of roof and arrangement of structure on the
parcel.
3. The adequate usable outdoor living space for each dwelling unit occupying or to occupy the site.
D. Drainage: The effect of the development on the adequacy of the storm and surface water drainage,
both on the site and in the affected area.
E. Water And Sewer Capacities: The ability of the Town to supply water and sewer service to the site
should be investigated.
F. Permitted Accessory Uses:
1. Any use customarily incidental to a permitted principal use, such as:
a. Private garage or carport for storage of vehicles.
b. Garden house, tool house, ramada, swimming pool.
2. Accessory dwelling units inherent to maintaining business.
3. Where the keeping of horses and other livestock is lawful, structures customarily accessory to
such use.
G. Property Development Standards:
1. Minimum Area: Five (5) acres.
2. Building Height: No building shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in height.
3. Required Yards:
a. Front Yard: Forty feet (40').
b. Side Yard: Forty feet (40').
c. Back Yard: Forty feet (40').
4. Minimum Distance Between Main Buildings: As prescribed by the Uniform Building Code.
H. Nonresidential Accessory Building:
1. Maximum Height: Fifteen feet (15') above grade.
2. Maximum Yard Coverage: Thirty five percent (35%) of the required side or rear yard.
3. Location Restriction: No accessory building shall be erected in any minimum required front yard.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 226/240
4. Setback Requirements: Accessory buildings shall be set back from the side lot line and the rear
lot line a distance not less than five feet (5'), except:
a. For a lot having its rear lot line continuous with an alley line, no rear setback shall be required
for the accessory buildings; or
b. For a corner lot abutting a key lot and not separated therefrom by an alley, an accessory
building shall be set back from the rear lot line a distance of not less than the width of the least
required side yard applicable to the main building; or
c. For a corner lot, the street side setback shall be the same as for the main building. (Ord. 108,
3-8-1994)
12-1-6: BUFFERING AND SCREENING:
A. General Provisions: To reduce the impacts on adjacent uses which are of a different type, buffers
and screening will be required. The property owner is responsible for the establishment and
maintenance of screening in accordance with the requirements of this Section unless the abutting
use has already provided said buffering in compliance with the standards of this Section.
B. Requirements:
1. A buffer consists of a horizontal distance from the main buildings of proposed use to the
property line.
2. Within the buffer areas, screening is required and may consist of any of the following:
a. At least one row of deciduous or evergreen trees or a mixture of each and spaced not more
than fifteen feet (15') apart, and at least one row of evergreen shrubs spaced not more than
five feet (5') apart which will grow to form a continuous hedge at least five feet (5') in height
within one year of planting; lawn, low-growing evergreen shrubs, evergreen ground cover or
vegetable of rock mulch covering the balance of the property.
b. In lieu of these stands, and at his option, the owner may prepare a detailed plan and
specifications for landscaping and screening, including plantings, fences, walls, walks and
other features designed to afford the decree of desired buffering. Such plan and specifications
shall be submitted to the Town Engineer for review and approval.
3. The buffer distance shall be forty feet (40') from property line.
4. An adequate buffering plan shall be considered as mitigating the five (5) acre requirement of
subsection 12-1-5G1 of this Chapter. (Ord. 108, 3-8-1994)
12-1-7: APPROVAL OF PLAN:
After the developer has submitted a site plan and necessary support documents, the Town Council
shall approve or reject the site plan. (Ord. 108, 3-8-1994)
12-1-8: RECONSIDERATION:
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 227/240
If the Town Council rejects a proposed site plan, the Town Council shall give written notice to the
developer, specifying the reasons for the rejection. The developer shall have thirty (30) days in which
to make a written request that the Town Council reconsider its decision. The Town Council shall then
have thirty (30) days to issue its decision. After reconsideration, the decision of the Town Council shall
be a final decision. (Ord. 108, 3-8-1994)
12-1-9: FAILURE TO COMPLY:
Any developer who fails to comply with all of the applicable requirements of this Chapter may be
punished as provided in this Code. The minimum fine for each day of noncompliance shall be two
hundred dollars ($200.00). (Ord. 108, 3-8-1994)
Chapter 2
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
12-2-1: PURPOSE:
This Chapter establishes standards applicable to the continuous operation and conduct of land uses
after their establishment. These standards are established to protect residents from the adverse
effects of excessive or objectionable emissions of noise or air contaminants that may be generated by
individual land uses, activities, processes or equipment. The purpose of this Chapter is also to identify
acceptable levels of noise and other emissions in various land use categories. (Ord. 108, 3-8-1994)
12-2-2: APPLICABILITY:
After the effective date of this Chapter:
A. Established Use Or Building: Any use established or changed to, and any building, structure or land
developed, constructed or used for any permitted principal use, or any use permissible as a special
exception, or any accessory use, shall comply with all of the performance standards herein set
forth.
B. Existing Use Or Building: If any existing use or building or other structure is extended, enlarged,
reconstructed or re-established, the performance standards set forth herein shall apply with
respect to such extended, enlarged, reconstructed or re-established portion or portions of such
use, building, machinery or other structure.
C. Annexed Areas: Within one year after annexation, all uses of lands, buildings or other structures
within the annexed area should comply with the performance standards. (Ord. 108, 3-8-1994)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 228/240
12-2-3: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. Emissions Where Flash Point Known: If the Town Engineer finds, after making determinations in
the manner set forth in this Section, that there is a violation of performance standards relating to
emission of smoke, fire and explosive hazards where flash point of flammable materials is known,
humidity, heat, glare or electromagnetic interference, he shall take, or cause to be taken, lawful
action to cause correction to within the limits set by such performance standards. Failure to obey
lawful orders concerning such correction shall be punishable as provided in this Code. The
minimum fine to be imposed against the industrial user shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) for
each day of noncompliance.
B. Emissions Where Flash Point Not Known: If, in the judgment of the Town Engineer, there is a
probable violation of the performance standards as set forth in this Chapter concerning emission of
particulate matter, vibration, noise, fire, explosive hazards where flash point of flammable materials
is not known, toxic or noxious matter, odorous matter, or radiation hazards, the following
procedures shall be followed in the case where there is not a threat to life or health:
1. The Town Engineer shall give written notice by registered or certified mail to the person(s)
responsible for the alleged violations. The notice shall contain the following:
a. Details and particulars of alleged violations.
b. The official's justification regarding why occurrence is a violation.
c. A time limit for either correction of alleged violation or other such response.
2. The notice shall further state that upon request of those to whom it is directed, technical
determinations as described in this Title will be made and that if violations, as alleged, are found,
costs of such determinations shall be charged against those responsible for the violation, in
addition to such other penalties as may be appropriate, but if it is determined that no violation
exists, the cost of the determination will be paid by the Town.
3. If there is no reply within the time limit set, but the alleged violation is corrected to the
satisfaction of the Town Engineer, he shall note "violation corrected" on his copy of the notice,
and shall retain it among his official records, taking such other action as may be warranted.
4. If there is no reply within the time limit set and the alleged violation is not corrected to the
satisfaction of the Town Engineer within the time limit set, he shall proceed to take or cause to
be taken such action as is warranted by continuation of a violation after notice to cease.
5. If reply is received within the time limit set indicating that the alleged violation will be corrected to
the satisfaction of the Town Engineer, but requesting additional time, the Town Engineer may
grant an extension, if he deems it warranted in the circumstances of the case and if the
extension will not, in his opinion, cause peril to life, health or property.
6. If reply is received within the time limit set requesting technical determination as provided in this
Title and if the alleged violations continue, the Town Engineer may call in properly qualified
experts to make the determinations. If expert findings indicate violation of the performance
standards, the costs of the determinations shall be assessed against the properties or persons
responsible for the violation, in addition to such other penalties as may be appropriate under the
terms of this Code. If no violation is found, the costs of determination shall be paid by the Town
without assessment against the properties or persons involved. (Ord. 108, 3-8-1994)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 229/240
12-2-4: VIBRATION STANDARDS:
A. Maximum Velocity: Ground vibration measured at the boundary of an industry shall not exceed 0.01
inches per second (0.0025 meters per second) RMS velocity.
B. Method Of Measurement: Vibration measurement procedures shall conform to the methods
described in this Section or to procedures approved by the Arizona Department of Environmental
Quality.
1. Instrumentation shall be capable of measuring RMS value of the vibration velocity over the
frequency range of ten (10) to one thousand (1,000) Hz.
2. Measurement values shall be recorded for a sufficient period of observation to provide a
representative sample.
3. Attachment of the vibration transducer to the ground shall be by magnetic screw attachment to a
steel bar of a minimum of nine inches (9") (22.9 cm) in length, driven flush with the ground
surface.
C. Exemptions: The rules of this Section shall not apply to:
1. Vibration resulting from the operation of any equipment or facility of a surface carrier engaged in
interstate commerce by railroad.
2. Vibration resulting from the operation of any road vehicle.
3. Vibration resulting from roadway maintenance and repair equipment. (Ord. 108, 3-8-1994)
12-2-5: AIR QUALITY:
Any land use shall be operated so that air quality conforms with all applicable State or Federal
regulations. In addition:
A. Smoke: No emission of smoke from any source shall be permitted to exceed a greater density than
the density described in No. 1 on the Ringleman Chart. However, smoke may be emitted, which is
equal to, but not darker, than No. 2 on the Ringleman Chart, for not more than four (4) minutes in
any eight (8) hour period. For the purpose of grading the density of smoke, the Ringleman Chart,
as published by the U.S. Bureau of Mines, shall be the standard. All measurements shall be taken
at the point of emissions of the smoke.
B. Fly Ash, Dust, Fumes, Vapors, Gases And Other Forms Of Air Pollution: No emission shall be
permitted which can cause damage to health, animals or vegetation, or other forms of property, or
which can cause any excessive soiling. (Ord. 108, 3-8-1994)
12-2-6: ODORS:
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 230/240
Any land use shall not emit noxious odors which are perceptible at the property line to a committee
designated by the Town Council. (Ord. 108, 3-8-1994)
12-2-7: WATER QUALITY:
Any land use shall be operated so that water quality affected by the use shall be in conformance with
all applicable State or Federal regulations. (Ord. 108, 3-8-1994)
12-2-8: TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS:
The storage and use of poisonous, corrosive, explosive and other materials hazardous to life or
property shall conform to all applicable portions of the current editions of the Uniform Building Code
and the Uniform Fire Code. These standards are in addition to all applicable State and Federal
regulations. (Ord. 108, 3-8-1994)
12-2-9: EXPLOSIVES:
The storage and use of explosives shall conform to all applicable portions of the current edition of the
Uniform Building Code and the Uniform Fire Code. These standards are in addition to all applicable
State and Federal regulations. (Ord. 108, 3-8-1994)
12-2-10: FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS:
The storage and use of flammable and combustible liquids shall conform to all applicable portions of
the current edition of the Uniform Building Code and Uniform Fire Code. These standards are in
addition to all applicable State and Federal regulations. (Ord. 108, 3-8-1994)
12-2-11: LIQUIDS AND SOLID WASTE:
No waste shall be discharged into the streets, drainage ways or any property which is dangerous to
the public health and safety. No waste shall be discharged in the public sewer system which
endangers the normal operation of the public sewage system.
A. Pretreatment: If the Town Engineer permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the
design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of
the Town and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
B. Industrial Waste Into Public Sewers; Admission, Control:
1. This subsection shall apply to industrial waste as previously defined, and further to waste from
industries which exhibit strengths or characteristics of BOD in excess of or equal to two hundred
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 231/240
(200) milligrams per liter (mg/l) or suspended solids in excess of or equal to one hundred fifty
(150) (mg/l) based on a composite sample of the waste.
2. Review and acceptance by the Town shall be obtained prior to the discharge into the public
sewers of any waste having a BOD greater than two hundred (200) milligrams per liter or a
suspended solids content greater than one hundred fifty (150) milligrams per liter.
3. Where required, in the opinion of the Town Engineer, to modify or eliminate waste that are
harmful to the structures, processes or operation of the sewage treatment works, the person
shall provide at his expense such preliminary treatment or processing facilities as may be
determined necessary to render his waste acceptable for admission to the public sewers.
4. Any industry discharging waste from canning, freezing or food packing operation shall provide
pretreatment which shall include, but not limited to, vibrating or rotary screens to remove any
particulate larger than #40 screen.
5. The volume of flow used for computing industrial waste charges shall be the metered water
consumption of the person as shown in the records of meter readings. If the person discharging
industrial waste into the public sewers procures any part, or all, of his water from sources other
than the Town, all of a part of which is discharged into the public sewers, the person shall install
and maintain, at his expense, water meters of a type approved by the Town Engineer for the
purposes of determining the volume of water obtained from these other sources.
6. Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be installed, owned and operated
by the person following approval of the Town Engineer.
7. Industrial waste discharged into public sewers shall be subject to periodic inspection and a
determination of character and concentration of said waste. The determinations shall be made
as often as may be deemed necessary by the Town Engineer. The samples collected shall be
representative and collected either manually or by the use of mechanical equipment acceptable
to the Town Engineer. Access to the sampling locations shall be granted to the Town Engineer or
his duly authorized representatives at all times. All required tests shall be ran by the industrial
user or his duly authorized representatives, and copies of the test results provided to the Town
Engineer.
8. If, in the opinion of the Town Engineer, tests taken of industrial waste show the character or
concentration of these waste to be in excess of those limits acceptable in the treatment facilities
or, if indications that waste discharged from a new industrial applicant's process may exceed the
allowable limits established by the Arizona Department of Health Services and the United States
Environmental Protection Agency, the Town shall have the authority to request negotiations with
representatives of the industry concerned to arrive at any special agreements concerning
pretreatment and/or payment of any surcharge or additional service charges necessary for
additional Town facilities.
C. Service Charges: The amount of any surcharge or additional service charge shall reflect the cost
incurred by the Town in removing the excess BOD and suspended solids or other waste
characteristics should an industrial user exceed the acceptable limits as set by the Town. (Ord.
108, 3-8-1994)
12-2-12: GLARE OR HEAT:
Any activity producing intense glare or heat shall be performed within a completely enclosed building
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 232/240
in such a manner as not to create a nuisance or hazard beyond the lot lines. (Ord. 108, 3-8-1994)
12-2-13: RADIOACTIVE MATERIALS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
Any other provisions of this Title notwithstanding, manufacturing activities involving the use, storage or
disposal of radioactive material are expressly prohibited. The foregoing is not intended to prohibit
manufacturing activities involving the use, storage or disposal of radioactive material, which
radioactive material does not become an integral part of the manufactured product or is exempt from
the licensing requirements of or permitted under a general license issued by the Arizona Atomic
Energy Commission or its legally established successor. Nor is the foregoing intended to prohibit the
use of radioactive material in medical diagnosis and therapy, or in medical, educational or industrial
research and development. For the purposes of this Section, "research and development" means
either: a) theoretical analysis, exploration or experimentation; or b) the extension of investigative
findings and theories of a scientific or technical nature into practical application for experimental and
demonstration purposes, including experimental production and testing of models, devices,
equipment, materials and processes. (Ord. 108, 3-8-1994)
Title 13
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Reserved
Footnotes - Click any footnote link to go back to its reference.
Footnote 1: A.R.S. title 9, chapter 4, article 6.2.
Chapter 1
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
13-1-1: ADOPTED:
The floodplain management document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the town
clerk of the town of Snowflake, which document was made a public record by resolution of the town of
Snowflake, Arizona, is hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully set forth in this
chapter. (Ord. 10-329, 10-12-2010)
Title 14
MATERIAL EXTRACTION
Reserved
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 233/240
Footnotes - Click any footnote link to go back to its reference.
Footnote 1: A.R.S. title 9, chapter 4, article 6.2.
Chapter 1
MATERIAL EXTRACTION AND PROCESSING
14-1-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens, in the
excavation, extraction, processing, storage, and transportation of sand, gravel, crushed stone and soil
and related products ("material extraction and processing" herein) in the town of Snowflake. (Ord. 08-
310, 6-24-2008)
14-1-2: AUTHORITY:
This chapter is adopted pursuant to and consistent with this code and may be known and cited as the
MATERIAL EXTRACTION AND PROCESSING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 08-310, 6-24-2008)
14-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
CODE ENFORCEMENT: Enforcement of this chapter shall include, but not be limited to, the town
manager, town engineer, or their designee.
DEFAULT OR VIOLATION, RESTORATION AND LIEN: In the event the owner, operator or lessee
defaults on any duty, obligation or responsibility created in this chapter, the town may exercise all
rights, powers and remedies it has pursuant to any constitution, statute, ordinance and the common
law to remedy, obtain, purchase, redevelop or condemn any material excavation or surface
disturbance and to sell or redevelop such material excavation or surface disturbed area found to be in
violation of this chapter, pursuant to a special use permit issued by the town or pursuant to the
findings of the state mine inspector. The town can reclaim the excavated area in accordance with the
approved reclamation plan and place a lien against the property in the amount equal to said
reclamation costs.
DISCONTINUED OPERATION: A material excavation from which less than two hundred (200) cubic
yards have been removed within a twelve (12) consecutive month period or by determination of the
state mine inspector, as defined by state statute.
FUEL SALES TAX POINT OF SALE: For purposes of assessment of fuel sales taxes, the material
excavation and processing operation shall be considered the point of sale for all fuel delivered to and
consumed by the material extraction and processing activities. The owner/operator shall notify its fuel
vendors of this provision and shall cooperate with the town to collect the appropriate fuel sales taxes.
MATERIAL EXCAVATION AND PROCESSING OPERATION OWNER: The owner of the land where
material is excavated, processed or stored. The responsibility to ensure restoration of the excavation
pursuant to the reclamation plan approved by the state mine inspector shall be the obligation of the
property owner or operator who is designated in the reclamation plan as the person responsible (as
defined in Arizona administrative code rule R11-3-101).
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 234/240
MATERIAL EXCAVATION AND PROCESSING OPERATION PIT: A. All of the land area used in the
excavation, processing, or storage of sand, gravel, stone, crushed stone or soil; and
B. All of the land area owned by the material excavation and processing operation owner that is
contiguous to an excavated area unless the owner can show that some or all of the contiguous
land cannot or will not be used as a site for material extraction or excavation.
C. Material excavations owned and/or operated by the same person, firm, or corporation, and
separated by less than five hundred feet (500') of land shall be considered one and the same
operation. The owner may divide his land into five (5) acre units and excavate and rehabilitate
five (5) acres before continuing another unit.
D. Land which has been restored in accordance to a special use permit or pursuant to a
reclamation plan approved by the state mine inspector will no longer be considered as part of a
material excavation and processing operation.
MATERIAL EXTRACTION: The removal of sand and gravel, bedrock, crushed rock or soil from its
natural site of geologic deposition or formation. Such materials are considered personal property.
MATERIAL EXTRACTION AND PROCESSING: The term "mineral extraction and processing
operation" as used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as the term "mine" as set forth in
Arizona Revised Statutes section 27-301(8).
MATERIAL PROCESSING: The screening, sorting, crushing or other processing of geologic material
extracted or excavated. This term includes mixing concrete or hot mix asphalt products.
MATERIAL STORAGE: The storage of sand, gravel, crushed stone, or soil in stockpiles, bins, hoppers
or other forms.
MATERIAL TRANSPORTATION: Using the public roads in the town to haul sand, gravel, crushed
stone, or any mixed materials including concrete hot mix, asphalt or soil except for snowplowing and
sanding operations. (Ord. 08-310, 6-24-2008)
14-1-4: VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY:
Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be
invalid, such decisions shall not invalidate any section not expressly subject to the decision of the
court and to this end the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. (Ord. 08-310,
6-24-2008)
14-1-5: CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES:
This chapter shall not repeal, annul, or in any way impair or remove the necessity of compliance with
any other rule, regulation, bylaw, permit, or provision of law including county, state, or federal
ordinances or statutes or the common law of the state of Arizona and the United States. This chapter
imposes a higher standard for the promotion and protection of health, safety, and welfare for the
people of the town of Snowflake. The provisions of this chapter as they relate to health, safety and
welfare shall prevail. (Ord. 08-310, 6-24-2008)
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 235/240
14-1-6: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to all proposed and/or operating gravel pits, gravel, rock, crushed stone, soil
or sand extraction and processing operations. A permit will be required for mineral extraction and
processing operations where the area is five (5) acres or more, or from which more than two hundred
(200) cubic yards of material has or will be removed, but not for construction projects where more than
two hundred (200) cubic yards will be excavated and where a grading or building permit is issued.
This chapter does not apply to borrow pits established by the town, county or state in connection with
a public roadway or flood control project. (Ord. 08-310, 6-24-2008)
14-1-7: ADMINISTRATION:
A. Special Use Permit Required: After the effective date hereof, no person, business entity, firm or
corporation shall engage in any material extraction and processing operation requiring a special
use permit without the owner or operator first obtaining approval of the plan by the office of the
state mine inspector and a special use permit from the town of Snowflake as approved by the town
council.
B. Procedure And Fee: Within thirty (30) days after the state mine inspector grants an approved
reclamation plan pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes section 27-1273, the owner/operator of
gravel and rock operation may apply for a special use permit from the town of Snowflake. The town
manager or designee shall review the information in the application, then shall refer the application
to the town council for action. The town council shall review the information submitted by the
applicant or review the application submitted to the state mine inspector by the applicant and issue
the special use permit or deny the special use permit within sixty (60) days from the date of the
application. The town council may deny or table the application to request additional information.
If any portion of the proposed mineral extraction and processing operation is located within the
100-year floodplain as defined by the federal emergency management agency ("FEMA"), the
applicant shall apply for and obtain a floodplain permit from the town.
The application for a permit shall be filed with the town manager or designee and accompanied by
the required application fee. Application fee shall be three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) or as
amended by town council.
Final approval or disapproval of the special use permit shall be made by the town council within
ninety (90) days after all information requested is presented by the applicant as required
hereinabove.
C. Submission: The application for a permit shall be submitted to the town accompanied by fifteen (15)
copies of the application which shall include the following information:
1. The name and current address of the owner of record of the property involved.
2. The name and current address of the individual, business entity, firm or corporation working the
site if different from the owner of record.
3. A to scale preliminary plot plan showing the location and boundaries of the site and the name
and location of abutting property owners.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 236/240
4. The preliminary plot plan shall define the existing contours of the land within and extending
beyond the above boundaries for one hundred feet (100') at intervals not to exceed ten feet (10')
in elevation. The scale used in defining contours shall appear on the preliminary plot plan. The
applicant may attach its plan presented to the state mine inspector in lieu of this requirement.
5. The location of all proposed access roads and temporary structures.
6. The proposed provisions for drainage and erosion control.
7. The estimated longevity of the material extraction operation based on the annual removal rate of
the last twelve (12) consecutive months prior to the application or other measures as may be
appropriate. Applicant shall submit a best estimate of the longevity of the extraction operation.
8. Alternatively, the applicant may submit fifteen (15) copies of the reclamation plan filed by the
owner or operator with the office of the state mine inspector pursuant to Arizona Revised
Statutes section 27-1252.
9. Submit copies of the reclamation plan and notice of complete plan and proof of the financial
assurance plan approved by the state mine inspector pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes
section 27-1291.
10. The reclamation plan approved by the state mine inspector shall be completed in accordance
with the standards set out by the state mine inspector pursuant to the aggregate mining unit
reclamation plan1, with review, added recommendations, and approval of the town council.
11. The town manager or designee shall review all plans, submissions, applications, public notices,
remedial orders and shall advise the town council and coordinate enforcement and reclamation
actions with the state mine inspector, as often as the town council requires, but not less than an
annual basis.
12. Any plans submitted must include applicant's plan for controlling migrating dust in accordance
with the applicable air quality ordinances and laws.
D. Approval Of Permits: The town manager or designee shall review the application and recommend
approval or disapproval of the application, or require additional information as necessary. The town
manager or designee shall submit a complete application after review, to the town council for its
review, and for its approval or denial of the application. The town council shall, after the receipt of a
complete application, including all of the information requested, and after review of the most recent
town manager's report, and any other available data with respect to the material extraction and
processing operation including, but not limited to, any application or permit prepared and filed with
any county, state or federal agency or department, including, but not limited to, the state mine
inspector, grant or deny a permit, upon a finding based on the information presented that the
proposed operation:
1. Will comply with applicable laws and regulations pertaining to noise, odor, dust control, flood
control, water quality and safety.
2. Will comply with the reclamation plan approved by the office of the state mine inspector.
3. Will not result in unlawful erosion or sedimentation that will damage a neighboring property.
4. Will not result in unlawful water pollution.
If the town council finds the application does not conform to the above requirements or other
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 237/240
provisions of this code, it shall deny the application until such time as the application complies
with the requirements of this section.
E. Terms Of Permit: No special use permit shall be issued for a period to exceed five (5) years. The
special use permit shall be renewed for additional terms not to exceed five (5) years until the
resource is fully mined, unless the permittee is in material violation of the terms of the permit or
other applicable law or unless mining has ceased for twelve (12) continuous months.
F. General Provisions:
1. Request For Waiver And Modification Of This Chapter:
a. If the town council finds that extraordinary and unnecessary hardships may result from strict
compliance with this chapter, or where there are special circumstances of a particular plan,
upon review of the request by the town council, they may waive any provision of this chapter
provided that such waiver will not have the effect of substantially impairing the purpose of this
chapter, a general plan, titles 8, 10, 12, and 13 of this code, or any other portion of this code.
b. In granting any waiver, the town council shall require such conditions as will, in its judgment,
substantially secure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the town.
G. Enforcement: This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the town manager, or designee
(and the police department per criminal sanctions).
1. Inspection: The town manager or designee shall inspect all gravel extraction operations on an
annual basis; or in lieu of such inspection, the town manager may rely on the inspection and
action taken by the state mine inspector's office. Any action on any violations of this chapter will
be reported to the town council at the next regular meeting following the determination of a
violation.
2. Right Of Entry: The town manager or designee may, with permission of the owner or operator,
enter any site for the purpose of assessing compliance with the provisions of this chapter. In
accepting a special use permit under the provisions of this chapter, permission shall be deemed
to have been given by the landowners, lessee, or operators for the right of entry by town
officials. If the landowner denies entry to the town manager or designee, either may issue a
notice of violation of the permit. Denial by the owner of access by the town manager or designee
may be cause to suspend the permit for a reasonable time or permanently. The town may elect
to rely on the inspection of the state mine inspector in lieu of any inspection by the town,
provided the state mine inspector's findings and reports are available to the town.
3. Violations: In all cases of violations of this chapter, the town manager or designee shall notify, in
writing, the owner, and if applicable, the lessee or operator, of the material extraction and
processing operation and advise of the nature of the violation and the proposed correction of the
same if possible. Said notification shall be deemed to have been made when sent to the owner,
and if applicable, to the operator or lessee by mailing a certified or registered letter to the
address supplied in the permit application.
4. Enforcement Of Ordinance: In case the owner or lessee does not comply within thirty (30) days
with the corrective action requested by the town manager or designee, the town manager or
designee shall make such complaints to the courts as in their judgment are proper or may
institute such actions or proceedings at law or in equity as are proper to restrain, correct, remove
or punish such violations. The town may elect to make complaints to the state mine inspector.
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 238/240
Court costs and attorney fees expended by the town of Snowflake to enforce this chapter may
be assessed against the owner/lessee and/or operator.
5. Fines: Any person, business firm or corporation being the owner or having control or use of
material extraction and processing operation who shall violate any of the provisions of this
chapter or fails to comply with any of the lawful requirements thereof may be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per offense. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Violation of any of the standards or provisions of this chapter shall
be deemed just cause for revoking the permit after reasonable notice and an opportunity for a
hearing before the town magistrate. (Ord. 08-310, 6-24-2008)
14-1-8: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
All material extraction operations shall conform to the following standards. The property owner is
ultimately responsible for ensuring that these standards are met.
A. Excavation: Excavation shall be performed in accordance with good engineering practice and shall
not damage, undermine or be proven to have caused instability to adjoining property. All property
boundaries must be identified and such marking continuously maintained in the field by markings
such as metal posts, stakes, flagging or blazed trees. All federal and state laws and regulations
and county ordinances relating to ground water and surface waters must be complied with.
B. View Screening: All material extraction operations shall be screened from view from adjacent public
ways with berms, walls, fencing or vegetation. Screening shall be no less than six feet (6') in height
and must block the view of auto and pedestrian traffic of the extraction operation except in areas
located within the floodplain where such structures would interfere with the flow of floodwaters. The
plans for screening barriers must be included in the permit application. Berms shall be vegetated
with native or better vegetation. In operations where valuable resources occur adjacent to public
ways, the operator shall excavate such material, backfill and construct the required screen within
twelve (12) months of the date of the permit. In operations where valuable resource does not exist
adjacent to the public way, screening must be completed within one hundred twenty (120) days
after the date of the permit.
C. Reclamation: Reclamation activity shall be required of any excavation which has been discontinued
for a period of one year. Reclamation in accordance with the requirements of Arizona Revised
Statutes title 27, chapter 6 shall be completed within one year after the date on which
discontinuance occurred, unless an extension is granted pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes
section 27-1226. All gravel extraction operations shall be restored as set out in the reclamation
plan approved by the state mine inspector with review, added recommendations, and approval of
the town council.
D. Transportation: All vehicles operating on the public roads of the town with a load of sand, gravel,
crushed stone or soil shall comply with applicable town, state and federal law.
E. Access: Access to material extraction areas shall be controlled by the owner, lessee, or with the pit
being enclosed by a six foot (6') fence or wall or an approved vegetation barrier, with locking gates
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 239/240
or cables at the entrance of all access roads. Gates or cables shall be closed and locked except
during hours of operation.
F. Hours Of Operation: The hours of operation for all material extraction and processing operations will
be six o'clock (6:00) A.M. until ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. from November 1 through March 31, and
five o'clock (5:00) A.M. until nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. from April 1 through October 31, except as
follows:
1. Where the operator's customer has specified the start time for project paving, material
placement or pouring operations which requires material excavation or processing operations to
occur prior to or after the above specified hours of operation, the operator may so operate so
long as written notice of such operation is provided to the town manager prior to the
commencement of such operation and approval of the town manager is obtained.
2. The limit on hours of operation shall not apply to the operation of crushers, generators, loaders
and related equipment which may be required to produce adequate inventories of aggregate
materials to meet customer requirements.
All equipment operated after dusk and prior to dawn shall utilize strobe lights in lieu of horns or
beepers when backing up, compliant with MSHA part 57.14132.
G. Noise: The ambient noise level shall comply with subsection 10-6-7C of this code.
H. Mitigating Dust And Particulates Control: In order to mitigate traveling dust and dust plumes, the
owner/operators shall use water trucks and other spray devices to sprinkle areas where dust forms
on roadways or around equipment on site to comply with applicable town and state air quality
regulations.
The owner, lessee, or operator shall use dust and particulate trapping devices and structures such
as canopies, covers or plastic barriers which trap, stop and impede migrating dust and airborne
particulates to the extent required to comply with applicable air quality laws and ordinances.
Upon issuance of a notice of violation of an applicable air quality law or ordinance, the owner
and/or operator shall take immediate remedial action such as the injection of water, water spray, or
mist to prevent dust and particulate migration or to terminate the operations causing the migrating
dust. (Ord. 08-310, 6-24-2008)
14-1-9: ADMINISTRATION FEE:
A. Administrative Fee: The town council, upon review of the application and supporting documents,
including, but not limited to, the application filed with the state mine inspector's office, and including
the reclamation plan, and the financial assurance plan for reclamation, may impose a reasonable
annual administrative fee for purposes of administering the special use permit. Owner(s) shall pay
to the town an annual fee of ten cents ($0.10) per cubic yard of material sold, not to exceed five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per calendar year. At the town council's discretion and approval,
materials, services, land or other assets may be accepted in lieu of the fee. In no event shall the
town become obligated financially to the owner/operator(s).
10/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=676 240/240
B. Guidelines For Use Of Administrative Fee: The administrative fee shall be used for any cost
associated with the cooperation with the Arizona mine inspector's office and any governmental
agreements entered into with the state mine inspector's office, relative to the application for the
extraction of cinders stone, crushed rock, composite granite, gravel, pumice and sand or the
mixture of such with cement or oil based compounds. The administrative fee may also be used to
administer any notice or recording requirements of the aggregate mining operations set forth in
Arizona Revised Statutes section 27-1229 and 1230. The administrative fee shall also be used to
administer the reporting, or other costs associated with the requirements of this code. The
administrative fee may be used for the review of maps, plats, redevelopment plans, rehabilitation
plans filed in the federal, state, county or municipal public records. (Ord. 08-310, 6-24-2008)