
Williams, Arizona Code of Ordinances


WILLIAMS, ARIZONA
CODE OF ORDINANCES




Contains 2019 S-1 Supplement current through Ordinance 970, passed 1-24-2019










Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet:  http://www.amlegal.com




ADOPTING ORDINANCES



ORDINANCE NO. 970



   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF WILLIAMS,
ARIZONA, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN
EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF WILLIAMS DEALING WITH SUBJECTS
EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.



   WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the City of
Williams are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in
form and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the City and for the proper conduct of its
affairs; and



   WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Arizona empower
and authorize the City to revise, amend, restate, codify and compile any
existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted or
published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book form;
and



   WHEREAS, the City Council of the City has authorized a general
compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the City of a
general and permanent nature and publication of such ordinance in book form;
and



   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of
the City and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the City that this ordinance take effect at an
early date.



   NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of
Williams, Arizona, as follows:



Section I.   The general ordinances of the City as revised, amended,
restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as and shall
constitute the “Code of Ordinances of the City of Williams, Arizona.”



Section II.   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section I shall
consist of the following Titles:



         TITLE I      GENERAL PROVISIONS



         TITLE III      ADMINISTRATION



         TITLE V      PUBLIC WORKS



         TITLE VII      TRAFFIC CODE



         TITLE IX      GENERAL REGULATION



         TITLE XI      BUSINESS REGULATIONS



         TITLE XIII   GENERAL OFFENSES



         TITLE XV      LAND USAGE



Section III.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in
such Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective
date of this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or
in part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense
committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective
date of this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of
ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching
territory, establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain
persons, authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds
or borrowing of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal
property, granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to
public use, vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public
places; nor shall such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or
special nature or pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the
Code.



Section IV.   Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the City Council and the Clerk of the City is hereby
authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code of Ordinances in the
Office of the Clerk.



Section V.   Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in
Section VI, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and
places of the ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and
regulations therein contained and of the date of passage, and that the same
is properly signed, attested, recorded, and approved and that any public
hearings and notices thereof as required by law have been given.



Section VI.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure
necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and
general welfare of the people of this City, and shall take effect at the
earliest date provided by law.



   PASSED AND ADOPTED by the City Council of the City of Williams,
Arizona, this 24th day of January 2019, by the following vote:



AYES:     6          NAYES:   0     ABSENT:      



EXCUSED:            ABSTAINED:        



   APPROVED this 10th day of January 2019.



  \s\ John W. Moore                     



John W. Moore, Mayor



ATTEST:



  \s\ Pamela Galvan                       



Pamela Galvan, City Clerk



APPROVED AS TO FORM:



  \s\  signed by City Attorney                             
         



City Attorney - Mangum, Wall, Stoops & Warden, PLLC



TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



      11.   CITY STANDARDS



      12.   CIVIL ENFORCEMENT OF MUNICIPAL VIOLATIONS



CHAPTER 10:  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Captions



   10.05   Definitions



   10.06   Rules of interpretation



   10.07   Severability



   10.08   Reference to chapters and sections



   10.09   Reference to offices; liability



   10.10   Errors and omissions



   10.11   Official time



   10.12   Reasonable time; calculation of time



   10.13   Ordinances repealed



   10.14   Ordinances unaffected



   10.15   Effective date of ordinances



   10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinances



   10.17   Conflicting provisions



   10.18   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10.19   Section histories; statutory references



 



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   (A)   The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections
shall constitute and be designated “The City Code of the City of Williams,
Arizona”, and may be so cited.



   (B)   The code may also be cited as “The Williams City Code” or
“this code”.



§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   The rules and the definitions set forth in this chapter shall
be observed in the construction of this code and the ordinances of the city,
unless the construction would be inconsistent with either the manifest intent
of the Council or the context of this code or the ordinances of the city.



   (B)   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication
required, the same rules of construction, definition and application shall
govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation
of state law.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule. All words and phrases shall be construed and
understood according to the common and approved usage of the language; but
technical words and phrases and others as may have acquired a peculiar and
appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to
the peculiar and appropriate meaning.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



      ACTS BY AGENTS. When an ordinance requires an act to be done
which may, by law, as well be done by an agent as by the principal, such
requirement shall be construed to include all such acts when done by an
authorized agent.



      AGENT. A person acting on behalf of another.



      CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION or MUNICIPALITY. The City of
Williams, Arizona.



      CODE,THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as
modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or
sections.



      COUNCIL. The Council of the City of Williams, Arizona.



      COUNTY. Coconino County, Arizona.



      DAY. The period of time between any midnight and the midnight
following.



      DAYTIME. The period of time between sunrise and sunset.



      DEPARTMENT, BOARD, COMMISSION, OFFICE, OFFICER or EMPLOYEE.
Whenever any department, board, commission, office, officer or employee is
referred to, it shall mean a department, board, commission, office, officer
or employee of the city unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.



      EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Vehicles of the Fire, Police and Public
Service Departments and legally authorized ambulances and emergency vehicles
of the state, county or any political subdivisions thereof and vehicles of
public service corporations.



      EMERGENCY WORK. Any work performed to prevent or alleviate
physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency,
which has or may result in a disruption of service, and which is necessary to
protect the health, safety and welfare of persons or property.



      EMPLOYEE(S). Whenever reference is made to employee(s) by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words “of the City
of Williams”.



      IN THE CITY or WITHIN THE CITY. All territory over which the city
now has, or shall hereafter acquire, jurisdiction for the exercise of its
police powers or other regulatory powers.



      JOINT AUTHORITY. All words purporting to give a JOINT AUTHORITY
to three or more city officers or other persons shall be construed as giving
the authority to a majority of the officers or other persons, unless it shall
be otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the authority.



      LAW. Applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the
state, the ordinances of the city and, when appropriate, any and all rules
and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder.



      LICENSE. The permission granted for the carrying-on of a
business, profession or occupation.



      MAJORITY. When used in reference to the City Council, means 51%
of those members in attendance; provided that, a quorum of the Council is
also present.



      MANAGER. The City Manager of the City of Williams.



      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.



      MONTH. A calendar month.



      MOTOR VEHICLE. Every self-propelled device in, upon or by which
any person or property is, or may be, transported upon a public highway,
excepting aircraft and devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or
tracks.



      MUST. The act referred to is mandatory.



      NIGHTTIME. The period of time between sunset and sunrise.



      NUISANCE. Anything offensive or obnoxious to health and welfare
of the inhabitants of the City of Williams; or any act or thing repugnant to,
or creating a hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of
another person, or of the community.



      OATH. Includes affirmation or declaration.



      OCCUPANT. Applied to a building or land shall include any person
who occupies the whole or any portion of such building or land, whether alone
or with others.



      OFFENSE. Any act forbidden by any provision of this code, or the
omission of any act required by the provisions of this code.



      OFFICER(S). Whenever reference is made to “officer(s)” by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words “of the
City of Williams”.



      OPERATOR. The person who is in charge of any operation, business
or profession.



      ORDINANCE. Also means RESOLUTIONS, and resolutions having the
effect of ordinances, where applicable, or so far as practical.



      OWNER. Applied to a building or land, includes any part owner,
joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety, of the
whole or a part of the building or land.



      PERSON. Extended and applied to firms, corporations or voluntary
associations, as well as to individuals, unless plainly inapplicable.



      PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes every species of property, except
real property as defined in this section.



      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. The words PRECEDING and FOLLOWING mean
next before and next after, respectively.



      PROPERTY. Real and personal property.



      REAL PROPERTY. Lands, tenements and hereditaments.



      RETAILER. Relating to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or
things in small quantities, directed to the consumer.



      SHALL. The action referred to is mandatory.



      SHALL HAVE BEEN. Includes past and future cases.



      SIDEWALK. The portion of a street between the curb line and the
adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.



      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the signer cannot
write, the signer’s or subscriber’s name being written near the mark by a
witness who writes his or her own name near the signer’s or subscriber’s
name; but a SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION by mark can be acknowledged or can
serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement only when two
witnesses so sign their own names thereto.



      STATE. The State of Arizona.



      STREET. Includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys,
courts, places, squares, curbs or other public ways in the city which have
been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use or other public
property so designated in any law of the state.



      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a
heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the
chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of
the heading. Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.



      TENANT or OCCUPANT. When applied to a building or land, shall
include any person holding a written or an oral lease or who occupies the
whole or part of the building or land, either alone or with others.



      TENSES. The present tense includes the past and future tenses,
and the future includes the present.



      TIME, COMPUTATION. The time within which an act is to be done as
provided in this code or in any order issued pursuant to any ordinance, when
expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including
the last; except that, if the last day is a Sunday or holiday, it shall be
excluded; and when such time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday or a
holiday, from midnight to midnight, shall be excluded.



      TIME, REASONABLE. In all cases where any section of this code
shall require any act to be done in a reasonable time or reasonable notice to
be given, such REASONABLE TIME OR NOTICE shall be deemed to mean such time
only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of such duty, or
compliance with such notice.



      WEEK. Consists of seven consecutive days.



      WHOLESALER and WHOLESALE DEALER. Relating to the sale of goods,
merchandise, articles or things in quantities to persons who purchase for the
purpose of resale.



      WRITING. Includes any form of recorded message capable of
comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report,
statement or record is required or authorized by this code, it shall be made
in WRITING in the English language, unless it is expressly provided otherwise.



      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether
by printing or otherwise.



      YEAR. A calendar year, except where otherwise provided.



(Prior Code, § 1-2.08)



Statutory reference:



   Definitions and construction of statutes generally, see A.R.S. §§
1-211 through 1-215



§ 10.06  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   The construction of all ordinances of the city shall be by the
following rules, unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the intent
of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.



   (A)   And/or. “Or” may be read “and”, and “and” may be
read “or”, if the context requires it.



   (B)   Acts by agents. When this code or an ordinance requires an act
to be done which may by law as well be done by an agent as by the principal,
the requirement shall be construed to include all acts when done by an
authorized agent.



   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses.



      (1)   Words of the masculine gender include the feminine;
words in the singular number include the plural and words in the plural
number include the singular.



      (2)   The present tense includes the past and future tenses
and the future includes the present.



   (D)   General terms. A general term following specific enumeration
of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so
limited.



   (E)   Interpretations. In determination of the provisions of each
section of this code, the following rules shall be observed.



      (1)   Intent to defraud. Whenever an intent to defraud is
required in order to constitute an offense, it shall be sufficient if an
intent appears to defraud any person.



      (2)   Liability of employers and agents. When the provisions
of any section of this official code prohibit the commission of an act, not
only the person actually doing the prohibited act or omitting the directed
act, but also the employer and all other persons concerned with or in aiding
or abetting the said person shall be guilty of the offense described and
liable to the penalty set forth.



(Prior Code, § 1-2.02)



§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY.



   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Council that the
titles, chapters, subchapters, sections, sentences, clauses and phrases of
this code shall be severable and, if any provision of this code is held
unconstitutional for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of the
code.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO CHAPTERS AND SECTIONS.



   (A)   All references to chapters or sections are to the chapters and
sections of this code unless otherwise specified.



   (B)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section
hereof, the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.09  REFERENCE TO OFFICES; LIABILITY.



   (A)   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to
apply to any office, officer or employee of the city exercising the powers,
duties or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



   (B)   No provision of this city code designating the duties of any
officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee
liable for any fine or penalty provided for failure to perform such duty,
unless the intention of the Council to impose such fine or penalty on such
officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section
creating the duty.



(Prior Code, § 1-1.09)



§ 10.10  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the
misspelling of any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to
express the intention of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words
to which no meaning can be attached; or the use of a word or words when
another word or words was clearly intended to express the intent, the
spelling shall be corrected and the word or words supplied, omitted or
substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions
shall have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the
text as originally published.



   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question
exists regarding the nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.11  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws,
shall be the official time within the city for the transaction of all
municipal business.



§ 10.12  REASONABLE TIME; CALCULATION OF TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME
OR NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done as provided in this
code or in any order issued pursuant to any ordinance, when expressed in
days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last;
except that, if the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, it shall be
excluded; and when the time is expressed in hours, the whole of Saturday,
Sunday or a holiday, from midnight to midnight, shall be excluded.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this
code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code,
except as otherwise provided in § 10.14 of this chapter; however, all
rights, duties and obligations created or imposed by the repealed ordinances
shall continue and exist in all respects as if this code had not been adopted
and enacted.



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   The adoption and enactment of this code shall not be construed to
repeal or, in any way, to modify or affect:



   (A)   Any special ordinance or ordinances regarding franchises,
annexations, dedications or zoning;



   (B)   Any ordinance making an appropriation;



   (C)   Any ordinance affecting any bond issue or by which any bond
issue may have been authorized;



   (D)   The running of the statute of limitations in force at the time
this code becomes effective;



   (E)   The continued existence and operation of any department,
agency, commission or office heretofore legally established or held;



   (F)   Any bond of any public officer;



   (G)   Any taxes, fees, assessments or other charges incurred or
imposed; and/or



   (H)   Any ordinances authorizing, ratifying, confirming, approving
or accepting any compact or contract with any other municipality, the state
or any county or subdivision thereof, or with the United States or any agency
or instrumentality thereof.



§ 10.15  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   (A)   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring
publication shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof,
unless otherwise expressly provided.



   (B)   Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from
their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.



§ 10.16  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES.



   (A)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or
provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause or provision unless it shall be expressly
so provided.



   (B)   The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or
penalty incurred before the repeal took effect nor any suit, prosecution or
proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for any offense committed under
the ordinance repealed.



§ 10.17  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Conflicting provisions/different titles. If the provisions of
different titles or chapters of this code, conflict with or contravene each
other, the provisions of each title or chapter shall prevail as to all such
matters and questions growing out of the subject matter of such chapter.



(Prior Code, § 1-2.04)



   (B)   Conflicting provisions/same chapter. If conflicting provisions
are found in different sections of the same chapter, the provisions of the
section which is last in numerical order shall prevail, unless such
construction is inconsistent with the meaning of such chapter.



(Prior Code, § 1-2.05)



§ 10.18  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing
chapter or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically
repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.



   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a
new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of
this code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to the
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.



§ 10.19  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are
listed following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed
5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25,
passed 1-1-1985)



   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this
indicates that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the
statute. Example: (A.R.S. § 9-240)



      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory
reference” following the text of the section, this indicates that the
reader should refer to that statute for further information.



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this
code or ordinances shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor, unless such
violation shall specify a different punishment therefor. Each day that a
violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense, punishable as
herein prescribed.



(Prior Code, § 1-1.07)



   (B)   When a person is convicted of a violation of any section of
this city code, any license previously issued to him or her by the city may
be revoked by the Council or any proper court, if there is a reasonable
relationship between the activities licensed and the offense charged.



(Prior Code, § 1-1.08)



CHAPTER 11:  CITY STANDARDS



Section



   11.01   Corporate seal



   11.02   Corporate limits



   11.03   Datum plane



   11.04   Official newspaper



§ 11.01  CORPORATE SEAL.



   The facsimile of the corporate seal of the city is as hereinafter
reproduced.







 



(Prior Code, § 1-3.01)



§ 11.02  CORPORATE LIMITS.



   The corporate limits of the city shall be as shown and designated on
the official plat on file in the office of the County Recorder. Said plat is
also on file in the office of the City Clerk. The boundaries of said
corporate limits shall be as designated by said plat, which is adopted by
reference and incorporated herein as if set out in full.



(Prior Code, § 1-4.01)  (Ord. 647, passed - -; Ord. 649, passed - -)



§ 11.03  DATUM PLANE.



   There shall be and is hereby established a datum plane for the city,
which plane is an assumed elevation of 100 feet below a point on the sidewalk
at the northwest corner of Lot 12, Block 16, Original Williams Townsite,
which point is definitely marked by a cross chiseled in the sidewalk, at
reference to which all grades pertaining to the city shall be established.



(Prior Code, § 1-5.01)  (Ord. 9, passed 7-30-2001)



§ 11.04  OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER.



   The Williams News of Williams, Arizona is hereby designated as the
official newspaper and is declared to be the newspaper of general circulation
within the city.



(Prior Code, § 1-6.01)



CHAPTER 12: CIVIL ENFORCEMENT OF MUNICIPAL VIOLATIONS



Section



   12.01   Purpose



   12.02   Applicability



   12.03   Enforcement officers



   12.04   Civil citations



   12.05   Municipal Court decision   



   12.06   Collection of civil penalties



   12.07   Abatement order



   12.08   Abatement



 



   12.99   Civil penalties



§ 12.01  PURPOSE.



   The purposes of this chapter are to:



   (A)   Create a procedure for code enforcement, including specialized
civil citations, and administrative agreements between the city and a person
accused of violating the city code; and



   (B)   Provide a timely, efficient means to address code violations.



§ 12.02  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   This chapter provides for consent orders and civil citations,
which are in addition to all other legal remedies that may be pursued by the
city to address violations of this city code.



   (B)   The use of this chapter neither limits nor precludes the city
from pursuing any other type of enforcement allowed by law.



§ 12.03  ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS.



   The City Manager shall designate those city employees who may issue
civil citations under this chapter.



§ 12.04  CIVIL CITATIONS.



   (A)   Contents. The civil citation shall:



      (1)   State the date of the violation or, if the date of the
violation is unknown, then the date the violation is identified;



      (2)   State the address or a definite description of where the
violation occurred;



      (3)   Notify the defendant with a written description or
statutory designation of the violation;



      (4)   State the action required to correct the violation, if
applicable;



      (5)   Show the name and signature of the enforcement officer;



      (6)   List the phone number of the Municipal Court to contact
for questions concerning the hearing process;



      (7)   Direct the defendant to correct the violation (if
applicable) and to pay the civil penalties set forth in the Court’s deposit
schedule for civil infractions on or before the appearance date, or to appeal
in Municipal Court, at the time and date specified in the citation; and



      (8)   Notify the defendant that if the defendant fails to
correct the violation (if applicable) and to pay the civil penalty on or
before the appearance date, or appeal on the date specified in the citation,
the Municipal Court shall issue a written decision of default against the
defendant and impose a civil penalty as set forth in this chapter.



   (B)   Service.



      (1)   The city employee issuing the citation may serve it on
the defendant and shall attempt to hand deliver the civil citation to the
person accused of violating this code. The citation may also be served in the
same manner as the summons in a civil action by any means allowed by the
Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure. In addition a citation may be served by
certified or registered mail, return receipt requested.



      (2)   The citation is deemed served on the date it is hand
delivered or, if mailed, on the date it is deposited in the United States
mail.



      (3)   Failure to receive any notice specified in this chapter
does not affect the validity of the proceedings conducted under this chapter.



   (C)   Disposition without hearing.



      (1)   If the defendant corrects the violation (if applicable)
and pays the civil penalty on or before the court appearance date, no hearing
shall be held.



      (2)   If the defendant fails to correct the violation (if
applicable) and pay the civil penalty on or before the court appearance date,
and fails to appear in Municipal Court on the date and time set, the
defendant has failed to exhaust administrative remedies. The Municipal Court
may issue a written decision of default against the defendant, impose a civil
penalty as set forth in this chapter and make an abatement order. The
Municipal Court shall mail a copy of the default decision and notice of the
right to set aside the default decision to the defendant.



   (D)   Hearings.



      (1)   A Municipal Court judge or hearing officer shall hear
and dispose of civil violations, and make such orders as may be necessary and
proper to dispose of such cases. Cases shall be heard without a jury.



      (2)   The Municipal Court may not grant variances nor modify
the provisions of the city code.



      (3)   The Municipal Court may continue the date set for the
hearing and may continue any hearing, for cause.



      (4)   If the defendant appears before the Municipal Court and
admits the allegations, the Municipal Court shall issue a decision, finding
against the defendant, impose a civil penalty and may issue an abatement
order.



      (5)   If the defendant appears and denies the allegation, the
Municipal Court shall set the matter for hearing.



      (6)   The Arizona Rules of Procedure in Civil Traffic
Violation Cases shall be followed by the Municipal Court for civil citations
issued pursuant to this code except where inconsistent with the provisions of
this code or as modified or established for use by the Williams Municipal
Court or the Arizona Supreme Court.



      (7)   The city employee who issued the citation may appear in
Municipal Court and be the city's representative. No person may be examined
except by the Court, an attorney for a party, the city's designated
representative or the defendant.



§ 12.05  MUNICIPAL COURT DECISION.



   (A)   The Municipal Court shall find the defendant responsible, not
responsible, or may dismiss the civil citation.



   (B)   If the defendant is found responsible, the order shall include:



      (1)   The amount of any civil penalty imposed;



      (2)   The date by when the defendant shall correct the
violation (if applicable), which date shall not be less than 30 days after
the decision and pay the civil penalty; and



      (3)   Notice that if the defendant does not pay the civil
penalty or correct the violation within the time ordered, the city may take
any lawful action to collect the civil penalty and impose a lien on the
defendant's land.



   (C)   A party aggrieved by the Municipal Court’s decision with
regards to any civil penalty may appeal to Superior Court pursuant to A.R.S.
§ 12-124. An appeal shall be taken within time set forth in the Rules of
Procedure for Civil Traffic Cases.



§ 12.06  COLLECTION OF CIVIL PENALTIES.



   Civil penalties may be collected in any manner provided by law.



§ 12.07  ABATEMENT ORDER.



   (A)   If the Municipal Court has determined that the code violation
constitutes a public nuisance or a hazard to public health and safety, the
Court may, together with the decision, issue a written abatement order and
shall cause the responsible persons to be notified of the existence of such
order and shall direct that such responsible persons abate and correct said
conditions within a reasonable time but not less than 30 days from the date
of the order.



   (B)   The abatement order shall include notice that if the
responsible person fails to comply with the abatement order, the city may
abate the violation and record the cost of such abatement, including
administrative fees and additional inspection fees, as a lien against the
property in accordance with A.R.S. § 9-499. The notice shall also include an
estimate of the amount of such costs.



   (C)   A copy of the abatement order shall be sent to the owner and
to the occupant or lessee of the property on which the violation exists and
may be sent to any other persons sought to be charged with the responsibility
of abatement. The notice may be personally delivered or sent by certified
mail, postage prepaid and addressed as follows:



      (1)   To the owner, as such person’s name and address appear
on the records of the County Assessor’s office as the address where the
last tax bill was mailed or as otherwise known to the city by virtue of more
recent and reliable information;



      (2)   To any occupant or lessee at the address of the subject
property; and



      (3)   To any other such responsible person, as such person’s
name and address are known to the city.



   (D)   The City Manager/Designee, shall record the abatement order in
the County Recorder’s Office and shall file a copy thereof in the office of
the City Clerk together with an affidavit or certificate stating the time and
manner in which notice of such abatement order was given. The failure of any
owner or other person to receive such abatement order shall not affect in any
manner the validity of any proceedings taken hereunder.



   (E)   The owner of real property as shown in the records of the
County Assessor's Office shall be conclusively deemed to be the proper person
and address for mailing of notice of any hearing, civil citation or order
pursuant to this chapter and the failure of any addressee to receive notice
shall not invalidate any notice, civil citation or order so issued. Any duly
issued civil citation, notice or order shall be conclusively deemed to be
adequate notice to any and all occupants, users, or possessors of the
property or its contents, and the failure of any such person to see, read,
understand or otherwise receive the civil citation notice or order shall not
invalidate any of the proceedings.



   (F)   Any person aggrieved by the Municipal Court’s abatement
order may appeal to the City Board of Building Appeals by filing a written
appeal with the Clerk of that Board. An appeal shall be taken within 20 days
of the date of the Municipal Court’s decision or shall be waived.



   (G)   The hearing before the City Board of Building Appeals shall be
a trial de novo.



§ 12.08  ABATEMENT.



   If no appeal to the Board of an abatement order is taken by the
defendant, or if the Board affirms the findings of the Municipal Court, and
the abatement is not accomplished by the defendant by the date specified, the
city may proceed to have the conditions abated as soon thereafter as is
practical. The city may use city employees or may contract for the required
services, or use any other methods to secure compliance in an expeditious and
timely manner.



   (A)   Record of expenses. The City Manager/Designee shall keep an
itemized account of the expenses involved in abating the public nuisance,
conditions and violation(s). A statement showing the expense of the
abatement, including the cost of additional inspections and administrative
costs, together with an explanation of appeal rights shall be served on the
owner in the same manner as provided in this chapter. This statement shall
also specify the date by which the owner must pay the amount in full to the
city and explain that a lien will be placed on the property if the amount is
not paid in full by the date specified.



   (B)   Appeal before Board of Appeals. Within ten working days from
the date of the statement of expenses, the owner may appeal and protest, in
writing, the amount of the costs to the Board of Appeals. The appeal shall be
filed with the Clerk of the Board and shall clearly show the legal
description of the property, the date the statement of expenses was issued
and the reason for the appeal.



   (C)   Hearing on statement of expenses. At the time fixed for the
hearing on the statement of expense, the Board shall consider the statement
and appeal or protests and objections raised by the owner. The Board may
revise, correct or modify the statement as it considers just and thereafter
shall confirm the statement by motion or resolution. The decision of the
Board on all appeals, protests and objections which may be made shall be
final and binding on all parties.



   (D)   Assessment against the property. Upon completion of the
abatement by the city and service of the statement of expenses on the owner,
or if an appeal to the statement of expenses was filed, upon confirmation of
the statement of expenses by the Board, the city shall take action to collect
the amount owing to the city, if the property owner does not pay the expense
of abating the violation(s) within 30 days after receipt of the statement of
expenses, the amount shall be recorded as an assessment lien against the
property in accordance with A.R.S. § 9-499. Such assessment lien shall be
payable and bear interest as set forth in A.R.S. § 9-499.



   (E)   Other collection methods. At the discretion of the City
Manager/Designee, the city may take any and all other legal actions to
collect such amounts.



   (F)   Satisfaction of assessment lien. If abatement is performed by
the property owner or other interested person, prior to abatement by the city
but after the city has recorded the notice of violation and abatement order
or when the city receives full payment from the property owner of the amount
of the assessment lien together with interest as provided by law, the city
shall record a release of the notice or lien release as is appropriate.



§ 12.99  CIVIL PENALTIES.



   (A)   Any person violating any section of this code which is
designated as subject to civil sanction or penalty shall be punished by
imposition of a civil sanction not to exceed $500, unless another penalty is
specified.



   (B)   Any person who commits a violation of any section of this code
generally punishable as a civil infraction, after previously having been
found responsible for committing two or more civil infractions of the same
chapter within any 36-month period, whether by admission, by payment of the
fine, by default, or by judgment after hearing, shall be guilty of a criminal
misdemeanor punishable as set forth in § 10.99.



   (C)   Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.



TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   MAYOR AND COUNCIL



      31.   OFFICERS



      32.   ORGANIZATIONS



      33.   ELECTIONS



      34.   EMPLOYMENT AND PERSONNEL



      35.   PUBLIC SAFETY



      36.   FINANCE AND REVENUE; FEES



CHAPTER 30:  MAYOR AND COUNCIL



Section




General Provisions




   30.01   Qualifications



   30.02   Term of office



   30.03   Election of Mayor



   30.04   Duties of Mayor



   30.05   Rules of Council procedure



   30.06   Vacancies in office



   30.07   Financial statements



   30.08   Liability of Council



   30.09   Oath of office



   30.10   Compensation of Mayor and Council




Ordinances




   30.25   Proposed ordinances



   30.26   Passage



   30.27   Filing



 



   30.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 30.01  QUALIFICATIONS.



   (A)   No person shall be a Council member unless, at the time of
election, he or she is 18 years of age, a qualified elector of the city,
residing within the city limits at the time of election and has resided
therein for one year next preceding.



   (B)   Any person who has resided for at least one year preceding an
election in an area annexed at least 30 days prior to such election by the
city shall also be qualified.



(Prior Code, § 2-1.01)  (Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)



§ 30.02  TERM OF OFFICE.



   Every Council member elected shall hold office for the term of four
years, except the members of the Council first appointed, and before entering
upon the duties of office shall take and subscribe to the oath of office.



(Prior Code, § 2-1.02)  (Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)



§ 30.03  ELECTION OF MAYOR.



   Commencing with the City Council elections of 1992, the Mayor shall be
directly elected by the qualified electors of the city. The term of office
for the Mayor shall be two years.



(Prior Code, § 2-1.03)  (Ord. 683, passed - -1990; Ord. 890, passed -
-2007; Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)



§ 30.04  DUTIES OF MAYOR.



   (A)   The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city and
shall preside over the meetings of the Council and shall perform such duties
as may be required by law.



   (B)   The Mayor shall appoint, by and with the advice and consent of
the Council, all officers of the city whose election or appointment is not
otherwise provided for. Any vacancies occurring in an appointive office shall
be filled in this same manner.



   (C)   The Mayor shall have general supervisory functions over all of
the executive officers and employees of the city.



   (D)   The Mayor shall have the power and authority to inspect all
books and records pertaining to the city affairs, kept by any officer or
employee of the city.



   (E)   Whenever a question or dispute should arise pertaining to the
respective duties or powers of any appointed officer of the city, the
question or dispute shall be settled by the Mayor with approval of the
Council, and he or she shall have the power to delegate any appointed officer
any duty which is to be performed when no specific officer has been directed
to perform such duty.



(Prior Code, § 2-1.04)  (Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)



§ 30.05  RULES OF COUNCIL PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The City Council may prescribe rules of procedure for
government of its proceedings.



   (B)   The following rules of procedure shall be applicable to all
City Council actions and proceedings.



      (1)   Rule 1. General Rules.



         (a)    Rules of Council. The Council shall determine its
own rules, order of business, conduct of public meetings, and shall provide
for keeping of minutes of its proceedings. These minutes shall be a public
record.



         (b)   Written rules, order of business and procedure.
The rules of business and procedure of the Council shall be in writing and be
available to all interested citizens.



      (2)   Rule 2. Council Meetings. The Council shall meet
regularly at least once in every month at such times and places as the
Council may prescribe by resolution. Special meetings may be held on the call
of the Mayor or of four or more members. All meetings shall be public.
Executive sessions may be held for the purposes allowed by law. All public
meetings and proceedings shall confirm to the requirements of A.R.S. §§
38-431 and 38-431.09, inclusive.



      (3)   Rule 3. The Council Agenda; Staff Procedure. All
reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions, contracts, documents or
other matters to be submitted to the Council shall be delivered to the City
Clerk.



         (a)   The City Manager and Mayor shall review the agenda
and background information material on the third day preceding the Council
meeting (Monday, if the meeting is on Thursday). The Mayor may delete or add
items to the agenda at his or her discretion, except those items specifically
requested by three Council members.



         (b)   Following the agenda review, the agenda with the
additions, deletions or other corrections shall be returned to the City Clerk
who shall prepare the agenda in its final form.



         (c)   Copies of the agenda and background material shall
be disseminated to the Mayor, City Council and city staff by the City Clerk.



         (d)   The agenda shall be made public in advance of the
meeting by posting on the regular public bulletin board at City Hall. Such
action shall be taken concurrently with the furnishing of the agenda to
individual members of the City Council.



      (4)   Rule 4. The Council Agenda. The agenda’s order of
business may contain the following items:



         (a)   Pledge of Allegiance;



         (b)   Invocation;



         (c)   Minutes:



            1.   Approval of Council meeting minutes; and



            2.   Acceptance of committee and board meeting
minutes.



         (d)   Reports and announcements:



            1.   Mayor’s announcements; and



            2.   Manager’s announcements.



         (e)   Public appearances and participation: five minute
time limit per citizen;



         (f)   Consent agenda: (NOTE: Consent agenda items may be
removed from the consent agenda and placed on the non-consent agenda at the
request of any Councilperson.)



            1.   Miscellaneous;



            2.   Award of bids;



            3.   Ordinances for introduction;



            4.   Ordinances for adoption;



            5.   Resolutions; and



            6.   Miscellaneous departmental reports.



         (g)   Non-consent agenda:



            1.   Miscellaneous;



            2.   Award of bids;



            3.   Ordinances for adoption; and



            4.   Resolutions.



         (h)   Manager’s business and staff reports;



         (i)   Council members’ business and reports; and



         (j)   Executive session.



      (5)   Rule 5. Presiding Officer. The Mayor or, in his or her
absence, the Vice-Mayor shall take the Chair at the hour appointed for the
Council to meet and shall immediately call the members to order. The
presiding officer shall serve as Council Parliamentarian. The Clerk shall
enter in the minutes of the meeting the names of the members present.



      (6)   Rule 6. Temporary Chairperson. In case of the absence of
the Mayor and the Vice-Mayor, the City Clerk shall call the Council to order.
If a quorum is found to be present, the Council shall proceed to elect, by a
majority vote of those present, a Chairperson of the meeting.



      (7)   Rule 7. Decorum and Order. The presiding officer shall
preserve decorum and decide all questions or order, subject to appeal to
Council.



         (a)   During Council meeting, Council members shall
preserve order and decorum and shall not delay or interrupt the proceedings
or refuse to obey the orders of the presiding officer or the Rules of the
Council. Every Council member desiring to speak shall address the Chair, and
upon recognition by the presiding officer, shall confine himself or herself
to the question under debate and shall avoid all personalities and indecorous
language. A Council member, once recognized, shall not be interrupted while
speaking unless called to order by the presiding officer or unless a point of
order is raised by another Council member. If a Council member is called to
order while he or she is speaking, he or she shall cease speaking immediately
until the question of order is determined. If ruled to be in order, he or she
shall be permitted to proceed. If ruled to be not in order, he or she shall
remain silent or shall alter his or her remarks so as to comply with the
rules of the Council. Council members shall confine their questions to the
particular issues before the Council. If the presiding officer fails to act,
any member may move to require him or her to enforce the rules and the
affirmative vote of the majority of the Council shall require the presiding
officer to act.



         (b)   The presiding officer shall have the authority to
preserve decorum in meetings as far as the audience, staff members and city
employees are concerned. The City Manager shall also be responsible for the
orderly conduct and decorum of all city employees under his or her direction
and control. Any remarks shall be addressed to the Chair and to any or all
members of the Council. No staff member, other than the staff member having
the floor, shall enter into any discussion either directly or indirectly
without permission of the presiding officer.



         (c)   Citizens attending Council meetings shall also
observe the same rules of propriety, decorum and good conduct applicable to
members of the Council. Any person making personal, impertinent and
slanderous remarks or who becomes boisterous while addressing the Council, or
while attending the Council meeting, shall be removed from the room if the
Sergeant-at-Arms is so directed by the presiding officer. Unauthorized
remarks from the audience, stamping of feet, whistles, yells, and similar
demonstrations shall not be permitted by the presiding officer, who shall
direct the Sergeant-at-Arms to remove such offenders from the room. Should
the presiding officer fail to act, any member of the Council may move to
require him or her to enforce the rules, and the affirmative vote of the
majority of the Council shall require the presiding officer to act. Any
member of the public desiring to address the Council must first prepare a
“citizen information card” in the form attached as Exhibit 1 to the
ordinance codified in this section and on file in the office of the City
Clerk and give the card to the City Clerk. The City Clerk will give the
“citizen information cards” to the presiding officer for recognition of
the public speaker. Any member of the public desiring to address the Council
shall be recognized by the presiding officer, shall state his or her name and
address in an audible tone for the record, and shall limit his or her remarks
to the questions under discussion. Any remarks shall be addressed to the
Chair and to any or all members of the Council and be limited to five minutes.



      (8)   Rule 8. Right of Appeal. Any member may appeal to the
Council from a ruling of the presiding officer. If the appeal is seconded,
the member making the appeal may briefly state his or her reason for the
same, and the presiding officer may briefly explain his or her ruling, but
there shall be no debate on the appeal, and no other member shall participate
in the discussion. The presiding officer shall then put the question,
“Shall the decision of the Chair be sustained?” If a majority of the
members present vote “Aye”, the ruling of the Chair is sustained,
otherwise it is overruled.



      (9)   Rule 9. Limitation of Debate. No member of the Council
or public shall be allowed to speak more than once upon any one subject,
until all Council members have had an opportunity to speak, nor for a longer
time than five minutes, without the leave of the presiding officer. Citizen
groups shall be represented in presentation to the Council by one of its
members.



      (10)   Rule 10. Roll Call Vote. If necessary, the roll shall
be taken for yeas and nays upon any questions before Council. It shall be out
of order for members to explain their votes during the roll call. There shall
be no additional debate or speaking on the subject after the vote is taken.



      (11)   Rule 11. Motions to be Stated by Chair; Withdrawal.
When a motion is made and seconded, it shall be so stated by the Chair before
debate commences. A motion may not be withdrawn by the mover without the
consent of the member seconding it.



      (12)   Rule 12. Motion to Adjourn, When Not in Order, Not
Debatable. A motion to adjourn shall be in order at any time, except as
follows:



         (a)   When repeated without intervening business or
discussion;



         (b)   When made as an interruption of a member while
speaking;



         (c)   When the previous question has been ordered; and



         (d)   While a vote is being taken. A motion to adjourn
is debatable only as to the time to which the meeting is adjourned.



      (13)   Rule 13. Motion to Lay on Table. A motion to lay on the
table shall preclude all amendments or debate on the subject under
consideration. If the motion shall prevail, the consideration of the subject
may be resumed only upon motion of a member voting with the majority of the
members present.



      (14)   Rule 14. Division of Question. If the question contains
two or more divisible propositions, the presiding officer may, and upon
request of a member shall, divide the same.



      (15)   Rule 15. Amend an Amendment. A motion to amend an
amendment shall be in order, but one to amend an amendment to an amendment
shall not be introduced. An amendment modifying the intention of a motion
shall be in order, but an amendment relating to a different matter shall not
be in order.



      (16)   Rule 16. Reconsideration. After the decision on any
question any member who voted with the prevailing side may move a
reconsideration of any action at the same or the next succeeding meeting;
provided, however, that, a resolution authorizing or relating to any contract
may be reconsidered at any time before the final execution thereof. A motion
to reconsider shall require a majority vote of all Council members, whether
present or not, not disqualified from voting by a conflict of interest, but
in no event by less than four affirmative votes.



      (17)   Rule 17. Rescind. After the time for reconsideration
has expired, any member who voted with the prevailing side may move to
rescind any action. A motion to rescind shall require a majority vote of all
Council members, whether present or not, not disqualified from voting by a
conflict of interest, but in no event by less than four affirmative votes.



      (18)   Rule 18. Suspend the Rules. These rules may be
suspended by a two-thirds vote of all Council member whether present or not.



      (19)   Rule 19. Amend the Rules. These rules may be amended
with previous notice by a majority vote of all Council members whether
present or not. A motion to amend these rules without previous notice shall
require a two-thirds vote of all Council members whether present or not.



      (20)   Rule 20. What Other Rules Shall Govern. The rules of
parliamentary practice, comprised in Robert’s Rules of Order, latest
edition, shall govern the Council in all cases to which they are applicable;
provided, they are not in conflict with these rules.



(Prior Code, § 2-1.05)  (Ord. 763, passed - -1997; Ord. 890, passed -
-2007; Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)



§ 30.06  VACANCIES IN OFFICE.



   (A)   The Council shall fill by appointment, for the unexpired term,
a vacancy that may occur through death, resignation, removal from the city,
or removal from office, of a member of the Council. The member appointed
shall be a legal resident of the city at the time of taking office.



   (B)   Removal from office shall be deemed to have occurred after the
happening of any of the following events before the expiration of the term of
office: death; insanity, when judicially determined; resignation, and the
lawful acceptance thereof; judicial decree declaring removal; ceasing to be a
resident of the city; absence from the city, without written permission from
the Council, for three consecutive months; ceasing to discharge the duties of
office for a period of three consecutive months; conviction of a felony or an
offense, including a violation of his or her official duties; failure to file
his or her official oath within the time prescribed by law; and judicial
decree declaring his or her election or appointment void.



(Prior Code, § 2-1.10)  (Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)



§ 30.07  FINANCIAL STATEMENTS.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      COMPENSATION. Money, tangible things of value or financial
benefit.



      IMMEDIATE FAMILY. The spouse of a local public officer, and any
minor child of whom he or she has legal custody.



      LOCAL PUBLIC OFFICER. A person holding an elective office of the
city.



   (B)   Duty to file financial disclosure statement exceptions. In
addition to other statements and reports required by law, each local public
officer as a matter of public record shall file with the City Clerk, on a
form prescribed by the City Clerk, a verified statement disclosing:



      (1)   The name of the public officer and the name of each
member of his or her immediate family, and all names under which they do
business;



      (2)   An identification of each employer and of each source of
compensation amounting to more than $1,000 annually received by the local
public officer and his or her immediate family in their own names, or by any
other person for the use or benefit of the local public officer and his or
her immediate family, and a brief description of the nature of the services
for which the compensation was received; providing, however, that, this
division (B)(2) shall not be construed to require the disclosure of
information that may be privileged by law; nor the disclosure of individual
items of compensation that constitute a portion of the gross income of the
business or profession from which the local public officer and his or her
immediate family derive compensation;



      (3)   The name of every corporation, trust, business
partnership or association in which the local public officer and his or her
immediate family, or any other person for the use or benefit of the local
public officer and his or her immediate family, have an investment or
holdings of over $1,000 at the fair market value as of the date of the
statement, or in which the local public officer or his or her immediate
family holds any office, or have a fiduciary relationship, together with the
description of the investment, office or relationship; providing, however,
that, this division (B)(3) does not require disclosure of the name of any
bank or other financial institution with which the local public officer or
member of his or her immediate family has a deposit or withdrawal share
account;



      (4)   All state real property interests, including street
address, specific location and approximate size or legal description, to
which either the local public officer or his or her immediate family hold
legal title or beneficial interest; specifically excluding however, his or
her residence or property used primarily for personal recreation by the local
public officer or his or her immediate family;



      (5)   The names of all persons to whom the local public
officer and his or her immediate family owe unsecured personal debts in
excess of $1,000. The names of all persons who owe the local public officer
and his or her immediate family unsecured personal debts in excess of $1,000;
providing, however, no disclosures shall be required of debts owed by the
local public officer or his or her immediate family resulting from the
following: the ordinary conduct of a business or a profession; debts on the
residence of the local officer or his or her immediate family; debts arising
out of secured transactions for purchase of consumer goods; debts secured by
cash values or life insurance; and/or debts owed relatives;



      (6)   The source of each gift of more than $500 received by
the local public officer and his or her immediate family in their own names
during the preceding 12 months, or by any other person for the use or benefit
of the local public officer or his or her immediate family, except gifts
received by will or by virtue of intestate succession, or received by way of
distribution from any inter vivos or testamentary trust established by a
spouse or by an ancestor, or gifts received from relatives. Political
contributions shall not be construed as gifts;



      (7)   A description of all of the professional, occupation and
business licenses in which either a local public officer or his or her
immediate family has an interest issued by the city or by any state
department, agency, commission, institution or instrumentality, which
requires for its issuance the consideration of the application by the City
Council, including the name in which the license is issued, the type of
business or profession and its location; and



      (8)   The verified statement required to be filed pursuant to
this entire division (B) shall be filed by each local public officer on or
before January 31 of each year hereafter.



   (C)   Duty to file financial statement by a candidate or an
appointee to the Council.



      (1)   A candidate for the City Council shall file a financial
disclosure statement containing the information required in division (B)
above hereof on forms prescribed by the City Clerk, at the time of filing his
or her signed nomination papers.



      (2)   An appointee to the City Council to fill a vacancy shall
file the required statement within 15 days following the filling of such
vacancy.



(Prior Code, § 2-1.11)  (Ord. 507, passed - -1974; Ord. 890, passed -
-2007; Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)  Penalty, see § 30.99



§ 30.08  LIABILITY OF COUNCIL.



   A member of the Council under the provisions of this subchapter shall
not be personally liable in damages or otherwise for an unlawful act of an
officer or employee of the city, unless the act is committed by the authority
of the member, or he or she has notice or knowledge thereof, or unless the
act is committed under circumstances which would cause, or would have caused,
a reasonable or prudent person to have knowledge of the act.



(Prior Code, § 2-1.12)  (Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)



§ 30.09  OATH OF OFFICE.



   Immediately prior to the assumption of the duties of office, each
Council member shall, in public, take and subscribe the oath of office.



(Prior Code, § 2-1.13)  (Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)



§ 30.10  COMPENSATION OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL.



   The salary of the Mayor shall be $900 per month and the salary of each
Council member shall be $800 per month; said amounts consisting of the
combination of the currently effective salary amounts and the currently
effective health care premium reimbursement program. This section shall be
effective as of the date adopted and shall be applied retroactively to
1-1-2015.



(Prior Code, § 2-1.14)  (Ord. 822, passed - -2001; Ord. 835, passed -
-2004; Ord. 849, passed - -2006; Ord. 890, passed - -2007; Ord. 938, passed
12-12-2014; Ord. 950, passed 6-25-2015)




ORDINANCES




§ 30.25  PROPOSED ORDINANCES.



   (A)   Every proposed ordinance introduced to the Council shall be in
writing and shall be entitled with the subject of the proposed ordinance.



   (B)   Before any action may be taken on the ordinance, the Council
shall determine the method for presentation of the proposed ordinance. Upon
motion, the Council may elect to:



      (1)   Have the ordinance read in its entirety just once or
more than one time;



      (2)   Read the ordinance in its entirety and then refer to the
proposed ordinance just by title and number; or



      (3)   Dispense with the reading of the ordinance in its
entirety and just refer to the ordinance by title and number.



   (C)   The city may adopt by reference uniform codes or any law that
the state legislature mandates the city to adopt.



   (D)   A proposed ordinance may be presented to the Council by the
City Clerk, the City Attorney, the City Manager, the Finance Director or any
other member of the city staff so directed by the Council.



   (E)   If, after consideration of a proposed ordinance, amendments
are made to it before the ordinance is finally passed by the Council, the
ordinance should be re-read with the amendments. If the ordinance was not
initially read in its entirety, any amendments must be read in their
entirety, indicating the specific sections of the proposed ordinance that
were amended.



(Prior Code, § 2-5.01)  (Ord. 812, passed - -2001; Ord. 938, passed
12-12-2014)



§ 30.26  PASSAGE.



   Before any ordinance shall become of force, it must pass the Council by
a vote of the majority of the members of such Council, and such vote shall
not be taken until the proposed ordinance has been read as provided herein,
when the same has passed by the required vote, the same shall be presented to
the Mayor and signed by him or her and attested by the City Clerk, and the
corporate seal of the city placed thereon.



(Prior Code, § 2-5.02)  (Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)



§ 30.27  FILING.



   (A)   Every ordinance, after its final passage as provided in §
30.26 of this chapter, shall be filed by the Clerk in the archives of the
city, and the same shall not be removed therefrom save upon the order of the
Council.



   (B)   The Clerk shall record all ordinances passed in a well bound
book with his or her certificate of correctness of such record, which record
shall be used for all purposes the same as the original ordinances, and shall
be open at all reasonable hours to the public.



(Prior Code, § 2-5.03)  (Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)



§ 30.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Any public officer or candidate who fails to file a financial
disclosure statement, as required by § 30.07 of this chapter, or who
knowingly and intentionally files an incomplete financial disclosure
statement is guilty to an offense punishable by a fine not less than $300 and
not more than $1,000 or confinement in the County Jail up to 30 days.



(Prior Code, § 2-1.11)  (Ord. 507, passed - -1974; Ord. 890, passed -
-2007; Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)



CHAPTER 31:  OFFICERS



Section



   31.01   General policies



   31.02   City Manager



   31.03   City Clerk



   31.04   City Attorney



   31.05   Magistrate Court and City Magistrate



   31.06   Chief of Police



   31.07   Fire Chief



   31.08   City Engineer



   31.09   Public Works Director



   31.10   Building Official



   31.11   Street Superintendent



   31.12   Water Superintendent



   31.13   Finance Director



   31.14   City Librarian



§ 31.01  GENERAL POLICIES.



   (A)   This chapter sets forth the city officers that shall be
appointed either by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City
Council, or by the City Manager.



   (B)   The appointment of these officers may be accomplished by
written contract between the city and appointees. However, it is not
necessary for the city to enter into a written contract to hire any of the
officers outlined in this chapter.



   (C)   In case of death, resignation or removal of any appointive
officer, the vacancy shall be filled by appointment in the same manner in
which the original appointment was made.



   (D)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit one
person from holding more than one appointive office. If a person holds more
than one appointive office, that individuals shall exercise all the rights
and responsibilities of each office, as set forth in state statutes and this
code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 2-2.01)  (Ord. 811, passed - -2001; Ord. 890, passed -
-2007; Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)



§ 31.02  CITY MANAGER.



   (A)   Creation of the office. The office of City Manager is hereby
created.



   (B)   Appointment of City Manger.



      (1)   The City Manager shall be appointed by a majority vote
of the City Council for an indefinite term. The City Manager shall be chosen
by the Council on the basis of the candidate’s executive and administrative
qualifications and knowledge of the duties of the office as set forth in this
section.



      (2)   No member of the City Council is eligible to become the
City Manager during the term for which he or she shall have been elected.



      (3)   A candidate for the position of City Manager need not be
a resident of the city or of the state at the time of his or her selection
for the position. However, if a candidate accepts the position of City
Manager, he or she must reside in the city throughout his or her tenure.



      (4)   The City Manager is an “at will” employee and serves
at the pleasure of the City Council unless otherwise established through an
employment contract or by Council.



   (C)   Removal of City Manager. The City Manager may be removed by
the Council without liability at any time, for any reason not unlawful
whatsoever or for no reason by a majority vote of its members.



   (D)   Duties and authority of City Manager. The City Manager shall
be the executive officer and head of the administrative branch of the city.
The City Manager is responsible to the City Council for proper administration
of all affairs of the city. The City Manager has the following powers and
duties:



      (1)   General administrative supervision and control of the
business and employment affairs of the city, including supervision of the
other appointive officers and all employees. The City Manager shall have full
authority to employ, terminate, suspend and utilize any and all available
employment-related action affecting all employees. In the cases of
termination or suspension of all employees, except temporary, the City
Council shall retain authority to ratify or reject actions by the City
Manager through the appeal process hereby directed to be included in the
Human Resource Department rules and regulations;



      (2)   Attend meetings of the City Council. The City Manager,
exercising discretion, may report to the City Council on the affairs of the
various departments, boards, services or activities under their supervision.
The City Manager also has the discretion to delegate to the heads of the
various departments the obligation to report to the City Council on the
affairs of that department;



      (3)   Institute proceedings to suspend or discharge any
appointive officer. The decision to suspend or remove any appointive officer
must be approved by a majority vote of the City Council;



      (4)   Suspend or discharge any classified employee(s), subject
to the provisions of the personnel regulations;



      (5)   Coordinate the administrative functions and operations
of the various departments, boards, divisions and services of the city
government, including:



         (a)   Ensuring compliance with the policies, rules,
regulations and ordinances adopted by the city and the various departments,
boards or divisions of the city; and



         (b)   Reviewing, recommending changes to, and approving
any policies and procedures proposed for adoption by any department, board or
division of the city.



      (6)   The City Manager shall require each department, board,
division or service to submit estimates of the annual expenditures required
for salaries, wages, capital outlays and miscellaneous operating costs. The
estimates from the various departments, divisions, boards and services will
be used by the City Manager in the preparation of the preliminary budget for
the City Council. The City Manager will submit an annual preliminary budget
to the City Council on the date specified by the Council;



      (7)   Supervise the expenditures of all departments, divisions
or services of the city government and act as purchasing agent for all
supplies, goods, wares, merchandise, equipment and material which may be
required for any such departments, divisions or services;



      (8)   Analyze and supervise the functions, duties and
activities of the various departments, boards and services of the city
government and of all employees thereof, and make such recommendations to the
City Council that will result, if made effective, in the highest degree of
efficiency in the overall operation of the city government;



      (9)   Develop and organize improvement projects and programs,
and aid and assist the City Council and the various departments and boards in
carrying the same through to a successful conclusion;



      (10)   Serve as public relations officer of the city
government, which includes investigating and handling all written and signed
citizen complaints filed against any employee, department or service thereof,
with the goal that the city is properly acting on their behalf with the
highest degree of efficiency;



      (11)   Cooperate with community organizations whose aim and
purpose it is to advance the best interests of the city and its residents,
and provide them with reasonable assistance obtainable through the city
government within the limitations of law and reasonable capabilities of the
city;



      (12)   Keep an up-to-date inventory of all personal property
owned by the city and, whenever appropriate, recommend to the City Council
the purchase of new machinery, equipment and supplies taking into
consideration trade-in value of then-owned machinery and equipment;



      (13)   Perform, or have performed, studies and surveys of the
duties, responsibilities and work of the personnel in the various departments
and services of the city government, and, if appropriate, recommend to the
City Council abolition, consolidation or reorganization of positions if such
action would increase efficiency in the administration of the city government;



      (14)   Ensure that all laws and ordinances of the city are
duly enforced;



      (15)   Devote his or her entire time during work hours to the
discharge of official duties; and



      (16)   Perform such other duties as may be required by the
City Council, not inconsistent with the laws of the state or the ordinances
of the city.



   (E)   Restrictions.



      (1)   The City Manager shall not exercise any policymaking or
legislative functions, except as otherwise set forth in this code of
ordinances.



      (2)   It is not intended by this code or ordinances to grant
any authority to, or impose any duty on, the City Manager, that is vested in
or imposed by general law or city ordinances on City Council or any other
city commission, board, officer or employee, except as set forth in the city
ordinances.



   (F)   Public relations. In the discharge of duties the City Manager
shall endeavor at all times to exercise the highest degree of tact, patience
and courtesy in contacts with the public and with all city boards,
departments and employees and shall establish and maintain a harmonious
relationship between all personnel employed in the government of the city, to
the end that the highest possible standards of public service shall be
continuously maintained.



   (G)   Compensation. The City Manager shall receive such compensation
as the City Council shall fix from time to time.



(Prior Code, § 2-2.02)  (Ord. 583, passed - -; Ord. 616, passed - -; Ord.
811, passed - -2001; Ord. 850, passed - -2006; Ord. 890, passed - -2007; Ord.
938, passed 12-12-2014)



§ 31.03  CITY CLERK.



   (A)   Creation of office. The office of City Clerk is hereby
created, to be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and
Council.



   (B)   Maintenance and records.



      (1)   The City Clerk shall keep a true and correct record of
all business transactions of the City Council, and any other records that
pertain to the business of the city or that the Council directs. The Clerk
shall number and plainly label, and file separately in a suitable category,
all resolutions, ordinances, notices, deeds, surveys, leases, paid and unpaid
vouchers, inventories, letters, orders and other documents of whatever nature.



      (2)   In maintaining the records of the city, the City Clerk
shall comply with state statutes on the preservation of public records, and
any rules, regulations or manuals for municipal records promulgated by the
state’s Department of Library, Archives and Public Records. Nothing in this
section prohibits the City Clerk from disposing of records that no longer
have “sufficient legal or fiscal value” and/or disposing of records
pursuant to a records retention and disposition schedule established by the
state’s Department of Library, Archives and Public Records.



   (C)   Public inspection. The Clerk shall keep convenient for public
inspection all public records and documents under his or her control as
provided by state statute, or rules, regulations or manuals for municipal
records promulgated by the state’s Department of Library, Archives and
Public Records.



   (D)   Preparation of agenda. The Clerk shall collect from the city
officers and employees for the agenda such monthly reports prepared in such a
manner and to include such information as may be directed by Council.



   (E)   Minutes. The Clerk shall prepare or cause to be prepared all
minutes of Council proceedings, consistent with the method chosen by the
Council in the city ordinances for the recordation of the minutes and shall
ensure their correctness and accuracy.



   (F)   Posting. The Clerk shall process, record, file, publish and,
if required by state statute, post all ordinances, resolutions, budgets and
notices that may be passed by the Council.



   (G)   Treasurer.



      (1)   The Clerk shall hold the office of ex officio City
Treasurer.



      (2)   However, the responsibilities for issuing purchase
orders.



      (3)   The city’s accounting records, payroll and other
financial functions will be handled by the city’s Finance Director, whose
responsibilities are set forth in § 31.13 of this chapter.



   (H)   Election official. The Clerk shall be the city election
official and perform those duties required by state statute.



   (I)   Licenses. The Clerk shall issue or cause to be issued all
licenses that may be prescribed by state statutes or this code.



   (J)   Responsibilities and duties. The Clerk shall be responsible
for the duties of the Human Resources Director, as described in the Human
Resources Ordinance. The Clerk shall perform or cause to be performed, those
administrative responsibilities and duties that are conferred by the Council,
in addition to those as specified in this code of ordinances.



   (K)   Deputy Clerk. The Clerk may appoint such Deputy Clerks as are
necessary to fulfill the functions and responsibilities contained herein.



(Prior Code, § 2-2.03)  (Ord. 811, passed - -2001; Ord. 890, passed -
-2007; Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)



§ 31.04  CITY ATTORNEY.



   (A)   Creation of office. The office of City Attorney is hereby
created. It shall consist of the City Attorney and such assistants as may be
authorized by the Council.



   (B)   Appointment of City Attorney. The City Attorney shall be
appointed by a majority vote of the City Council for an indefinite term and
shall serve under the direct supervision and control of the Council as its
legal advisor. The City Attorney shall hold office for and at the pleasure of
the Council. Nothing in this section, however, shall be construed as a
limitation on the power of authority of the Council to enter into any
supplemental agreement with the City Attorney delineating additional terms
and conditions of employment.



   (C)   Removal of City Attorney. The City Attorney may be removed by
the Council by a majority vote of its members, without right of hearing,
unless such hearing is required by state or federal law.



   (D)   Retainment of other counsel. The Council may retain or employ
other attorneys, assistants or special counsel as may be needed to take
charge of any litigation or legal matters or to assist the City Attorney
herein.



   (E)   Compensation. The City Attorney shall receive such
compensation and expense allowance as the City Council shall from time to
time determine, and such compensation shall be a proper charge against such
funds of the city, as the Council shall designate.



   (F)   Duties of City Attorney. The duties and functions of the City
Attorney shall be as follows:



      (1)   Advise the Council and all city officers in all matters
of law pertaining to their office;



      (2)   Furnish legal service at all meetings of the Council,
except when excused or disabled, and give advice or opinions on the legality
of all matters under consideration by the Council or by any of the boards or
commissions or officers of the city;



      (3)   Prepare and/or approve all ordinances, resolutions,
agreements, contracts and other legal instruments as shall be required for
the proper conduct of the business of the city; and



      (4)   Prosecute and defend all suits, actions or causes
wherein the city is a party.



(Prior Code, § 2-2.04)  (Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)



§ 31.05  MAGISTRATE COURT AND CITY MAGISTRATE.



   (A)   Establishment of Court. The Magistrate Court is hereby
established in the city.



   (B)   Jurisdiction. The Magistrate Court shall have jurisdiction
over all violations of this code of ordinances, and concurrent jurisdiction
with Justices of the Peace of precincts in the city, of violations of laws of
the state, committed within the limits of the city.



   (C)   Presiding officer. The presiding officer of the Magistrate
Court shall be the City Magistrate, who shall be appointed by the Council.
The City Magistrate shall be appointed for a term of two years, to run
concurrently with the term of the Justice of the Peace in the city’s
Justice Court. During this term, the Magistrate may only be removed for cause.



   (D)   Duties of City Magistrate. The City Magistrate shall have the
following powers and duties:



      (1)   The powers and duties set forth and conferred upon him
or her under the provisions of the State Constitution and statutes, this
code, and the ordinances and resolutions of the city;



      (2)   The keeping of a docket in which shall be entered each
action of the proceedings of the Court, therein;



      (3)   The responsibility for fixing and receiving all bonds
and bills, all fines, penalties, fees and other monies as provided by law and
collected by the Court; and the payment of such to the Treasurer;



      (4)   The submission of a monthly report to the Council
summarizing the Court activities for that month; and the preparation of
schedule of traffic violations, not involving the death of a person, listing
the specific bail for each violation; and



      (5)   The designation of a deputy other than a law enforcement
officer, and a specific location at which the Deputy shall, during the hours
when the Court is not open, set the amount of bail in accordance with the
foregoing schedule; and collect such bail or accept proper bail bonds, in
lieu thereof, for and on behalf of the Court.



   (E)   Proceedings. Proceedings of the Magistrate Court shall be
conducted in accordance with the State Constitution, and the applicable state
statutes and rules of the state’s Supreme Court pertaining to police
courts. The proceedings shall be conducted in accordance with the rules of
criminal procedure for the Superior Court, unless otherwise prescribed, and
providing this code of ordinances and resolutions of the city are not in
conflict therewith.



   (F)   Employees. The City Magistrate shall be authorized to employ
such Court Clerks and other auxiliary personnel as is necessary for the
proper functions of the Magistrate Court. Said Court Clerks and other
personnel shall be responsible for those duties lawfully assigned to them by
the City Magistrate.



(Prior Code, § 2-2.05)  (Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)



§ 31.06  CHIEF OF POLICE.



   (A)   Chief law enforcement officer. The Chief of Police shall be
the chief law enforcement officer of the city.



   (B)   Appointment of Chief of Police. The Chief of Police is
appointed to his or her office by the Mayor and City Council, at whose
pleasure he or she serves.



   (C)   Removal of Chief of Police. The Chief of Police may be removed
from his or her office by the City Manager, upon institution of dismissal
proceedings, subject to approval of the Mayor and the Council.



   (D)   Writs and processes. The Chief of Police shall, by himself or
herself or his or her Deputy, execute all writs and processes issued under
the authority of this code of ordinances.



   (E)   Keep the peace. The Chief of Police or his or her officers
shall strictly suppress all riots, disturbances and peace, and shall have, in
the discharge of his or her proper duties, like powers and be subject to like
responsibilities as any peace officer in similar cases.



   (F)   Arrests. The Chief of Police or his or her officers shall
arrest, with or without warrant, upon view of any person violating or charged
with violating any of the provisions of this code of ordinances.



   (G)   Additional aid. The Chief of Police or his or her officers
shall have the power to call to his or her assistance, deputies or in case of
emergency, any number of citizens needful to effect an arrest, quell a riot,
keep good order or preserve the peace, and any person who shall refuse to
assist the Chief of Police or his or her officers when called upon, shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.



   (H)   Police officers. The Chief of Police may appoint such officers
as may be necessary, and such appointments shall become effective when
approved by the City Manager.



   (I)   Duties of the Chief of Police.



      (1)   The Chief of Police shall keep, or cause to be kept,
records and make, or cause to be made, such reports concerning the activities
of his or her Department as may be required of him or her by the City Manager;



      (2)   He or she shall be responsible for the performance of
the Police Department and all of its functions; all persons who are members
of the Police Department shall serve as classified or unclassified personnel
in accordance with the pertinent personnel ordinance for the city;



      (3)   Provide reports, as requested by the City Manager,
regarding the functioning of the Police Department. Provide such information
as may be requested by the City Manager to carry out his or her duties and
responsibilities to the Council including, but not limited to, providing an
inventory of personal property in the departments that he or she supervises;
making recommendations to the City Manager for purchases of new equipment,
machinery or supplies; or providing information to the City Manager for the
completion of personnel studies or surveys; and



      (4)   Issue general orders and policies for the Police
Department. Any general orders or policies that are inconsistent with the any
city ordinance are void and of no effect. Because of the evolving nature of
the constitutional, statutory and common law applicable to police officers,
all general orders and policies shall be submitted to the City Attorney for
legal approval before they go into effect. Any general order or policy that
could potentially subject the city to civil liability may, in the discretion
of the Chief of Police, be presented to the Council for its approval.



(Prior Code, § 2-2.06)  (Ord. 613, passed - -; Ord. 614, passed - -; Ord.
811, passed - -2001; Ord. 890, passed - -2007; Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)



§ 31.07  FIRE CHIEF.



   (A)   Election of officers. The Fire Chief shall be elected by the
member of the Fire Department, with the approval of the Mayor and Council.
Other officers are elected by the members of the Fire Department.



   (B)   Supervision. The Fire Chief shall be head of the Fire
Department and have supervision over all officers and members thereof.



   (C)   Duties and responsibilities of Fire Chief. The Fire Chief
shall keep such records and make such reports concerning the activities of
his or her department as may be required by the statute or by the Mayor and
Council. He or she shall be responsible for the performance of the Fire
Department and of its functions, and all persons who are members of the Fire
Department shall serve subject to his or her orders. He or she shall be
responsible for the control and custody of all Fire Department property and
equipment and shall have the authority of a law enforcement officer while
actively engaged in fighting a fire or en route to or from a fire.



(Prior Code, § 2-2.07)  (Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)



§ 31.08  CITY ENGINEER.



   (A)   A competent Civil Engineer shall be appointed by the City
Manager, with the advice and consent of the Council. The City Engineer will
receive such fees for his or her services as the Council may prescribe.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the City Engineer to perform such
duties as from time to time may be required of him or her in locating the
grades of the streets and sidewalks of the city; handling engineering
questions regarding the city’s sewers and water works; participating as a
member of the Planning and Zoning Commission; providing legal descriptions
for property and easements; inspections, as needed, for construction projects
by the city or infrastructure to be dedicated to the city; and such other
duties as may be required by him or her by the Council or the City Manager.



(Prior Code, § 2-2.08)  (Ord. 811, passed - -2001; Ord. 890, passed -
-2007; Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)



§ 31.09  PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR.



   (A)   Creation of office. The office of Public Works Director is
hereby created.



   (B)   Appointment of Public Works Director. The Public Works
Director will be appointed by the City Manager and will be appointed for an
indefinite term.



   (C)   Removal of Public Works Director. The Public Works Director
may be removed by the City Manager.



   (D)   Duties of Public Works Director. The Public Works Director
shall act as an administrator of various municipal departments and shall:



      (1)   (a)   Supervise and coordinate the work performed by
the following departments:



            1.   Streets;



            2.   Maintenance;



            3.   Water;



            4.   Sanitation;



            5.   Maintenance;



            6.   City Shop;



            7.   Golf Course; and



            8.   Youth Center and Recreation Activities.



         (b)   However, the heads of the foregoing departments
shall be responsible for arranging for the work schedules for the employees
in those departments, and the personnel decisions in those departments.
Personnel decisions will be coordinated by the department heads and the City
Manager.



      (2)   Advise the City Manager and City Engineer of issues that
require the expertise of an engineer;



      (3)   At the request of the City Manager or City Engineer,
supervise construction or repair work that is done on behalf of the city,
obtain and provide such factual information as may be required by the City
Manager to properly perform his or her functions to oversee municipal
projects and to enter into contracts on behalf of the city, and obtain and
provide such factual information as may be required by the City Engineer to
properly perform his or her functions;



      (4)   Provide such information as may be requested by the City
Manager to carry out his or her duties and responsibilities to the Council,
including, but not limited to, providing an inventory of personal property in
the departments that he or she supervises; making recommendations to the City
Manager for purchases of new equipment, machinery or supplies; or providing
information to the City Manager for the completion of personnel studies or
surveys;



      (5)   Ensure that the City Manager has information from the
various departments that will allow the City Manager to submit a preliminary
annual budget to the city;



      (6)   Provide information to the City Manager as may be
required for the City Manager to report to the Council as required by these
ordinances; and



      (7)   Attend Council meetings as necessary and provide a
report to the Council as requested by the City Manager.



(Prior Code, § 2-2.09)  (Ord. 811, passed - -2001; Ord. 890, passed -
-2007; Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)



§ 31.10  BUILDING OFFICIAL.



   (A)   Creation of office. The office of Building Inspector, who
shall be known as Building Official, is hereby created.



   (B)   Appointment of Building Official. The Building Official shall
be appointed by and under the general control of the City Manager.



   (C)   Duties of Building Official. It shall be the duties of the
Building Official to enforce all laws relating to the construction,
alteration, repair, removal and demolition of buildings and structures. To
the extent that the Building Official and the Fire Chief have overlapping
duties, they shall act jointly. The Building Official, or his or her
designee, shall also act as the Plumbing and Electrical Inspector, Fire
Marshal and Code Enforcement Officer.



   (D)   Classification. For purposes of personnel actions, the
Building Official shall be a “classified” employee.



(Prior Code, § 2-2.10)  (Ord. 811, passed - -2001; Ord. 890, passed -
-2007; Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)



§ 31.11  STREET SUPERINTENDENT.



   (A)   Creation of office. The office of Street Superintendent is
hereby created.



   (B)   Appointment of Street Superintendent. The City Manager shall
be responsible for selecting the Street Superintendent with the advice and
consent of the City Council. The compensation of the Street Superintendent
shall be fixed by the City Manager.



   (C)   Duties of Street Superintendent. The duties of the Street
Superintendent shall be to improve, maintain and supervise the improvement of
maintenance of the streets, alleys and public ways of the city; together with
such other duties as are specified by law, including, but not limited to,
those enumerated in A.R.S. §§ 48-501 to 48-691, and such other duties as
may be from time to time prescribed by the Mayor and Council.



   (D)   Classification. For purposes of personnel actions, the Street
Superintendent shall be a “classified” employee.



(Prior Code, § 2-2.11)  (Ord. 811, passed - -2001; Ord. 890, passed -
-2007; Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)



§ 31.12  WATER SUPERINTENDENT.



   (A)   Creation of office. The office of Water Superintendent is
hereby created.



   (B)   Appointment of Water Superintendent. The City Manager shall be
responsible for the selection and hiring of the Water Superintendent. The
compensation of the Water Superintendent shall be fixed by the City Manager.



   (C)   Duties of Water Superintendent. The Water Superintendent shall
be responsible for the supervision of all work and activities of the Water
and Wastewater Departments, including, but not limited to, improvement,
maintenance, repair and installation of water mains, water services, water
meters, sanitary sewers, wastewater treatment plant and facilities, storage
facilities, fire hydrants and other related equipment and facilities as well
as such other duties as may from time to time be prescribed by the Mayor and
Council.



   (D)   Classification. For purposes of personnel actions, the Water
Superintendent shall be a “classified” employee.



(Prior Code, § 2-2.12)  (Ord. 811, passed - -2001; Ord. 890, passed -
-2007; Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)



§ 31.13  FINANCE DIRECTOR.



   (A)   Creation of office. The office of Finance Director is hereby
created.



   (B)   Appointment of Finance Director.



      (1)   The Finance Director shall be appointed by a majority
vote of the City Council for an indefinite term. The Finance Director shall
be chosen by the Council on the basis of his or her financial, accounting,
executive and administrative qualifications and his or her knowledge of the
duties of his or her office that are set forth in this section.



      (2)   A candidate for the position of Finance Director need
not be a resident of the city or of the state at the time of his or her
selection for the position.



      (3)   The Finance Director is an “at will” employee, who
serves at the pleasure of the City Council.



   (C)   Removal of Finance Director. The Finance Director may be
removed by the Council by a majority vote of its members.



   (D)   Duties of Finance Director. The Finance Director shall be an
executive officer of the city. The Finance Director shall:



      (1)   Report directly to the City Manager regarding the
financial matters of the city;



      (2)   Manage and supervise payroll for the city and its
employees;



      (3)   Be responsible for payment of all purchase orders and
the issuance of purchase orders;



      (4)   Manage the bookkeeping and accounting records for the
city;



      (5)   Assist in any audits performed on the city’s financial
records;



      (6)   Assist the City Manager in the preparation of the annual
budget;



      (7)   Prepare revenue and expenditure reports, and the check
register, and make presentations to the City Council on these items;



      (8)   Draft rules and regulations for the Accounting
Department, including rules and regulations governing reimbursement requests
and documentation, if any, needed for properly paying reimbursement requests.
Any rules and regulations drafted on reimbursement requests shall provide,
however, for the right of the Mayor or a member of the Council to have a
denial of any reimbursement request appealed to the Council within 45 days of
the date of the decision. In the event of an appeal, the reimbursement issue
will be decided by a majority vote of the Council;



      (9)   Attend meetings of the City Council; and



      (10)   Perform such other duties as may be requested by either
the Council or the City Manager.



(Prior Code, § 2-2.13)  (Ord. 811, passed - -2001; Ord. 890, passed -
-2007; Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)



§ 31.14  CITY LIBRARIAN.



   (A)   Creation of office. The office of City Librarian is hereby
created.



   (B)   Appointment of City Librarian. The City Manager shall be
responsible for selecting the City Librarian with the advice and consent of
the City Council. The compensation of the City Librarian shall be fixed by
the City Manager.



   (C)   Duties of the City Librarian.



      (1)   Annual report. The City Librarian, on or before the
first Monday of July of each year, shall make a report to the City Council
containing:



         (a)   A full statement of all property and money
received, where derived and its use and expenditure;



         (b)   The number of books, journals and other
publications on hand, the number added by gift, purchase or otherwise during
the year, the number lost or missing and the number and kind of those loaned;



         (c)   Such other statistics, information and suggestions
as may be of general interest; and



         (d)   A financial report, showing all receipts and
disbursements of money.



      (2)   Library management. Advise the City Council regarding
the following:



         (a)   The creation and enforcement of rules, regulations
and by-laws necessary for the administration and government of the library
and all library property;



         (b)   Exercise and administration of any trust declared
or created for the library or reading room;



         (c)   Recommend the purchase necessary books, journals,
publications and other personal property;



         (d)   Make recommendations to the City Council and City
Manager for library staffing; and



         (e)   Request the drawing and payment of money out of
the Library Fund for any liability authorized.



      (3)   Records. The City Librarian shall keep such records and
make such reports concerning the activities of the library as may be required
by the statute or by the Mayor and Council. The City Librarian shall be
responsible for the performance of the library and of its functions. The City
Librarian shall be responsible for the control and custody of all library
property and equipment and shall exercise general supervision of the library.



(Prior Code, § 2-2.13)  (Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)



CHAPTER 32:  ORGANIZATIONS



Section



   32.01   General provisions



   32.02   Planning and Zoning Commission



   32.03   Board of Adjustments



   32.04   Golf Committee



   32.05   Housing Authority



   32.06   Airport Advisory Committee



   32.07   Historic Preservation Commission



   32.08   Parks and Recreation Commission



§ 32.01  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   The following boards and commissions shall consist of seven
members each, appointed by the Mayor and Council of the city:



      (1)   Planning and Zoning Commission;



      (2)   Board of Adjustments;



      (3)   Golf Committee;



      (4)   Historic Preservation Commission;



      (5)   Airport Advisory Committee; and



      (6)   Parks and Recreation Commission.



   (B)   Each Board and Commission shall have as ex officio member, the
Mayor and one additional Council member appointed or designated by the City
Council.



   (C)   The term of each member appointed to the enumerated boards and
commissions shall expire July 1 of the year of the Council elections,
commencing in 1990.



   (D)   Each member appointed to any board, committee or commission,
including those enumerated above and those listed in this chapter, shall have
attained the age of 18 years. A majority of all sitting boards, committees or
commissions shall be made up of individuals who have resided in the city for
at least one year on the date of appointment to the board, committee or
commission.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2-3 intro)  (Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)



§ 32.02  PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.



   (A)   Establishment. The Planning and Zoning Commission of the city
is hereby established.



   (B)   Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson. The Commission shall elect a
Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson from among its own members, who shall serve
for one year and until their successors are elected and qualified. The
Chairperson shall preside at all meetings and exercise all the usual rights,
duties and prerogatives of the head of any similar organization. The
Chairperson shall have the power to administer oaths and to take evidence.
The Vice-Chairperson shall perform the duties of the Chairperson in the
latter’s absence or disability. Vacancies created by any cause shall be
filled for the unexpired term by a new election.



   (C)   Powers and duties. It shall be the duty of said Commission to
formulate, create and administer any lawful plan duly adopted by the City
Council for the present and future growth of the city, pertaining to the use
of land and buildings for any purpose, together with all incidental
activities usually associated therewith and commonly known as “Planning and
Zoning”; to make or cause to be made a continuous study of the best present
and future use to which land and buildings shall be put within the city and
in cooperation with adjacent areas; to recommend to the City Council
revisions in such plans which, in the opinion of the said Commission, are for
the best interest of the citizens; to promulgate rules of procedure and to
supervise the enforcement of rules so promulgated by said Commission and
approved by the City Council.



   (D)   Meetings. The Commission shall provide in its rules for its
meetings; provided, however, that, special meetings may be called by the
Chairperson or, in his or her absence, the Vice-Chairperson. In addition, any
three members of the Commission may make written request to the Chairperson
for a special meeting and, in the event such meeting is not called, such
members may call such special meeting in such manner and form as may be
provided in the Commission rules.



   (E)   Quorum. Four members shall constitute a quorum. The
affirmative vote of four members shall be required for passage of any matter
before the Commission. In this connection, the minutes of the meeting shall
reflect the “ayes” and “nays” cast on particular shall and the
reflect the vote of each member present. A member may abstain from voting
only upon a declaration that he or she has a conflict of interest, in which
case such member shall take no part in the deliberations on the matter in
question.



   (F)   Assessment of fees. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall
be authorized to establish a uniform schedule of fees for services with all
receipts to be paid into the General Fund of the city. Such fee schedules
shall become effective upon approval by the City Council.



   (G)   Appeals. Any person who has been aggrieved by a decision of
the Planning and Zoning Commission may appeal to the City Council for hearing
within 30 days from such decision.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2-3.01)  (Ord. 502, passed - -; Ord. 890, passed - -2007;
Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)



§ 32.03  BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS.



   (A)   Established. The Board of Adjustments of the city is hereby
established.



   (B)   Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson. The Board shall elect a
Chairperson and a Vice-Chairperson from among its own members, who shall
serve for one year and until their successors are elected and qualified. The
Chairperson shall preside at all meetings and exercise all the rights, duties
and prerogatives of the head of any similar organization. The Chairperson
shall have the power to administer oaths and take evidence. The
Vice-Chairperson shall perform the duties of the Chairperson in the
latter’s absence or disability. Vacancies created by any cause shall be
filled for the unexpired term by a new election.



   (C)   Powers and duties. It shall be within the power and the duty
of the Board to:



      (1)   Hear and decide appeals in which it is alleged there is
an error in an order, requirement or decision made by the Zoning
Administrator in the enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance;



      (2)   Hear and decide appeals for variances from the terms of
the Zoning Ordinance only if, because of special circumstances applicable to
the property, including its size, shape, topography, location or surroundings
the strict application of the Zoning Ordinance will deprive such property of
privileges enjoyed by other property of the same classification in the same
zoning district. Any variance granted is subject to such conditions as will
assure that the adjustment authorized shall not constitute a grant of special
privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the
vicinity and zone in which such property is located; and



      (3)   Reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order
requirement or decision of the Zoning Administrator appealed from, and make
such order, requirement, decision or determination as necessary.



   (D)   Powers not granted. The Board of Adjustments may not:



      (1)   Make any changes in the uses permitted in any zoning
classification or zoning district, or make any changes in the terms of the
Zoning Ordinance; provided, the restriction in this section shall not affect
the authority to grant variances pursuant to this section; or



      (2)   Grant a variance if the special circumstances applicable
to the property are self-imposed by the property owner.



   (E)   Meetings. The Board shall provide in its rules for its
meetings; provided, however, that, special meetings may be called by the
Chairperson or in his absence the Vice-Chairperson. In addition, any three
members of the Board may make written request to the Chairperson for a
special meeting and, in the event such meeting is not called, such members
may call such special meeting in such manner and form as may be provided in
Board rules.



   (F)   Quorum. Four members shall constitute a quorum. The
affirmative vote of four members shall be required for passage of any matter
before the Board. In this connection, the minutes of the meeting shall
reflect the “ayes” and “nays” cast on a particular measure and shall
reflect the vote of each member present. A member may abstain from voting
only upon a declaration that he or she has a conflict of interest, in which
case such member shall take no part in the deliberations on the matter in
question.



   (G)   Assessment of fees. The Board of Adjustments shall be
authorized to establish a uniform schedule of fees for services with all
receipts to be paid into the General Fund of the city. Such fee schedules
shall become effective upon approval by the City Council.



   (H)   Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by any act or decision
of the Board of Adjustments may appeal to the Superior Court of the county,
within 30 days from the decision or action from which the appeal is taken.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2-3.03)  (Ord. 503, passed - -; Ord. 890, passed - -2007;
Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)



§ 32.04  GOLF COMMITTEE.



   (A)   Establishment. The Golf Committee of the city is hereby
established.



   (B)   Membership. The golf professional of Williams Elephant Rocks
Golf Course shall serve as an ex officio member of the Golf Committee.



   (C)   Chairperson. The members of the Committee shall meet the first
Monday of every July to elect members to serve as Chairperson and as
Vice-Chairperson for a term of one year from July 1 through June 30. The
Chairperson shall preside at all meetings and exercise all the rights, duties
and prerogatives of the head of any similar organization. The
Vice-Chairperson shall perform the duties of the Chairperson in the
latter’s absence or disability. Vacancies created by any cause shall be
filled for the unexpired term by a new election.



   (D)   Quorum. Four members shall constitute a quorum. The
affirmative vote of four members shall be required for passage of any matter
before the Committee. A member may abstain from voting only upon a
declaration that he has a conflict of interest, in which case such member
shall take no part in the deliberations on the matter in question.



   (E)   Duties and powers. The Golf Committee is not constituted as an
agency of the City Council, but is created to assist and aid the Council in
its operation, regulation and supervision of the City of Williams Elephant
Rocks Golf Course in accordance with the state statutes.



   (F)   Negotiation. The Committee shall be responsible to negotiate,
review, recommend to and advise the Council on all matters relating to the
conduct of the Williams Elephant Rocks Golf Course, and the same shall be in
writing. Rules and regulations may be proposed by the Committee, but such
rules and regulations shall be enacted only by the City Council.



   (G)   Property disposal. No real property shall be disposed of by
the Committee by sale, lease or otherwise, but the Committee shall advise the
Council on such matters. The Committee may negotiate to lease space, area or
improvements and the granting of concessions for aeronautical purposes or
purposes incidental thereto, and advise the Council in writing of its
recommendations.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2-3.04)  (Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)



§ 32.05  HOUSING AUTHORITY.



   (A)   Established. The Housing Authority of the city is hereby
established, as an agent of the city pursuant to A.R.S. § 36-1404; and
delegated to the Housing Authority is the power to construct, maintain,
operate and manage a housing project or projects, and also any or all of the
powers conferred on the city by A.R.S. §§ 36-1401 et seq., except the power
to borrow money, issue bonds and acquire real property.



   (B)   Members and compensation. The Mayor shall appoint five persons
as Commissioners of the Authority. Commissioners first appointed shall be
designated to serve terms of one, two, three, four and five years,
respectively, from the date of their appointment, but thereafter
Commissioners shall be appointed for a term of office of five years. A
Commissioner of the Authority shall not hold any other office or employment
of the city. A Commissioner shall hold office until his or her successor has
been appointed and is qualified. A certificate of appointment or
reappointment of a Commissioner shall be filed with the Clerk and a
certificate shall be conclusive evidence of the due and proper appointment of
the Commissioner. A Commissioner shall receive no compensation for his or her
services, but shall be entitled to reimbursement for necessary expenses,
including travel, incurred in the discharge of his or her duties.



   (C)   Secretary and executive director. The Housing Authority is
authorized to employ a Secretary who shall also act as executive director and
shall be authorized to employ technical experts and such other officers,
attorneys, agents and employees, permanent and temporary, as the Authority
requires, to determine their qualifications, duties and compensation, and to
delegate to one or more of them such powers or duties as the Authority deems
proper.



   (D)   Powers and quorum; Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson. The
powers delegated by the city to the Housing Authority shall be vested in the
Commissioners. Three Commissioners shall constitute a quorum for all purposes
including conducting the business of the Authority and exercising its powers.
Action may be taken by the Authority upon a vote of a majority of the
Commissioners present. The Mayor shall designate which of the Commissioners
shall be Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson, respectively.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2-3.05)  (Res. 593, passed - -; Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)



§ 32.06  AIRPORT ADVISORY COMMITTEE.



   (A)   Establishment. The Airport Advisory Committee of the city is
hereby established.



   (B)   Chairperson. The members of the Committee shall meet the first
Monday of every July to elect members to serve as Chairperson and as
Vice-Chairperson for a term of one year from July 1 through June 30. The
Chairperson shall preside at all meetings and exercise all the rights, duties
and prerogatives of the head of any similar organization. The
Vice-Chairperson shall perform the duties of the Chairperson in the
latter’s absence or disability. Vacancies created by any cause shall be
filled for the unexpired term by a new election.



   (C)   Quorum. Four members shall constitute a quorum. The
affirmative vote of four members shall be required for passage of any matter
before the Committee. A member may abstain from voting only upon a
declaration that he or she has a conflict of interest, in which case such
member shall take no part in the deliberations on the matter in question.



   (D)   Duties and powers. The Airport Advisory Committee is not
constituted as an agency of the City Council, but is created to assist and
aid the Council in its operation, regulation and supervision of the city’s
Municipal Airport in accordance with the state statutes.



   (E)   Negotiation. The Committee shall be responsible to negotiate,
review, recommend to and advise the Council on all matters relating to the
conduct of the city’s Municipal Airport, and the same shall be in writing.
Rules and regulations may be proposed by the Committee, but such rules and
regulations shall be enacted only by the City Council.



   (F)   Property disposal. No real property shall be disposed of by
the Committee by sale, lease or otherwise, but the Committee shall advise the
Council on such matters. The Committee may negotiate to lease space, area or
improvements and the granting of concessions for aeronautical purposes or
purposes incidental thereto, and advise the Council in writing of their
recommendations.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2-3.06)  (Ord. 637, passed - -; Ord. 890, passed - -2007;
Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)



§ 32.07  HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION.



   (A)   Membership.



      (1)   The city’s Historic Preservation Commission is hereby
established. Appointed members shall have demonstrated interest, experience
or knowledge in one of the following: history; architecture; planning;
archaeology; historic archaeology; real estate; historic preservation; law;
or a related field. If expertise in one of the above mentioned
fields/disciplines is not available locally, then the Commission must obtain
expertise in that field when considering National Register nominations and
other actions that will impact historic properties.



      (2)   The Historic Preservation Commission shall meet at least
four times each year and follow the provisions of the state’s Open Meeting
Law, A.R.S. §§ 38-431 et seq.



      (3)   The Commission shall elect a Chairperson and
Vice-Chairperson from among its own members, who shall serve for one year and
until their successors are elected and qualified. The Chairperson shall
preside at all meetings and exercise all the usual rights, duties and
prerogatives of the head of any similar organization. The Chairperson shall
have the power to administer oaths and to take evidence. The Vice-Chairperson
shall perform the duties of the Chairperson in the latter’s absence or
disability. Vacancies created by any cause shall be filled for the unexpired
term by a new election.



   (B)   Statement of the Commission’s powers. Unless otherwise
specified herein, the powers and duties of the Historic Preservation
Commission shall be as follows:



      (1)   The Historic Preservation Commission shall be advisory
to the Mayor and Council in all matters regarding historic preservation in
the city;



      (2)   Adopt criteria consistent with the National Register of
Historic Places for the identification of historic districts;



      (3)   Prepare, or cause to be prepared, a comprehensive
inventory of historic buildings and districts in the city;



      (4)   Increase public awareness of the value of historic,
architectural, archaeological and cultural preservation by developing and
participating in public information programs;



      (5)   Make recommendations to the Mayor and Council concerning
the utilization of grants from federal and state agencies, private groups and
individuals on the utilization of budgetary appropriations to promote
historic preservation in the city. The Commission shall raise funds as
necessary to promote its programs and activities;



      (6)   Make known to the owners of historic properties and the
public standards for architectural review and appoint three members of the
Historical Commission to sit on the Development Review Board when review of
preservation projects occurs;



      (7)   Evaluate and comment upon decisions by other public
agencies affecting the physical development and land use patterns in historic
districts as appropriate;



      (8)   Hold public hearings as specified in this section; and



      (9)   Any other functions which may be designated by
resolution or motion of the Council.



   (C)   Reporting and notification procedures.



      (1)   The Commission shall follow notification procedures
under the state’s Open Meeting Law as well as those discussed in this
section.



      (2)   The Commission shall keep written, public minutes.



      (3)   The Commission shall prepare a written annual report of
Commission activities that is provided to the Mayor and Council, the State
Historic Preservation Officer and is available to the public.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2-3.07)  (Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)



§ 32.08  PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION.



   (A)   There is hereby established a Parks an Recreation Commission
of the city to serve in an advisory capacity to the Mayor and Council on
Parks and Recreation matters such as:



      (1)   Citizens’ requests for park and recreation
improvements, facilities and programs;



      (2)   Coordinating city/school/county functions;



      (3)   Coordination with special interest activities such as
Little League, youth football, softball tournaments, tennis tournaments and
other activities; and



      (4)   The planning and promotion of recreation facilities,
programs and activities.



   (B)   The Mayor and Council shall strive to appoint members to the
Commission who have a broad range of recreation interest and experience such
as golf, skiing, youth sports and adult sports. The Parks and Recreation
Director shall be an ex officio member of the Parks and Recreation Commission.



   (C)   The Parks and Recreation Commission shall establish its rules
of procedure and shall establish regular meeting dates.



   (D)   The Commission shall elect a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson
from among its own members, who shall serve for one year and until their
successors are elected and qualified. The Chairperson shall preside at all
meetings and exercise all the usual rights, duties and prerogatives of the
head of any similar organization. The Chairperson shall have the power to
administer oaths and to take evidence. The Vice-Chairperson shall perform the
duties of the Chairperson in the latter’s absence or disability. Vacancies
created by any cause shall be filled for the unexpired term by a new election.



(Prior Code, Ch. 2-3.08)  (Ord. 690, passed - -; Ord. 890, passed - -2007;
Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)



CHAPTER 33:  ELECTIONS



Section



   33.01   Date of elections



   33.02   Hours of polls



   33.03   Election procedure



   33.04   Primary election



   33.05   General election



   33.06   Elected candidates



   33.07   Compliance



§ 33.01  DATE OF ELECTIONS.



   (A)   If necessary, there shall be a general election for Mayor and
members of the City Council, held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday
in November of even numbered years.



   (B)   A primary election for members of the City Council shall be
held on the tenth Tuesday before the first Tuesday after the first Monday in
November, immediately preceding the general election.



(Prior Code, § 2-4.01)  (Ord. 594, passed - -; Ord. 745, passed - -1995;
Ord. 793, passed - -1999; Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)



§ 33.02  HOURS OF POLLS.



   On the day of any municipal election, the polls shall be opened at 6:00
a.m. and closed at 7:00 p.m.



(Prior Code, § 2-4.02)  (Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)



§ 33.03  ELECTION PROCEDURE.



   The manner of conducting and voting at elections in the city, of
keeping poll lists, counting and canvassing the votes, certifying the
returns, declaring the results and notifying the persons elected, contesting
the election and all acts relating to the election, shall conform to the
provisions of law relating to the general election of county officers as
nearly as possible.



(Prior Code, § 2-4.03)  (Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)



§ 33.04  PRIMARY ELECTION.



   Any candidate who shall receive, at the primary election, a majority of
the votes cast shall be declared elected to the office for which he or she is
a candidate, effective as of the date of the general election, and no further
election shall be held as to said candidate; except that, in the case where
more candidates than number of offices being elected, receive a majority of
the votes cast, only the number of candidates equal to the number of offices
being filled shall be so declared elected. In that event, those candidates
receiving the highest number of votes shall be declared elected. Nothing on
the ballot in any primary election shall be indicative of the source of the
candidacy or of the support of the candidate.



(Prior Code, § 2-4.04)  (Ord. 591, passed - -; Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)



§ 33.05  GENERAL ELECTION.



   If, at any primary election held as above provided, there be any office
or offices for which no candidate was elected, then as to such office or
offices said election shall be considered to be a primary election for
nomination of candidates for such office or offices, and the second or
general municipal election shall be held to vote for candidates to fill such
office or offices. Candidates to be placed on the ballot at such second or
general municipal elections shall be those not elected at such first
elections, and shall be equal in number to twice the number to be elected to
any given office, or less than that number if there be less than that number
named on the primary election ballot, and persons who receive the highest
number of votes for the respective offices at such first election shall be
the only candidates at such second election; provided that, if there be any
person, who under the provisions of this chapter, would have been entitled to
become a candidate for any office, except for the fact that some other
candidate received an equal number of votes therefor, then all such persons
receiving said equal number of votes shall likewise become candidates for
such office.



(Prior Code, § 2-4.05)  (Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)



§ 33.06  ELECTED CANDIDATES.



   The candidates equal in number to the persons to be elected who shall
receive the highest number of votes at said election shall be declared
elected to such office.



(Prior Code, § 2-4.06)  (Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)



§ 33.07  COMPLIANCE.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the primary election to
be held in the year of 1962 and to each primary election thereafter.



(Prior Code, § 2-4.07)  (Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)



CHAPTER 34:  EMPLOYMENT AND PERSONNEL



Section




Employment Relations




   34.01   Employee relations



   34.02   Dealings with public



   34.03   At-will employment



   34.04   Drug free workplace



   34.05   Administration and discipline



   34.06   Method of amendment




EMPLOYMENT RELATIONS




§ 34.01  EMPLOYEE RELATIONS.



   It is the policy of the city to implement fair and effective personnel
policies and to ensure that all employees act in the best interests of the
city. The city is an equal opportunity employer in full conformity with all
applicable state and federal laws. The City Manager has the responsibility to
and shall prepare and implement the city’s personnel regulations, which
shall govern the conduct of employee relations between the city and its
employees. The City Manager may from time to time amend and/or modify the
personnel regulations and shall be charged with the responsibility to effect
the preparation and/or enforcement of regulations as may from time to time be
required.



(Prior Code, § 9-1.01)  (Ord. 850, passed - -2006)



§ 34.02  DEALINGS WITH PUBLIC.



   The city, as part of its commitment to providing its citizens, the
public and customers with quality products and services, expects all
employees:



   (A)   To deal with citizens, the public, customers and suppliers in
a professional manner;



   (B)   To perform assigned tasks in an efficient and conscientious
manner;



   (C)   To be punctual;



   (D)   To demonstrate a considerate, friendly and constructive
attitude toward fellow employees; and



   (E)   Follow the policies adopted by the city.



(Prior Code, § 9-1.02)  (Ord. 850, passed - -2006)



§ 34.03  AT-WILL EMPLOYMENT.



   (A)   Employees who do not have an individualized written employment
contract are employed at the will of the city and are subject to termination
of employment at any time, for any reason not unlawful, with or without cause
or notice. No city representative is authorized to modify this policy for any
employee or to enter into any agreement; oral or written that changes the
at-will employment relationship. No statements, written or oral, made at any
time to an employee or prospective employee, including statements that
discharge will occur only “for cause” shall alter the at-will nature of
the employment relationship.



   (B)   This subchapter taken alone or in combination with any other
ordinance, rule or regulation of the city shall not create an express or
implied contract concerning any terms or conditions of employment.



(Prior Code, § 9-1.03)  (Ord. 850, passed - -2006)



§ 34.04  DRUG FREE WORKPLACE.



   It is the policy of the city that certain rules and regulations
regarding employees’ behavior are necessary for efficient business
operation and for the benefit and safety of all employees. The city will
maintain a workplace that is free from the effects of alcohol and drug abuse.



(Prior Code, § 9-1.04)  (Ord. 850, passed - -2006)



§ 34.05  ADMINISTRATION AND DISCIPLINE.



   It is the policy of the city that all employees are expected to comply
with the standards of behavior and performance and that any non-compliance
with these standards must be corrected or discipline up to and including
discharge may be imposed. The city, however, retains the right to administer
discipline up to and including discharge in any manner it sees fit.



(Prior Code, § 9-1.05)  (Ord. 850, passed - -2006)



§ 34.06  METHOD OF AMENDMENT.



   (A)   The City Manager has the authority and the responsibility to
prepare and implement the foregoing policies of the city in the form of rules
and/or regulations.



   (B)   The City Manager shall effect the preparation of the rules
and/or regulations embodying the employer-employee policies of the city.



   (C)   The rules and/or regulations resulting from the preparation
efforts of the City Manager will be reviewed and subject to approval by an
Employment Policy Review Committee. Prior to being published and implemented
the Mayor and the City Council must render final approval.



   (D)   The Employment Policy Review Committee shall be comprised of
six members:



      (1)   A member of the City Council;



      (2)   The City Attorney;



      (3)   The City Manager;



      (4)   The Director of Personnel;



      (5)   The Finance Director; and



      (6)   One employee chosen from the employee base at large.



(Prior Code, § 9-1.06)  (Ord. 850, passed - -2006)



CHAPTER 35:  PUBLIC SAFETY



Section




General Provisions




   35.01   Worker’s compensation insurance




Police Department




   35.15   Creation of Department



   35.16   Duties of Police Department



   35.17   Witness fee



   35.18   Rules and regulations



   35.19   Background checks on employees and volunteers




Fire Department




   35.30   Creation of Department



   35.31   Meetings



   35.32   Compensation



   35.33   Volunteer members



   35.34   Fire protection services outside city limits



Cross-reference:



   Fire Chief, see § 31.07



   Police Chief, see § 31.06




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 35.01  WORKER’S COMPENSATION INSURANCE.



   (A)   For purposes of calculating the worker’s compensation
insurance premiums, volunteer firefighters would earn $2,800 per month in
“wages” and volunteers for the city’s Police Department, and all other
volunteers, would earn $1,000 per month in “wages”.



   (B)   The City Manager and/or Human Resources Director are
authorized to negotiate with insurance agents or insurance companies to
procure worker’s compensation insurance, taking into consideration the
lowest rates and the quality of the insurance companies.



(Ord. 945, passed 7-24-2014)




POLICE DEPARTMENT




§ 35.15  CREATION OF DEPARTMENT.



   There is hereby created a Police Department, which shall consist of the
Chief of Police and such other personnel as may be provided by the City
Manager.



(Prior Code, § 5-1.01)



§ 35.16  DUTIES OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   It shall be the duty of the members of the Police Department to see to
the enforcement of all of the laws of the municipality and all statutes
applicable therein and to preserve order and prevent infractions of the law
and arrest violators thereof.



(Prior Code, § 5-1.02)



§ 35.17  WITNESS FEE.



   (A)   Every member of the Police Department shall appear as witness
whenever necessary in a prosecution for a violation of any law or of any
state or federal law.



   (B)   No such member shall retain any witness fee for service as
witness in any action or suit to which the city is a party; and fees paid for
such services shall be turned over to the Police Department, who shall
deposit the same with the Treasurer.



(Prior Code, § 5-1.03)



§ 35.18  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Chief of Police may make or prescribe such rules and regulations as
he or she shall deem advisable, subject to approval of the City Manager.



(Prior Code, § 5-1.04)



§ 35.19  BACKGROUND CHECKS ON EMPLOYEES AND VOLUNTEERS.



   Each applicant for an employee or volunteer position with the city’s
Department of Recreation shall provide a full set of fingerprints to the
city’s Police Department. The city’s Police Department shall forward
those fingerprints, accompanied by the appropriate fees, to the state’s
Department of Public Safety for the purpose of obtaining a state and federal
criminal history records check. The state’s Department of Public Safety is
authorized to exchange this fingerprint data with the Federal Bureau of
Investigation.



(Prior Code, § 5-1.05)  (Ord. 765, passed - -1997)




FIRE DEPARTMENT




§ 35.30  CREATION OF DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   There is hereby created a Fire Department, which shall consist
of a Fire Chief, a Secretary- Treasurer and such other personnel as may be
appropriate for the needs of the Fire Department.



   (B)   The number of personnel in the Fire Department shall be set by
the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 5-2.01)  (Ord. 808, passed - -2001)



§ 35.31  MEETINGS.



   (A)   The Fire Department shall hold regular monthly meetings and
may purchase apparatus and water for fire protection and purchase rescue
equipment for the protection of lives.



   (B)   The Fire Department may also employ necessary help for
additional fire protection assistance.



   (C)   The Fire Department shall not incur any debt or liability in
excess of the funds actually available and unencumbered at the present time,
in the Department fund.



(Prior Code, § 5-2.02)



§ 35.32  COMPENSATION.



   The volunteer firefighters shall serve without compensation, but the
Fire Chief and regular firefighters shall receive compensation for extra
services performed under the direction of the Fire Chief, at the fixed rates,
and subject to the approval of the Mayor and Council.



(Prior Code, § 5-2.03)



§ 35.33  VOLUNTEER MEMBERS.



   Any volunteer members of the Fire Department shall conduct themselves
in the same manner and under the same rules and regulations as regular
members of the Fire Department. They shall respond to all fire calls
according to a schedule prescribed by the Fire Chief and they shall attend
all meetings and drills called by the Fire Department.



(Prior Code, § 5-2.04)



§ 35.34  FIRE PROTECTION SERVICES OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS.



   (A)   The city’s Fire Department may provide fire protection and
emergency services outside the incorporated city limits only upon and
pursuant to a written contract with an established fire district in
accordance with the terms and conditions of that contract.



   (B)   The city’s Fire Department shall not provide any fire or
emergency services outside of the city limits, except:



      (1)   As provided in division (A) above; and



      (2)   In those instances where the Fire Chief determines, in
his or her sole discretion, that there is sufficient equipment, manpower,
other firefighting resources available at that time and that there are no
other emergencies within the city. Thereupon, the Fire Department may, in its
sole discretion, but is not required to, respond to a service request
immediately outside of the city limits.



   (C)   The city’s Fire Department will assess charges and fees, and
will bill for personnel time for fire and emergency services rendered
pursuant to division (B) above in amounts and at rates set by the Council by
resolution at a duly constituted meeting. Those rates, fees and charges will
remain in place until changed or modified by the City Council.



   (D)   All fees collected by the city for fire or emergency services
rendered by the Fire Department for equipment shall be placed in the Fire
Department’s budget. All fees collected for personnel shall be deposited
into the Fireman’s Pension Fund.



   (E)   The Fire Chief is hereby delegated the authority to adopt
standard operating procedures to implement this subchapter and for any other
duty required of him or her by law.



(Prior Code, § 5-2.05)  (Ord. 789, passed - -1998)



CHAPTER 36:  FINANCE AND REVENUE; FEES



Section




General Provisions




   36.01   Claims and demands



   36.02   Court fees




Purchasing System




   36.15   City Manager authority



   36.16   Purchases without bids



   36.17   Informal quotations required



   36.18   Formal bidding by advertisement



   36.19   Advertisement and publication



   36.20   Services exempt



   36.21   Interdepartmental transfer



   36.22   State purchases



   36.23   Purchases at auction



   36.24   Purchases of used materials or equipment




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 36.01  CLAIMS AND DEMANDS.



   (A)   Claims.



      (1)   Every person, firm or corporation having a claim against
the city, except for salaries, shall present such claims in writing for
payment to the office of the City Clerk.



      (2)   The claim must state in detail what the claim is for,
specifying each item payment is claimed for and the amount and date of the
city’s indebtedness.



      (3)   The office of the City Clerk may require such additional
forms and information as deemed necessary and as approved by the Council.



   (B)   Indebtedness to be deducted. No demand shall be allowed in
favor of any person who is indebted to the city without first deducting such
indebtedness.



   (C)   Acknowledgment of payment. Upon payment of such indebtedness
by warrant or check, the recipient or assignee thereof, upon endorsing the
warrant or check acknowledges that he or she has received payment for that
which the warrant or check is intended to make payment, less any authorized
retention of funds which might be retained by the city.



   (D)   Warrants.



      (1)   Upon presentation of properly documented claims, a
warrant properly signed, may be issued by the city in favor of the claimant.



      (2)   A city warrant shall be delivered to the payee of his or
her assignee, executor or administrator, and shall be considered as a check
upon the city depository for the amount therein specified.



      (3)   No funds shall be drawn from the city depository, except
upon a warrant duly signed and endorsed.



   (E)   Claim for damages.



      (1)   No claim for damages shall be paid by the city and no
suit for damages shall be filed against the city unless such claim has first
been presented in writing to the Council.



      (2)   All such claims shall be acted upon within a reasonable
time after such presentation.



(Prior Code, § 2-6.02)  (Ord. 938, passed 12-12-2014)



§ 36.02  COURT FEES.



   (A)   (1)   The City Court shall collect an $18.30 per count,
Court enhancement fee for each case in which a fine, sanction, penalty or
assessment is imposed by the City Court and cause it to be placed monthly in
the Court Enhancement Fee Account. The enhancement fee shall not apply to any
violation that is dismissed by the Court or through the motion of any
prosecution agency or for any violation that is resolved through the
defendant’s participation in a certified defensive driving program that
does not become more than 90 days’ delinquent on Court imposed fees,
sanctions, penalties or assessments. This fee shall be in addition to any
other fine imposed and shall be collected from any individual or business for
each account.



      (2)   All funds collected shall be used to supplement, not
supplant, the funding levels provided the Court in current and future fiscal
years.



      (3)   The fee for the public defender per defendant shall be
$100. If the Judge of the City Court or a duly appointed Judge pro tempore
determines that a person appearing before the Court is indigent, the Court
may reduce the amount of this fee.



      (4)   (a)   The Judge of the City Court shall annually
submit a written plan proposing how the justice enhancement funds will be
used for the following year.



         (b)   This plan shall be submitted routinely, coinciding
with the annual budget preparation.



   (B)   Warrant fees shall be $75. Driver’s license suspension fees
shall be $20.



(Prior Code, § 2-6.03)



   (C)   (1)   The City Court is hereby authorized and directed to
assess a $7 Court processing fee representing the costs incurred by the Court
in processing credit and debit card payments for fines, penalties, surcharges
and fees owed to the Court.



      (2)   This fee shall be in addition to any other fine, fee,
assessment or surcharge imposed and shall be collected from any individual or
business using a credit or debit card for form of payment.



      (3)   All funds collected in accordance with this section
shall be deposited in an account for use by the Court, shall supplement, not
supplant, funds appropriated to the Court through the city’s budget
process, and shall be used in the discretion of the presiding Judge to defray
expenses associated with Court staff, technology, operations and/or
facilities.



   (D)   (1)   The City Court shall collect a $25 fee for each order
to show cause issued by the Court for any order to show cause that is
required for failure to appear, failure to pay, failure to provide proof of
completion or completion of Court-ordered diversion and plea agreement
programs and any other order to show cause where the Court seeks to enforce
or ascertain the status of any Court order.



      (2)   This fee shall be in addition to any other fine, fee,
assessment or surcharge imposed and shall be collected from any individual or
business for each order to show cause.



      (3)   All funds collected shall be used to supplement, not
supplant, the funding levels provided the Court in current and future fiscal
years.



      (4)   (a)   The Judge of the City Court shall annually
submit a written plan proposing how the City Court enhancement funds will be
used for the following year.



         (b)   This plan shall be submitted routinely, coinciding
with the annual budget preparation.



(Ord. 848, passed - -2005; Ord. 851, passed - -2006; Ord. 890, passed -
-2007; Ord. 913, passed 5-13-2010; Ord. 917, passed 4-28-2011; Ord. 938,
passed 12-12-2014)




PURCHASING SYSTEM




§ 36.15  CITY MANAGER AUTHORITY.



   The City Manager, or his or her appointed designee, shall contract for
and purchase or issue purchase authorizations for all supplies, materials,
equipment and services for the offices, departments and agencies of the city.



(Prior Code, § 2-6.01)  (Ord. 499, passed - -; Ord. 790, passed - -1999;
Ord. 819, passed - -2001; Ord. 925, passed - -2012; Ord. 938, passed
12-12-2014)



§ 36.16  PURCHASES WITHOUT BIDS.



   The City Council hereby authorizes the City Manager to make purchases
of individual budgeted items for less than $5,000, exclusive of taxes, by
purchase order without requiring said City Manager to obtain written bids or
quotations.



(Prior Code, § 2-6.01)  (Ord. 499, passed - -; Ord. 790, passed - -1999;
Ord. 819, passed - -2001; Ord. 925, passed - -2012; Ord. 938, passed
12-12-2014)



§ 36.17  INFORMAL QUOTATIONS REQUIRED.



   Where purchases or contracts exceed $5,000.01 and are less than
$25,000, informal quotations shall be required. The City Manager shall be
required to obtain written informal quotations when available for any
contract, city improvement or purchase from $5,000.01 to $25,000, inclusive,
but not including taxes. The City Manager shall request or obtain, when
available, written quotations from at least three qualified persons and keep
a record of the quotations and of the award of contracts and purchases for
public examination and inspection. The City Council shall accept and award
every such contract or purchase exceeding the sum of $5,000.01 to the lowest
qualified bidder who has the highest quality item with the best service. In
determining whether a bidder is a “qualified and responsible bidder”, the
City Council may take into consideration the past performance record of the
bidder. The award may be made to other than the lowest bid. The City Council
expressly reserves the right to reject all quotations. Any work that
constitutes building, alteration, addition or alterations within the scope of
A.R.S. § 34-201(C) may be exempt from the requirement of obtaining three
informal bids.



(Prior Code, § 2-6.01)  (Ord. 499, passed - -; Ord. 790, passed - -1999;
Ord. 819, passed - -2001; Ord. 925, passed - -2012; Ord. 938, passed
12-12-2014)



§ 36.18  FORMAL BIDDING BY ADVERTISEMENT.



   (A)   Formal bidding by advertisement shall be required for any city
improvement or structure costing more than $25,000.01 and shall be executed
by contract, except where such improvement is authorized by the Council to be
performed directly by a city department in conformity with detailed plans,
specifications and estimates. The Council shall accept and award those bids
and written quotations for every such contract of purchase exceeding the sum
of $25,000.01 to the lowest qualified and responsible bidder who has the
highest quality item with the best service. In determining whether a bidder
is a “qualified and responsible bidder”, the City Council may take into
consideration the past performance record of the bidder and change order
history. The City Council expressly reserves the right to reject all
quotations.



   (B)   Formal bidding is not required, however, for:



      (1)   Buildings, structures, additions or alterations within
the scope of A.R.S. § 34-201(C), including any adjustments made by the state
to the maximum amount for such projects;



      (2)   Any street road, bridge, water or sewer work, excluding
water or sewer treatment plants or buildings within the scope of A.R.S. §
34-201(D), including any adjustments made by the state to the maximum amount
for such projects;



      (3)   Construction, reconstruction, installation or repair of
a natural gas or electric utility distribution system owned or operated by
the city, if such work is performed by employees regularly employed by the
city, A.R.S. § 34-201(E);



      (4)   Contributions by the city, if any, for public
infrastructure made pursuant to a development agreement and up to the maximum
amount allowed pursuant to A.R.S. § 34-201(F), including any adjustments
made by the state to such amount; or



      (5)   Any projects that qualify for design-bid-build,
construction manager at risk or job-order contracting pursuant to A.R.S. §§
34-602 et seq.



(Prior Code, § 2-6.01)  (Ord. 499, passed - -; Ord. 790, passed - -1999;
Ord. 819, passed - -2001; Ord. 925, passed - -2012; Ord. 938, passed
12-12-2014)



§ 36.19  ADVERTISEMENT AND PUBLICATION.



   (A)   Advertisements for bids shall distinctly and specifically
state the character of the city improvement contemplated and/or the kind of
supplies, materials, equipment and services required.



   (B)   Such advertisement shall be published at least once in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city, not less than five days prior
to the opening of bids.



   (C)   Bidding will be by sealed proposals only and under such
regulations as may be prescribed by the Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-6.01)  (Ord. 499, passed - -; Ord. 790, passed - -1999;
Ord. 819, passed - -2001; Ord. 925, passed - -2012; Ord. 938, passed
12-12-2014)



§ 36.20  SERVICES EXEMPT.



   This subchapter shall not be construed to apply to the hiring of
professional consultants, or the awarding of liability insurance, contracts
or computer services and other professional services, which, by custom, are
normally not awarded by competitive bidding.



(Prior Code, § 2-6.01)  (Ord. 499, passed - -; Ord. 790, passed - -1999;
Ord. 819, passed - -2001; Ord. 925, passed - -2012; Ord. 938, passed
12-12-2014)



§ 36.21  INTERDEPARTMENTAL TRANSFER.



   The City Manager may transfer to or between offices, departments and
agencies supplies, materials and equipment subject to such regulations as the
Council may prescribe. Claim must state in detail what the claim is for,
specifying each item payment is claimed for and the amount and date of the
city’s indebtedness. The office of the City Clerk may require such
additional forms and information as deemed necessary and as approved by the
Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-6.01)  (Ord. 499, passed - -; Ord. 790, passed - -1999;
Ord. 819, passed - -2001; Ord. 925, passed - -2012; Ord. 938, passed
12-12-2014)



§ 36.22  STATE PURCHASES.



   No part of this subchapter shall be construed to prevent the city from
purchasing any items through the state. Where the state has already
established open end contracts or procedures for purchasing items at quantity
discounts, the city may, without bidding or obtaining quotes, make purchases
through the state for those items.



(Prior Code, § 2-6.01)  (Ord. 499, passed - -; Ord. 790, passed - -1999;
Ord. 819, passed - -2001; Ord. 925, passed - -2012; Ord. 938, passed
12-12-2014)



§ 36.23  PURCHASES AT AUCTION.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prevent the City
Manager, or his or her designee, from purchasing items at auction. If there
are items for sale at auction that the city wishes to obtain, the City
Council shall approve participation in the auction, the item(s) to be
purchased and the maximum amount to be bid for such item(s).



(Prior Code, § 2-6.01)  (Ord. 499, passed - -; Ord. 790, passed - -1999;
Ord. 819, passed - -2001; Ord. 925, passed - -2012; Ord. 938, passed
12-12-2014)



§ 36.24  PURCHASES OF USED MATERIALS OR EQUIPMENT.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prevent the City
Manager, or his or her designee, from purchasing used items for sale. If a
used item is offered for sale for less than $5,000, exclusive of taxes, the
City Manager may purchase the item without prior approval of the Council. If
there are used items for sale that the city wishes to obtain and the price of
the used item is in excess of $5,000.01, the City Council shall approve the
purchase of the item(s), the item(s) to be purchased and the amount to be
paid for such item(s), exclusive of taxes.



(Prior Code, § 2-6.01)  (Ord. 499, passed - -; Ord. 790, passed - -1999;
Ord. 819, passed - -2001; Ord. 925, passed - -2012; Ord. 938, passed
12-12-2014)



TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



      50.   GARBAGE AND TRASH



      51.   WATER SYSTEM



      52.   WASTE WATER SYSTEM



      53.   NORTHSIDE SEWER IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT NUMBER II



CHAPTER 50:  GARBAGE AND TRASH



Section



   50.01   Definitions



   50.02   Throwing, placing solid waste



   50.03   City responsibilities



   50.04   Occupant responsibilities



   50.05   Fees



 



   50.99   Penalty



§ 50.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONSTRUCTION WASTE. The materials from construction, remodeling,
construction site preparation; including, but not limited to, rocks, trees,
debris, dirt, brick, plaster and all types of scrap building materials, and
their wrappings and containers.



   GARBAGE. All rubbish, animal refuse, vegetable kitchen refuse,
household waste, bottles, tin or aluminum cans, waste paper, grass cuttings,
tree limbs or branches cut up to a size no longer than three feet, weeds, and
all other scraps of similar nature as comprise the daily accumulation from
residences or business operations, other than prohibited substances or
uncontained trash.



   LOAD. A truck load of uncontained trash having a capacity of five cubic
yards or less.



   OCCUPANT. The customer or person occupying or controlling a residence,
store, hotel, office, restaurant or any other facility or building.



   PROHIBITED SUBSTANCES. Solid wastes prohibited in collection
containers, or as uncontained trash as follows:



      (1)   Any substance not approved by the state’s Department
of Environmental Quality (ADEQ) or the landfill operator for disposal in the
public landfill;



      (2)   Plot ashes or other materials which could cause
combustion to occur in sanitation containers or hauling equipment;



      (3)   Construction waste;



      (4)   Large building materials, rock, concrete or metal
objects which may cause damage to loading devices or compaction units;



      (5)   Large dead animals;



      (6)   Hazardous materials or toxic substances in strength or
quantity which could cause illness to the public or people operating or
repairing sanitation equipment;



      (7)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other
flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas;



      (8)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of
creating a public nuisance;



      (9)   Tires;



      (10)   Industrial waste, other than garbage; and



      (11)   Sludge from a waste water treatment plant.



   SOLID WASTE. Any garbage, trash, rubbish, refuse, sludge from a
wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant or pollution control
facility and other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semi-solid or
in contained gaseous materials, but not including domestic sewage or
hazardous waste.



   UNCONTAINED TRASH. All wooden boxes or crates, appliances, large items
of household furniture, tree trunks, branches and limbs more than three feet
in length, and other items which, by size, shape or weight cannot be placed
in city-receptacles, but not including prohibited substances.



(Prior Code, § 8-2.01)



§ 50.02  THROWING, PLACING SOLID WASTE.



   Except as provided in this chapter, it shall be a misdemeanor for a
person to throw, deposit or cause to accumulate any solid waste on any public
place or private premises, whether owned by such person or not.



(Prior Code, § 8-2.02)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.03  CITY RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   It shall be the sole responsibility of the city’s Sanitation
Department to collect and convey solid waste through the streets or alleys of
the city for a fee.



   (B)   The city shall provide containers approved by the Sanitation
Superintendent to occupants for the placement of their solid waste.



   (C)   The city-owned containers shall be distributed and positioned
as scheduled by the Sanitation Superintendent.



(Prior Code, § 8-2.03)



§ 50.04  OCCUPANT RESPONSIBILITIES.



   It shall be the responsibility of each and every occupant, whether
residential or business, to:



   (A)   Place or cause to be placed, all garbage, except as provided
in this chapter, from any house, store, motel, office, restaurant or any
business in containers approved by the Sanitation Superintendent, so that the
same may be removed by the city’s Sanitation Department;



   (B)   Place the individual city-owned container serving one
residence or one business, at the locations scheduled by the Sanitation
Superintendent, not prior to 6:00 p.m. on the day preceding the day of
collection; such containers shall otherwise be kept on the occupant’s
property;



   (C)   Securely wrap in paper or plastic bags and place in approved
containers all wet garbage and liquid wastes;



   (D)   Remove all prohibited substances by means other than
city-owned containers, and city forces, within seven days after its
generation; and



   (E)   Arrange with the Sanitation Superintendent for separate
pick-up of uncontained trash and place said uncontained trash in the alley at
the rear or side of the property; or, if there is no alley, at the curb line
of the street fronting the property, or as directed by the Sanitation
Superintendent on the day scheduled for its collection.



(Prior Code, § 8-2.04)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.05  FEES.



   The fees for collection of trash from containers and for uncontained
trash shall be such as Council may, by resolution, adopt.



(Prior Code, § 8-2.05)



§ 50.99  PENALTY.



   It shall be a Class 1 misdemeanor for any person to:



   (A)   Place prohibited substances in a container or for pick-up as
uncontained trash;



   (B)   Place, or cause to be placed, refuse in a container not
designated for his or her use;



   (C)   Burn, destroy, vandalize or otherwise damage any city-owned
container;



   (D)   Remove or cause to be removed, any city-owned container from
the location designated by the sanitation superintendent except as provided
in this chapter; and



   (E)   Remove, haul, or cause to be removed or hauled, any solid
waste on or along any city right-of-way, street or alley, unless the same is
so loaded as to prevent any such refuse from falling, leaking or spilling.



(Prior Code, § 8-2.06)



CHAPTER 51:  WATER SYSTEM



Section




General Provisions




   51.01   Definitions



   51.02   Water system



   51.03   Water turn-ons



   51.04   Water service connections, buy-in fees and rates



   51.05   Meters and meter readings



   51.06   Rates, fees and monthly statements



   51.07   Resale of water



   51.08   Business and industrial uses



   51.09   Application of regulations




Cross-Connection Control Program




   51.20   Definitions



   51.21   Purpose



   51.22   Backflow prevention; preventers required



   51.23   Hazard potential



   51.24   Backflow assembly installation requirements; location



   51.25   Inspections; maintenance; records



   51.26   Discontinuance of water service; notice



   51.27   Retroactive application



   51.28   Plan review



   51.29   Disclaimer of liability




Water Conservation




   51.40   Adoption of Water Conservation Code



   51.41   Purpose



   51.42   Regulations



   51.43   Potable water flowing into streets



   51.44   Incentive program



   51.45   Restrictions during water shortages; levels



   51.46   Excessive water consumption rates



   51.47   New landscape permits



 



   51.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 51.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.



   WATER. Any water from the city’s water supply system.



(Prior Code, § 8-4.01)



§ 51.02  WATER SYSTEM.



   All mains, laterals, pipes, hydrants and fixtures now laid, constructed
or installed, or hereafter to be laid, constructed or installed, in, under,
across or through the streets, avenues, alleys and other thoroughfares of the
city, or adjacent territory, for supplying water to said city and the
inhabitants thereof, are hereby declared to be the property of the city,
under the control thereof and subject to the provisions of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 8-4.02)



§ 51.03  WATER TURN-ONS.



   (A)   No water from the city water supply shall be turned on for
service into any premises by any person, but the Water Superintendent or his
or her designated appointee.



   (B)   No water shall be turned on for service in premises in which
the plumbing does not comply with the specifications of the city; provided
that, water may be turned on for the construction work in unfinished
buildings, subject to the provisions of this subchapter.



   (C)   Application to have water turned on shall be made in writing
to the office of the City Clerk, and shall contain an agreement by the
applicant to abide by and accept all of the provisions of this chapter as
conditions governing the use of the city water supply by the applicant.



(Prior Code, § 8-4.03)



§ 51.04  WATER SERVICE CONNECTIONS, BUY-IN FEES AND RATES.



   (A)   No water line connection shall be made to the water system
until a permit has been issued and the water buy-in fee, connection fee and
deposit, if any, has been paid.



   (B)   All water line connections shall be made under the supervision
of the Public Works Director and no connections shall be covered until the
work has been inspected by him or her, or his or her designee.



   (C)   Water buy-in fees and water connection charges shall be
determined by a rate and fee schedule which the Council may, from time to
time, adopt pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05C. Sewer rates charged for
providing water treatment and other related services shall be determined by
the City Council, from time to time, pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-531.01.



   (D)   Water connection fees shall be adopted and adjusted from time
to time by the City Council through a resolution at a duly constituted
meeting.



   (E)   Water buy-in fees shall be in conformity with the following
schedule.



      (1)   Residential users will be charged a flat fee of $1,580
for a single-family residence or $1,111 per unit for a multiple-family
residence.



      (2)   Commercial users will be charged a fee based on the
number of fixture units, plus a flat fee based on the required meter size.
Only one meter will be allowed per commercial property. The Public Works
Director or designee will determine the appropriate meter size for each
property.



 

 

Fees





Hotel/motel (per f.u.)
 

$210



Industrial (per f.u.)
 

$114



Industrial laundry (per f.u.)
 

$252



Multiple-family residence, flat, per unit
 

$1,111



Other commercial/institutional (per f.u.)
 

$114



Restaurants (per f.u.)
 

$366



Single-family residence, flat
 

$1,580





 



 

 
 
Meter Size


Commercial
 

3/4”

 

1”

 

1-1/2”

 

2”

 

3”

 

4”



Water buy-in fee
 

$3,510

 

$4,560

 

$5,640

 

$9,150

 

$35,160

 

$45,710




 



(Prior Code, § 8-4.04)  (Ord. 775, passed - -1998)



§ 51.05  METERS AND METER READINGS.



   (A)   All premises using the city water supply must be equipped with
an adequate water meter furnished by the city, but paid for by the consumer;
provided that, such water service may be supplied by the city at a flat rate
or charge until such meter may be installed. Before any premises are
occupied, a water meter shall be installed therein as herein required or
application made for such water service at the flat rate of charge until the
meter can be installed or no water shall be furnished such premises. Meters
shall be installed in a location that will be of each access.



   (B)   (1)   The Water Superintendent shall read, or cause to be
read, every water meter used in the city at such times as are necessary that
the bills may be sent out at the proper time.



      (2)   Any municipal water meter shall be taken out and tested
upon complaint of the consumer upon payment of a fee to be set by Council
resolution at a duly constituted meeting.



      (3)   If, upon testing, the meter is not within 3% of being
accurate, it shall be repaired or replaced and the fee returned to the
consumer.



   (C)   In the event any dog kept on the premises interferes with
meter reading as specified in this subchapter and the meter is not read, a
billing will be made by the city in an amount based on the average monthly
billing of the last three months.



(Prior Code, § 8-4.05)



§ 51.06  RATES, FEES AND MONTHLY STATEMENTS.



   (A)   Rates, fees and monthly statements. Monthly statements for
water used shall be dated and sent out at such times as specified by the
Mayor and Council. Water service may be discontinued for any premises for
which the water bill remains unpaid in accordance with division (B) of this
section. When service has been discontinued for non-payment, water shall not
be turned on unless and until the appropriate reconnect charge has been paid.



   (B)   Disconnection for late payment.



      (1)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility
service to customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a
meaningful opportunity to be heard on disputed bills.  The city's form for
application for utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to
the title, address, room number, and telephone number of the official in
charge of billing, clearly visible and easily readable provisions to the
effect:



         (a)   That all bills are due and payable on or before
the date set forth on the bill; and



         (b)   That if any bill is not paid by or before that
date, a second bill will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the
bill is not paid within ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service
will be discontinued for nonpayment; and



         (c)   That any customer disputing the correctness of his
bill shall have a right to a hearing at which time he may be represented in
person and by counsel or any other person of his choosing and may present
orally or in writing his complaint and contentions to the city official in
charge of utility billing.  This official shall be authorized to order that
the customer's service not be discontinued and shall have the authority to
make a final determination of the customer's complaint.



      (2)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be
entertained; only questions of proper and correct billing will be
considered.  In the absence of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the
hearing procedure provided herein, service will be discontinued at the time
specified, but in no event until the charges have been due and unpaid for at
least 30 days.



      (3)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue
utility service to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be
reinstated only after all bills for service then due have been paid, along
with a turn-on charge in the sum of $20.



(Prior Code, § 8-4.06)  (Ord. 775, passed - -1998; Ord. 774, passed - -1998)



§ 51.07  RESALE OF WATER.



   (A)   No person shall purchase water from the city for removal
outside of the corporate limits from any source whatsoever; except that, it
be intended for his or her own use or for use in connection with his or her
own premises, unless such person shall have first entered into a contract
with the Council specifying in said contract the amount of water he or she
shall purchase, the duration of his or her continued purchase, the price he
or she shall pay to the city for each 1,000 gallons of water so purchased and
whether or not water so purchased is intended primarily for resale.



   (B)   Any person now engaged in the removal of water outside the
corporate limits of the city and who comes within the provisions of this
subchapter shall have 90 days from the effective date of this chapter in
which to comply fully with the terms of this subchapter, and failing therein
shall be cut off and barred from making purchases of water from the city
until such time as compliance herein has been fully effected.



(Prior Code, § 8-4.07)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.08  BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL USES.



   All businesses and industries using city water shall be restricted to
the use of the amount of water used by the business or industry during the
corresponding month of the year preceding the effective date hereof.



   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to those
businesses and industries declared, by resolution of the Council, to be
necessary for the public health, safety and welfare.



   (B)   Businesses and industries processing animal, vegetable and
mineral matter for food purposes shall be regulated in the use of water as
the City Manager determines the minimum quantities in a particular food
processing business.



   (C)   All public and private records necessary to determine the uses
of water restricted by this subchapter shall be made available to the City
Manager upon his or her written request.



(Prior Code, § 8-4.09)



§ 51.09  APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all persons using
water both in and outside of the city, and regardless of whether any person
using water shall have a contract for water service with the city.



(Prior Code, § 8-4.10)




CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL PROGRAM




§ 51.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AIR GAP. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere
between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank,
plumbing fixture or other device and the flood level rim of said vessel. An
approved AIR GAP shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe,
measured vertically, above the overflow rim of the vessel and in no case less
than one inch.



   APPROVED. Accepted by the Department as either meeting an applicable
specification stated or cited in this subchapter, or suitable for the
proposed use.



   ASSEMBLY. A mechanical device located between two tightly-closing
resilient-sealed shut-off valves with properly located resilient-sealed test
cocks designed to prevent backflow.



   AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY. Any water supply on or available to the
premises other than the public potable water supply, including, but not
limited to, water from another purveyor’s public potable water supply,
treated effluent, waste waters or industrial fluids.



   BACKFLOW. The reversal of the normal flow of water caused by either
backpressure or backsiphonage.



   BACKFLOW PREVENTER. An approved assembly or means designed to prevent
the reversal of the normal flow of water caused by either backpressure or
baeksiphonage.



   BACKPRESSURE. Any elevation of pressure in a user’s water supply
system, above the pressure of the potable water supply system, which could
cause water or other liquids, mixtures or substances to flow from a user’s
water supply system into the distribution system of the potable water supply
system.



   BACKSIPHONAGE. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or
substances into the distribution pipes of the potable water supply from any
source other than its intended source caused by the reduction of pressure in
the potable water supply system.



   CERTIFIED TESTER. A person who has proven his or her competency to the
satisfaction of the Department. Each person certified to make competent tests
or to repair, overhaul and make reports on backflow prevention assemblies
shall be conversant with the applicable laws, rules and regulations and have
had experience in plumbing or pipe fitting or have other qualifications which
are equivalent in the opinion of the Department.



   CONTAMINATION. An impairment in the quality of potable water, by
sewage, industrial fluids, waste liquids, compounds or other materials or
fluids, to a degree which creates an actual hazard to the public health by
poisoning or the spread of disease.



   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any physical connection or arrangement of piping or
fixtures between two otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains
potable water and the other non-potable water or industrial fluids through
which, or because of which, backflow may occur into the potable water system.
This would include any temporary connections, such as swing connections,
removable sections, four-way plug valves, spools, dummy section of pipe,
swivel or changeover devices or sliding multi-port tube.



   DEPARTMENT. The City of Williams Water Department.



   DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM. The network of conduits used to deliver potable
water from the source facilities to the user’s water supply system.



   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY. An assembly of two independently operating
approved check valves with tightly closed shut-off valves on each end of the
check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of each check
valve. The entire ASSEMBLY shall meet the design and performance
specifications as determined by a recognized laboratory and approved by the
Department for backflow prevention assemblies. To be approved, these devices
must be readily accessible or in-line testing and maintenance.



   HAZARD, DEGREE OF. The potential risk to the public health and adverse
effects of the hazard upon the public potable water distribution system.



   NON-POTABLE WATER. Water which is not safe for human consumption or
which is of questionable quality for human consumption.



   NOTICE. A written instrument served by the city, as follows, with time
commencing from date of mailing, serving, filing or recording:



      (1)   By the use of ordinary mail to the last known address of
the person to whom it is required to be given;



      (2)   By personal service upon the person or his or her lawful
representative; or



      (3)   By filing or recording with a Clerk of the Superior
Court or County Recorder.



   POLLUTION. The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic or
biological) in water which tends to degrade its quality or impair its
usefulness to a degree which does not create an actual hazard to the public
health, but which does adversely and unreasonably affect such water for
domestic use.



   POTABLE WATER. Any water which is safe for human consumption pursuant
to the standards set by the state’s Department of Environmental Quality.



   PUBLIC POTABLE WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM. The source facilities and the
distribution system under control of the Department to the point where a
user’s water supply system commences. A user’s water supply system
commences at the discharge point of the service connection.



   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE ASSEMBLY. An assembly of two independently
acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically operating,
mechanically independent differential pressure relief valve located between
the check valves and, at the same time, below the first check valve. The unit
shall include properly located test cocks and tightly closing shut-off valves
at each end of the assembly. The entire device shall meet the design and
performance specifications as determined by a recognized laboratory and
approved by the Department for backflow prevention assemblies. To be
approved, these devices must be readily accessible for in-line testing and
maintenance.



   SERVICE CONNECTION. The terminal end of a service line from the public
potable water system at its point of delivery to the user’s water system
where the Department loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water.
If a meter is installed between the user’s water supply system and the
public potable water system, the SERVICE CONNECTION shall be the discharge
end of the meter. Unprotected takeoffs from the service line will not be
permitted upstream of any meter or any backflow prevention device located at
the point of delivery to the user’s water system. SERVICE CONNECTION shall
also include water service connection from a fire hydrant and all other
temporary or emergency water service connections from the public potable
water system.



   USER. The owner, tenant, trustee, mortgagee, receiver or occupier,
whether person, corporation, firm or municipality, of property which is
connected to the public water system.



(Prior Code, § 8-10.01)  (Ord. 720, passed - -1993)



§ 51.21  PURPOSE.



   (A)   To protect the public potable water supply of the city from
the possibility of contamination or pollution by preventing the backflow of
contaminants and pollutants into the public potable water supply system; and



   (B)   To provide for a continuing program of cross-connection
control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the public
potable water supply system.



(Prior Code, § 8-10.02)  (Ord. 720, passed - -1993)



§ 51.22  BACKFLOW PREVENTION; PREVENTERS REQUIRED.



   (A)   (1)   Backflow prevention shall be required at every
service connection to a user’s water system when the Department determines
the potable water supplied by the public potable water system may be subject
to contamination, pollution or other deterioration of quality by conditions
within the user’s water system.



      (2)   Backflow prevention required by the Department shall be
sufficient to protect against the potential degree of hazard to the public
potable water supply from the user’s water system.



   (B)   (1)   When any of the following items or activities are
present or conducted on premises served by the potable water system, a
potential hazard to the public potable water system shall be presumed and a
backflow preventer, of the type specified for that item or activity herein,
must be in place at each service connection for that premises:



         (a)   Aircraft and missile plants: RP;



         (b)   Animal clinics and animal grooming shops: RP;



         (c)   Automotive repair with steam cleaner, acid
cleaning equipment or solvent facilities: RP;



         (d)   Auxiliary water systems (interconnected): RP;



         (e)   Auxiliary water systems (non-interconnected): DC;



         (f)   Beverage bottling plants: DC;



         (g)   Breweries: DC;



         (h)   Buildings greater than three stories or greater
than 34 feet in height from curb level: DC;



         (i)   Buildings with house pumps and/or potable water
storage tank: DC;



         (j)   Buildings with sewage ejectors (inadequate on-site
protection): RP;



         (k)   Buildings with sewage ejectors (adequate on-site
protection): DC;



         (l)   Canneries, packing houses and reduction plants: RP;



         (m)   Car wash facilities: RP;



         (n)   Centralized heating and air conditioning plants:
RP;



         (o)   Chemical plants: RP;



         (p)   Chemically treated potable or non-potable water
systems: RP;



         (q)   Civil works (government owned or operated
facilities not open for inspection by the Department): RP;



         (r)   Commercial laundries: RP;



         (s)   Dairies and cold storage plants: DC;



         (t)   Dye works: RP;



         (u)   Film processing laboratories, facilities or
equipment: RP;



         (v)   Food processing: DC;



         (w)   High schools and colleges: DC;



         (x)   Holding tank disposal stations: RP;



         (y)   Hospitals and mortuaries: RP;



         (z)   Medical and dental buildings, sanitariums, rest
and convalescent homes engaged in the diagnosis, care or treatment of human
illness: DC;



         (aa)   Irrigation system:



            1.   Premises having non-potable piping one inch
and larger: RP; and



            2.   Premises having a separate system: RP.



         (bb)   Laboratories using contaminated materials: RP;



         (cc)   Manufacturing, processing and fabricating plants
using toxic or nontoxic materials: RP;



         (dd)   Mobile home parks served by master meter: DC;



         (ee)   Motion picture studios: RP;



         (ff)   Oil and gas production facilities: RP;



         (gg)   Plating plants: RP;



         (hh)   Power plants: RP;



         (ii)   Radioactive materials processing facilities: RP;



         (jj)   Restricted, classified or other closed
facilities: RP;



         (kk)   Rubber plants: RP;



         (ll)   Sand and gravel plants: RP;



         (mm)   Sewage and storm drainage facilities: RP;



         (nn)   Shopping centers: DC;



         (oo)   Any premises where a cross-connection is
maintained: RP;



         (pp)   Water, trucks, hydraulic sewer cleaning
equipment: RP and AG;



         (qq)   Any premises where water supplied by the city is
subject to deterioration in sanitary quality and its entry into the public
water system: RP; and



         (rr)   Fire protection systems will be required to have
the following type of protection:



            1.   Direct connection from public water system
(non-contaminating): DC;



            2.   Direct connection from public water system
(contaminating): RP;



            3.   With pump and/or storage tank: RP; and



            4.   With auxiliary supply: DC and RP.



      (2)   When two or more of the items or activities listed above
are present or concluded on the same premises and served by the same service
connection, the most restrictive backflow preventer required for any of the
items or activities present or conducted on the premises shall be required to
be utilized or installed at the service connection. The order of most
restrictive to least restrictive backflow preventers shall be as follows:



         (a)   Air gap (AG) (most restrictive);



         (b)   Reduced pressure principle assembly (RP);



         (c)   Double check valve assembly (DC); and



         (d)   Pressure vacuum breaker assembly (least
restrictive): (PVB).



      (3)   If the Department determines, after inspection of the
user’s system, that a backflow preventer less restrictive than that
required in this section will provide adequate protection of the public
potable water system, the Department may, in its sole discretion, modify the
requirements of this section accordingly.



      (4)   Each backflow prevention assembly required hereunder
shall be approved by the Department prior to installation and shall be
installed by and at the expense of the user.



      (5)   (a)   The Department may approve backflow assemblies
when such devices have received approval from the Foundation for
Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research of the University of Southern
California, American Water Works Association (A.W.W.A.).



         (b)   Assemblies shall be specified and located on the
constructions plans for all new buildings, additions with new services, and
changes of use of existing buildings. Approval shall be obtained prior to
issuance of the building permit.



(Prior Code, § 8-10.05)



(Ord. 720, passed - -1993)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.23  HAZARD POTENTIAL.



   The potential degree of hazard to the public supply system shall be
determined using the following hazard factors:



   (A)   Health. Any actual or potential condition, device or practice
which, in the judgment of the Department, may create a threat of
contamination to a potable water supply or may create a danger to the health
and well-being of the potable water consumers;



   (B)   Plumbing. An actual or potential plumbing cross-connection in
a user’s water supply system that has not been protected by an approved
backflow preventer. A plumbing hazard may be either a pollution or
contamination hazard;



   (C)   Non-health. Any actual or potential condition, device or
practice which, in the judgment of the Department, may create a threat of
pollution to a potable water supply system. The maximum degree of intensity
of pollution to which a potable water supply system could be degraded under
this definition would cause a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or
could cause damage to the distribution system or its appurtenances; and



   (D)   System. Any actual or potential condition, device or practice
which, in the judgment of the Department, may create a threat of severe
damage to the physical properties of a potable water supply system or that
would have a protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the
system.



(Prior Code, § 8-10.04)  (Ord. 720, passed - -1993)



§ 51.24  BACKFLOW ASSEMBLY INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS; LOCATION.



   (A)   The premises of all users shall be evaluated by the Department
to determine if a backflow prevention device is required under the provisions
of this subchapter. If it is determined by the Department that the premises
requires a backflow prevention device, the construction and installation of
said device shall be in accordance with specifications and requirements
promulgated by the Department.



   (B)   Assemblies shall be installed at the service connection or
near the property line, but, in all cases, before the first branch line
leading off of the service line, and in an accessible location approved by
the Department. Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed by the
user, at the user’s expense and in compliance with the standards and
specifications adopted by the Department, at the service connection.



   (C)   Backflow prevention assemblies shall have at least the same
cross-sectional area as the water service and/or meter. In those instances
where a continuous water supply is necessary, two sets of backflow prevention
assemblies shall be installed in parallel if the water supply cannot be
temporarily interrupted for the testing of assemblies.



   (D)   No bypass shall be installed around backflow preventive
assemblies.



   (E)   Double check valve assemblies shall be installed belowground
in a vault. Double check valve assemblies installed in vaults shall have
sufficient clearance provided to permit testing in place or removal for
maintenance, as prescribed in the standard details. Copies available upon
request from Department.



   (F)   A reduced pressure principle backflow preventive assembly
shall be installed aboveground as close to the water meter as possible. The
assembly must be protected from freezing. Assemblies installed shall be
accessible for testing as not to endanger the tester. Under no conditions,
except as provided for herein, will backflow prevention assemblies be
installed less than 12 inches or more than 24 inches above grade level.



   (G)   All pressure type backflow prevention assemblies which are
designed for periodic field testing shall be equipped with gate valves on
both the upstream and the downstream side of the assembly. In addition, test
cocks shall be provided and located so that test equipment may be connected
to the assembly at such points that the pressure in each pressure zone may be
detected and, in addition, a test cock shall be located upstream of the
upstream gate valve, as close as possible to the upstream gate valve.



(Prior Code, § 8-10.06)  (Ord. 720, passed - -1993)



§ 51.25  INSPECTIONS; MAINTENANCE; RECORDS.



   (A)   An inspection shall be conducted to determine whether any
cross-connections or other hazard potentials exist and to determine
compliance with this subchapter. The user’s water system shall be available
at all times during normal business hours for inspection by authorized
personnel of the Department.



   (B)   The user shall maintain accurate records of tests and repairs
made to backflow prevention devices and provide the Department with copies of
such records. The records shall be on forms approved by the Department and
shall include the list of materials or replacement parts used.



   (C)   Testing, maintenance and repairs to such devices shall be made
at the customer’s expense by a certified backflow prevention device tester
that is approved by the Department or any other agency designated by the
Department to prescribe test methods or to certify or approve persons to
conduct such tests. It shall be the duty of the user to see that these tests
are made at the time of the initial installation and at least once a year, on
the anniversary date of the initial inspection.



   (D)   The user shall notify the Department 15 days in advance when
the annual tests are to be done, so that an official representative of the
Department may witness the tests if so desired.



   (E)   Following the installation of any assembly, the user shall
have it inspected by the Department, before the certificate of occupancy is
issued.



   (F)   Following the installation of any assembly, the user shall
have it inspected by the Department, before the certificate of occupancy is
issued.



   (G)   If the Department or user learns or discovers, during the
period between tests, that an assembly is defective or in unsatisfactory
operating condition, the user shall perform any necessary repairs, including
replacement of the assembly, if necessary, which will return the assembly to
satisfactory operating condition.



   (H)   Following the repair, repiping, overhaul or relocation of an
assembly, the user shall have it inspected by the Department and tested by a
certified tester, within ten days of the completion of the rework.



   (I)   (1)   The user’s system must be open for inspection at
all reasonable times, and in all emergencies to authorized representatives of
the Department to determine whether cross-connections or other structural or
sanitary hazards, including violations of these regulations, exist.



      (2)   When such a condition becomes known, the Department may
deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing a
physical break in the service line until the user has corrected the condition
in conformance with this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 8-10.07)  (Ord. 720, passed - -1993)



§ 51.26  DISCONTINUANCE OF WATER SERVICE; NOTICE.



   (A)   Service of water to any premises may be discontinued by the
Department if a backflow preventive assembly required by this subchapter is
not installed, tested and maintained; if it has been found that a backflow
preventive assembly has been removed or bypassed; or if a cross-connection
exists on the premises.



   (B)   Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects
are corrected.



(Prior Code, § 8-10.08)  (Ord. 720, passed - -1993)



§ 51.27  RETROACTIVE APPLICATION.



   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all new water
users and all water users existing prior to the enactment date of this
chapter.



   (B)   If the Department determines that a user’s backflow
preventive assembly does not meet current adopted city standards, the user
shall retrofit his or her assembly so that it will meet current standards.



   (C)   Whenever it is determined by an authorized city representative
that a water service poses an actual or potential threat to the physical
properties of the water system of potability of the public water supply, a
device complying with this subchapter shall be installed. The cost for the
installation, testing and maintenance shall be borne by the user.



(Prior Code, § 8-10.09)  (Ord. 720, passed - -1993)



§ 51.28  PLAN REVIEW.



   (A)   All backflow preventers which will be installed shall be shown
and specified on all required building and engineering plans. City approval
of the intended installation is required prior to issuance of any building or
encroachment permit.



   (B)   Installation permits for the installation of all backflow
preventers required by the city shall be obtained from the city prior to
installation. A separate permit shall be obtained for each required backflow
preventer to be installed, including replacement.



   (C)   Backflow preventers must be installed as to meet the standards
and specifications of the Department and be tested by a certified tester and
shown to be operating correctly before a certificate of occupancy is issued
by the city.



   (D)   The Department may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit
issued under the provisions of this subchapter, whenever the permit is issued
in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or in violation
of any ordinance or regulation of any provision of the Uniform Plumbing Code
or this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 8-10.10)  (Ord. 720, passed - -1993)



§ 51.29  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   This program shall not create any liability or duty on the part of the
city, any officer or employee.



(Prior Code, § 8-10.11)  (Ord. 720, passed - -1993)




WATER CONSERVATION




§ 51.40  ADOPTION OF WATER CONSERVATION CODE.



   This subchapter shall be added to any legal Plumbing Code approved by
the Mayor and Council of the city and will be a stand-alone ordinance
fostering water conservation efforts in the city.



(Prior Code, § 8-4.08)  (Ord. 940, passed 3-13-2014)



§ 51.41  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish maximum rates of flow
for plumbing fixtures and other devices in order to conserve water and to
regulate the use of water resources within the city and its water service
area.



(Prior Code, § 8-4.08)  (Ord. 940, passed 3-13-2014)



§ 51.42  REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Scope. The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all
new construction, remodeling and replacement of fixtures in all existing
structures.



   (B)   Water closets and/or urinals. Water closets shall be designed
so as to be operable and adequately flushed with no more than 1.6 gallons of
water per flush. Urinals shall be of the waterless type.



   (C)   Shower heads. Shower heads shall be designed, manufactured
and/or installed so that the flow will not exceed two and one-half gallons
per minute.



   (D)   Kitchen and lavatory faucets. All kitchen and lavatory faucets
shall be designed, manufactured and/or installed so that the flow will not
exceed two and one-half gallons per minute for kitchen and two gallons per
minute for lavatory.



   (E)   Public restrooms. Faucets located in restrooms intended for
unrestricted use by the general public shall be of the metering or
self-closing type and shall comply with division (D) above.



   (F)   Pressure reducing valve. A pressure reducing valve shall be
installed by the property owner, in all new construction or remodeling where
line pressure exceeds 50 psi. This valve shall be adjusted so that the
pressure at the highest point of use in the building shall not exceed 50 psi.
The provisions of this division (F) are not intended to interfere with any
provisions in the Uniform Fire Code.



(Prior Code, § 8-4.08)  (Ord. 940, passed 3-13-2014)



§ 51.43  POTABLE WATER FLOWING INTO STREETS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or entity to allow
raw or potable water used for irrigation to flow into or upon a public street
for a period of ten minutes or longer.



   (B)   If the irrigation water which is flowing into or upon a street
is a direct result of an antiquated irrigation system (as determined by the
Water Superintendent), the responsible individual shall provide an
implementation plan within 60 days of issuance of the notice of violation.
This implementation plan shall provide for the upgrade, modernization and/or
repair of the irrigation system, together with specific time frames to
accomplish same. The period to complete the plan shall be as soon as possible
given the nature and cost of repairs and the size of the system to be
repaired, but in no event shall it exceed 12 months. Upon approval of the
implementation plan, the responsible party shall not be subjected to any
civil sanctions pursuant to § 51.46 of this chapter; provided that, the
upgrading and/or repairs are continuing in accordance with the approved time
frames set forth in the plan.



(Prior Code, § 8-4.08)  (Ord. 940, passed 3-13-2014)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.44  INCENTIVE PROGRAM.



   The City Manager shall administer a program to provide a credit
incentive for retrofitting of old plumbing fixtures and drought resistant
landscaping improvements to any city water customers located within the
city’s water distribution system who meets any or all of the following
criteria:



   (A)   Installs a dual-flush water closet or a waterless urinal;



   (B)   Installs shower heads using two and one-half gallons per
minute or less, kitchen faucets using two and one-half gallons per minute or
less and/or lavatory faucets using two gallons per minute or less, that also
are not otherwise required to be installed pursuant to any Building or
Plumbing Code;



   (C)   Installs an irrigation timer or a drip irrigation system for
any existing turf;



   (D)   Installs on a minimum of 75% of the total landscape area an
inorganic ground cover (river rock, gravel, crushed rock, decomposed granite,
cinders and the like) and is in accordance with the city’s Zoning Code; and



   (E)   A minimum of 75% of the new plantings on a lot must be
drought-resistant shrubs and trees or acceptable xeriscape.



 


Credit Incentive Table





Drip irrigation
 

50% of cost not to exceed $50



Dual-flush water closet
 

$50



Irrigation timer
 

$25



Kitchen faucets
 

$20



Lavatory faucets
 

$15



Shower head
 

$10



Turf conversion
 

$0.25/sq. ft. up to a maximum of $350



Waterless urinal
 

$40





 



(Prior Code, § 8-4.08)  (Ord. 940, passed 3-13-2014)



§ 51.45  RESTRICTIONS DURING WATER SHORTAGES; LEVELS.



   (A)   The City Manager, upon the recommendation of the Water
Superintendent, is hereby authorized to declare water conservation levels.
The conservation levels shall be initiated based upon the resource status
which assessed the relationships between water demand, municipal safe
production capability and reservoir storage levels, weather conditions and
historic data. The City Manager shall evaluate resource status levels no less
than once per week. Such evaluation criteria shall be documented and made
available to the public.



   (B)   The following resource levels are hereby defined as follows:



      (1)   Resource Status Level 1. When water demand is equal to
or less than safe production capability. SAFE PRODUCTION shall be defined as
a daily system demand of 1,000,000 gallons per day/reservoir storage reserves
of 18 months supply or more;



      (2)   Resource Status Level 2. When water demand is greater
than safe production capability for three consecutive days or reservoir
storage reserves are less than 12 months’ supply in or before December of
any year;



      (3)   Resource Status Level 3. When water demand is greater
than safe production capability for more than one week or reservoir storage
reserves are less than ten months’ supply in or before February of any
year; and



      (4)   Resource Status Level 4. When water demand exceeds total
production capability and distribution storage reserves are at 50% or
reservoir storage reserves are less than ten months’ supply any time after
April.



   (C)   The following water conservation measures shall govern the use
of water by city water users, as prescribed below correlating to the resource
status levels established in division (A) above.



      (1)   Resource Status Level 1: Water Awareness. Water users
are specifically encouraged to minimize waste in water used for irrigation,
vehicle and pavement washing, construction and all other uses.



      (2)   Resource Status Level 2: Water Restrictions. The
following water uses are restricted or prohibited. No person shall:



         (a)   Irrigate or wash vehicles, except as provided
herein and subject to such additional restrictions as contained herein.
Even-numbered addresses are restricted to said uses on Monday, Wednesday,
Friday and Sunday; odd-numbered addresses and all others are restricted to
said uses on Tuesday, Thursday, Saturday and Sunday. Irrigation may take
place only between the hours of 5:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to 10:00
p.m.;



         (b)   Wash vehicles with a bucket and hose with a
positive type shutoff nozzle. No restrictions at commercial car washes;



         (c)   Wash paved areas such as driveways or sidewalks;
and/or



         (d)   Use fire hydrants for other than emergencies.



      (3)   Resource Status Level 3: Water Emergency. In addition to
the restrictions set forth in the previous status levels, the following water
uses are further restricted or prohibited:



         (a)   Filling or refilling swimming pools, spas or
wading pools;



         (b)   No irrigation of golf course fairways and roughs.
No restrictions if treated effluent is used; and/or



         (c)   No landscaped areas may be irrigated more than two
times per week; additionally, irrigation may only take place between the
hours of 6:00 p.m. and 11:59 p.m. on Thursday and Sunday for even numbered
addresses, and on Wednesday and Saturday for odd numbered addresses and all
others. No restrictions if treated effluent is used.



      (4)   Resource Status Level 4: Water Crisis. The following
water uses are restricted or prohibited. No person shall:



         (a)   Do any of the acts prescribed in previous status
level restrictions;



         (b)   Use potable or raw water for irrigation. City
property and other properties used for city recreation programs, including
the parks, golf courses and baseball fields shall be irrigated according to
the restrictions in Level 3, until such time as the City Manager determines
that such use is no longer in the best interests of the city;



         (c)   Use potable or raw water for any purpose that is
not specifically authorized by this section, other than public health or
emergency purposes;



         (d)   Use potable or raw water in violation of any other
restriction deemed necessary by the City Council; and



         (e)   No new commercial or residential building permits
will be issued, except under the following circumstances:



            1.   A water allocation has previously been
granted by Council and impact fees have been paid toward water infrastructure;



            2.   The permitted construction will not result in
new fixture units connected to the city’s potable water supply;



            3.   The application was submitted and in process
prior to the declaration of Level 4 restrictions; and



            4.   All commercial water hauling is stopped,
except for residential purposes.



(Prior Code, § 8-4.08)  (Ord. 940, passed 3-13-2014)



§ 51.46  EXCESSIVE WATER CONSUMPTION RATES.



   (A)   During Resource Status Level 3 and Resource Status Level 4,
single-family residential rates shall increase to 150% of the established
rate for any water consumption between 15,000 and 20,000 gallons.



   (B)   Rate shall increase to 200% of the established rate for any
water consumption greater than 20,000 gallons per billing cycle.



   (C)   Rate increases shall take effect with the billing cycle(s)
following implementation of Resource Status Level 3.



(Prior Code, § 8-4.08)  (Ord. 940, passed 3-13-2014)



§ 51.47  NEW LANDSCAPE PERMITS.



   Daily irrigation of new landscape may be allowed for elective
landscaping and will be allowed for required landscaping by obtaining a
special use irrigation permit from the Building Department.



   (A)   The permit shall be good for a maximum of 30 days.



   (B)   The fee for the permit shall be determined by the square feet
of landscaping to be installed at $0.25 per square foot, with a maximum of
2,500 square feet per permit, plus a $10 fee to cover administration and
printing.



   (C)   The permit shall be obtained prior to landscape installation
and prominently posted at the irrigation site.



   (D)   The determination of provision of an elective landscaping
permit shall be made by a representative of the Utilities Department and may
be appealed by the application to the City Council, if thought to have been
unreasonably denied. The decision of the City Council shall be final.



   (E)   Resource Status Level 2 restrictions shall apply to all
special use irrigation permit(s).



   (F)   No new elective or required special use irrigation permits for
landscaping will be issued when at Resource Status Level 4.



   (G)   Landscaping not installed and required by the city to meet the
Land Development Code will not delay a certificate of occupancy to be issued,
providing its installation is delayed as a result of a suspension of new
landscaping permits and a surety is provided acceptable to the Community
Development Department.



   (H)   When a violation of the water restrictions is observed by one
of the designated city employees, that employee will photograph the violation
and fill out a water violation report and turn it in to the Code Enforcement
Officer. The following surcharges will apply to all violations deemed to be
valid by the Code Enforcement Officer.



      (1)   A surcharge of $25 shall be assessed to the account of
record for a violation of Resource Status Level 2.



      (2)   A surcharge of $35 shall be assessed to the account of
record for a violation of Resource Status Level 3.



      (3)   A surcharge of $100 shall be assessed to the account of
record for a violation of Resource Status Level 4.



      (4)   Surcharges shall double for every repeat violation. Each
succeeding surcharge under the prevailing resource status level may be twice
the previous surcharge assessed for the previous violation.



      (5)   (a)   The assessment of the surcharge may be
informally appealed, in writing, within 15 calendar days of the notice of the
surcharge assessment. The written appeal shall be received by the city’s
Utilities Department within the said 15-day time limit or the right to such
appeal shall be permanently waived.



         (b)   Address all surcharge related correspondence to
the city’s Utility Department.



(Prior Code, § 8-4.08)  (Ord. 940, passed 3-13-2014)



§ 51.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a civil
violation, and shall be subject to penalties for each day the violation
continues; provided, however, that, a second offense of said violation shall
result in a mandatory minimum sanction of $100, and a third offense shall
result in a mandatory minimum sanction of $250. Mandatory minimum sanctions
shall not be waived, in addition to any other legal or equitable remedy to
enforce the provisions of this chapter, the city may terminate or suspend
water service to property owned or controlled by any party in violation. The
City Manager or designee may cause a notice of water termination to be served
upon the violating party stating that service will be discontinued in five
days unless a hearing is requested, If a hearing is requested, the City
Manager or designee shall convene a hearing within three days of the request.
Upon finding that a violation has occurred, the City Manager or designee may
order that water service be terminated or suspended pending compliance with
this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 8-4.11)



   (B)   A violation of any provision of §§ 51.42, 51.43 and 51.45 of
this chapter shall be a civil violation and shall be subject to penalties for
each day the violation continues; provided, however, that, a second offense
of said violation shall result in a mandatory minimum sanction of $100 and a
third offense shall result in a mandatory minimum sanction of $250. Mandatory
minimum sanctions shall not be waived. In addition to any legal or equitable
remedy to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the city may terminate or
suspend water service to property owned or controlled by any party in
violation. The City Manager or designee may cause a notice of water
termination to be served upon the violating party stating that service will
be discontinued in five days unless a hearing is requested. If a hearing is
requested, the City Manager or designee shall convene a hearing within three
days of the request. Upon finding that a violation has occurred, the City
Manager or designee may order that water service be terminated or suspended
pending compliance with this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 8-4.08)



(Ord. 753, passed - -1996; Ord. 940, passed 3-13-2014)



CHAPTER 52:  WASTE WATER SYSTEM



Section



   52.01   Deposits and dispositions; prohibited wastes



   52.02   Grease, oil, sand and lint interceptors



   52.03   Rules and regulations



   52.04   Sewer service connection fees, buy-in fees and rates



   52.05   Noise and odor setback



§ 52.01  DEPOSITS AND DISPOSITIONS; PROHIBITED WASTES.



   (A)   It shall be a Class 1 misdemeanor for any person to deposit,
in an unsanitary manner, upon public or private property within the city, or
any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human excrement, sewage,
industrial wastes or contaminated water, except where suitable treatment has
been provided in accordance with this chapter. It shall also be a Class 1
misdemeanor for any person to construct or maintain within the city, any
privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used
for the disposal of sewage.



(Prior Code, § 8-3.01)



   (B)   It shall be a Class 1 misdemeanor for any person to discharge
or cause to be discharged, any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof
run-off, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process
water into any sanitary sewer. It shall also be a Class 1 misdemeanor for any
person to discharge or cause to be discharged, any of the following described
waters or wastes into any sewer:



      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than
150°F;



      (2)   Any water or waste which may contain more than 50 parts
per million by weight of fat, oil, or grease;



      (3)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other
flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas;



      (4)   Any vegetable or organic food material that is not
ground garbage;



      (5)   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal,
rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, glass grits, such as
brick, cement, onyx, carbides or any other solid or viscous substance capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works;



      (6)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five and
one-half or higher than nine or having any other corrosive property capable
of causing damage or hazard to structure, equipment and personnel of the
sewage works;



      (7)   Any waters or wastes containing a substance in
sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create any hazard in the waters
or lands receiving the effluent of the treatment plant;



      (8)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of
creating a public nuisance; and



      (9)   Any other substance prohibited by federal or state law.



(Prior Code, § 8-3.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.02  GREASE, OIL, SAND AND LINT INTERCEPTORS.



   Grease, oil, sand and lint interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the City Engineer, they are necessary to the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes,
sand and other harmful ingredients; except that, such interceptors shall not
be required for private single-family living quarters. Said interceptors
shall be of a type and capacity approved by the City Engineer, and shall be
located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
Maintenance for said interceptors shall be by the owner or occupier, at his
or her expense, and in continuously efficient operation at all times.



(Prior Code, § 8-3.03)



§ 52.03  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Approval. It shall be a Class 1 misdemeanor for any person,
without prior approval of the Waste Water Superintendent to admit into the
public sewers any waters or wastes having a five-day biochemical oxygen
demand greater than 300 parts per million by weight; or containing more than
350 parts per million by weight of suspended solids.



   (B)   Preliminary treatment. Where necessary, in the opinion of the
Waste Water Superintendent, the owner or occupier of premises shall provide,
at his or her expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to:



      (1)   Reduce the BOD to 300 parts per million and the
suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight;



      (2)   Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to
within the maximum limits provided for in this chapter;



      (3)   Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such
waters or wastes; and



      (4)   Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent
information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be
submitted for the approval of the Waste Water Superintendent. No construction
of such facilities shall be commenced until such approvals are obtained in
writing. Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters
or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner or occupier at his or her expense.



   (C)   Control manhole. When the nature or quantity of wastes, other
than waste generated by residential use, creates a potential for violations
of this chapter, the customer shall install a suitable control manhole in the
private sewer to facilitate observation and samplings of the wastes. Such
manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Waste Water
Superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner or occupier at
his or her expense and shall be maintained by him or her.



   (D)   Tests and measurements. All tests and analyses of the
characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this
chapter shall be conducted by a laboratory certified by the state’s
Department of Environmental Quality.



   (E)   Special agreements. No statement contained in this chapter
shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between
the city and any person whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the city for treatment subject to payment
therefor by the person.



(Prior Code, § 8-3.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.04  SEWER SERVICE CONNECTION FEES, BUY-IN FEES AND RATES.



   (A)   No sewer line connection shall be made to the sewer system
until a permit has been issued and sewer buy-in fee, connection fee and
deposit, if any, has been paid.



   (B)   All sewer connections shall be made under the supervision of
the Public Works Director and no connection shall be covered until the work
has been inspected by him or her or his or her designee.



   (C)   Sewer buy-in fees and sewer connection charges shall be
determined by a rate and fee schedule which the Council may, from time to
time, adopt pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05C. Sewer rates charged for
providing sewer treatment and other related services shall be charged
pursuant to a fee schedule which the Council, from time to time, may adopt
pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-511.01.



   (D)   Sewer connection charges shall be in conformity with schedules
adopted by Council resolution at a duly constituted meeting.



(Prior Code, § 8-3.05)



§ 52.05  NOISE AND ODOR SETBACK.



   The city shall maintain a noise and odor setback of 300 feet from the
component parts of any wastewater treatment facility operated by the city.



(Prior Code, § 8-3.06)  (Ord. 865, passed - -2007; Ord. 775, passed - -1998)



CHAPTER 53:  NORTHSIDE SEWER IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT NUMBER II



Section



   53.01   Policy



   53.02   Definitions



   53.03   Application for tap-in



   53.04   Participating charge for tap-in; payment



   53.05   Adjacent line tap-ins prohibited



§ 53.01  POLICY.



   There is hereby established a policy and orderly program for the
extension of services and facilities of the Northside Sewer Improvement
District Number II sewer system to serve and provide for newly developed
areas and subdivisions within the city which are located outside of the
geographical boundaries of the Northside Sewer Improvement District Number II.



(Prior Code, § 8-11.01)  (Ord. 734, passed - -1994)



§ 53.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COST OF PROJECT. The total amount of all assessments imposed on the
property located within the geographical boundaries of Northside Sewer
Improvement District Number II attributed to the installation of sewer
improvements.



   NORTHSIDE SEWER IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT NUMBER II. The sewer improvement
district created by the city, pursuant to Res. 932, adopted on 12-16-1993.



   PARTICIPATING CHARGE. The proportionate share of the cost of project
based on benefits derived in accordance with standards determined by the City
Engineer as calculated by the participating charge formula set forth in §
53.04(A) of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 8-11.02)  (Ord. 734, passed - -1994)



§ 53.03  APPLICATION FOR TAP-IN.



   Any property owner located outside of Northside Sewer Improvement
District Number II desiring to tap into the Northside Sewer Improvement
District Number II sewer line must submit an application to the city
containing the following information:



   (A)   A warranty of workmanship and material for tap-in sewer lines
and facilities installed which shall run to the benefit of the city for a
period of at least one year from the date of acceptance by the city;



   (B)   A diagram of all property which may be served by any tap-in
sewer line to be installed;



   (C)   A statement that the city acquires ownership of any tap-in
sewer line and appurtenances upon completion and acceptance of the work by
the city;



   (D)   A statement that the city’s cost for inspecting such work
shall be paid by the developer or owner;



   (E)   Provide easements for the tap-in sewer line, assignable to the
city, in a form, acceptable to the City Attorney;



   (F)   A statement setting forth the intended uses of the property
utilizing the tap-in sewer line; and



   (G)   Cash or chock made payable in an amount to be determined by
the City Engineer for the applicant’s participating charge in the Northside
Sewer Improvement District Number II.



(Prior Code, § 8-11.03)



§ 53.04  PARTICIPATING CHARGE FOR TAP-IN; PAYMENT.



   (A)   (1)   Any property owner who installs a tap-in sewer line
into the Northside Sewer Improvement District Number II sewer line shall be
subject to a participation charge based upon the following formula:



 


Cost of Project

 

Cost Per Gallon

 

Estimated Gallon




Gallon Per Day =

 

Per Day X

 

Per Day Usage Of




Capacity of Line

 


 

Tap-In Applicant




- 1/25 for each year after 1-1-1995




 



      (2)   The City Engineer will compute the participation charge
for each applicant in accordance with the formula set forth in division
(A)(1) above. The City Engineer shall use industry standards or state’s
Department of Water Quality standards to estimate the gallons per day usage
of the applicant.



(Prior Code, § 8-11.04)



   (B)   (1)   Prior to the issuance of a building permit by the
city for a tap-in sewer line, the tap-in applicant must deposit with the city
the participation charge as determined by the city.



      (2)   The city will establish a separate account for
participation charges assessed pursuant to this chapter. Sums collected shall
be treated as trust funds to be paid to the land owners of the parcels of
land upon which the Northside Sewer Improvement District Number II
assessments have been imposed, or upon their successors or assigns. The
participation charge shall be distributed to the owners of each parcel, pro
rata, based upon the amount of each parcel’s assessment relative to the
Northside Sewer Improvement District Number II cost of project. Unless
otherwise agreed to in writing between a seller and purchaser of land within
the Northside Sewer Improvement District Number II boundaries, the right to
collect a participation charge distribution shall be deemed to be a right
which runs with the land and payable to the owner of the land at the time the
distribution is made.



(Prior Code, § 8-11.05)  (Ord. 734, passed - -1994)



§ 53.05  ADJACENT LINE TAP-INS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall be permitted to extend service from his or her tap-in
to the Northside Sewer Improvement District Number II to adjacent property
owned by someone else or to property for which a participation charge has not
been advanced and deposited with the city. Prior to a building permit being
issued, adjacent property owners shall be subject to the participation charge
set forth in § 53.04(A) of this chapter and all other terms and conditions
of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 8-11.06)  (Ord. 734, passed - -1994)



TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



      72.   PARKING AND STOPPING RULES



      73.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES



      74.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   70.01   Traffic laws adopted



   70.02   Records



   70.03   Accidents



   70.04   Directing traffic



   70.05   Visual obstructions



   70.06   Traffic signs



   70.07   Crosswalks, safety zones and traffic lanes



   70.08   One-way roads and rotary island traffic



   70.09   Stop or yield intersections



   70.10   Towing and impounding vehicles



 



   70.99   Penalty



§ 70.01  TRAFFIC LAWS ADOPTED.



   (A)   All appropriate provisions of A.R.S. Title 28 dealing with
traffic and vehicles shall be deemed to apply upon all city streets, alleys
and roadways.



   (B)   In addition to the definitions and phrases set out in the
A.R.S. Title 28 adopted by this section, the city hereby establishes the
following definitions.



      CITY TRAFFIC ENGINEER. As used in this traffic code, the CITY
TRAFFIC ENGINEER is used to cover the joint responsibilities of the Public
Works Director and the Chief of Police.



      DOWNTOWN PARKING DISTRICT. The area consisting of the following
streets, including all adjacent sidewalks to the city right-of-way line:
Route 66 Eastbound, between Fourth Street and First Street.



   (C)   It is a violation for any person to do any act that is
forbidden or fail to perform any act required by this traffic code. It shall
also be a violation for any person to willfully fail or refuse to comply with
any lawful order or direction of the Police Chief or any Fire Department
official. All violations of this traffic code shall be adjudicated as civil
traffic violations as provided in A.R.S. Title 28.



   (D)   Every person in whose name a vehicle is registered or licensed
shall be prima facie responsible for any parking of the vehicle in violation
of any provision of this traffic code.



(Ord. 922, passed 7-14-2011; Ord. 935, passed 8-8-2013)  Penalty, see §
70.99



§ 70.02  RECORDS.



   The City Court shall keep a record of all violations of the traffic
laws of the town or of the state vehicles laws of which any person has been
charged together with a record of final disposition of all alleged offenses.
The record shall accumulate during at least a five-year period and from that
time on the records shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent
five-year period.



(Ord. 922, passed 7-14-2011)



§ 70.03  ACCIDENTS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Police Chief to investigate
traffic accidents and to cite and assist in the prosecution of those persons
charged with violations of law causing or contributing to accidents.



   (B)   Whenever the accidents at any particular location become
numerous, the Police Chief shall conduct studies of the accidents and
determine remedial measures.



   (C)   The Police Chief shall maintain a suitable system of filing
traffic accident reports so that accidents reports may be retrieved by both
party name or accident location. Records shall only be released in accordance
with the provisions of A.R.S. § 28-667.



(Ord. 922, passed 7-14-2011)



§ 70.04  DIRECTING TRAFFIC.



   (A)   The Police Chief is hereby authorized to direct all traffic by
voice, hand or signal.



   (B)   Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire,
may direct or assist the Police Chief in directing traffic at the scene or
the immediate vicinity.



(Ord. 922, passed 7-14-2011)



§ 70.05  VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle which
has any type of visual obstruction, natural or human-made, including, but not
limited to, snow or ice, on any windows thereof, of such a nature as to
obstruct the driver’s view through the windshield or side or rear windows;
provided, however, that, this section shall not apply to the rear window or
windows if the motor vehicle is equipped with outside mirrors that are on
both left- and right-hand sides of the vehicle, and are located in a manner
and in such a condition as to reflect to the driver a view of the roadway
through each mirror for a distance of at least 200 feet to the rear of the
motor vehicle.



(Ord. 922, passed 7-14-2011)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.06  TRAFFIC SIGNS.



   (A)   From time to time, with the approval of the Council, the
Public Works Department shall place and maintain traffic-control devices,
signs and signals when and as required under the traffic regulations of the
city to make effective the provisions of those regulations, and may place and
maintain any additional traffic-control devices and may be deemed necessary
to regulate traffic under the traffic laws of the town or the state, or to
guide or warn traffic. Prior to the placement of any traffic-control device
signs or signals, a plan or design shall be prepared for placement and the
plan or design shall be prepared in conformance with generally accepted
engineering or design standards in effect at the time of the preparation of
the plan design.



   (B)   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any
official traffic-control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with
the traffic regulations of the town unless otherwise directed by a law
enforcement officer acting in accordance with state or local law and subject
to any exceptions granted in this traffic code or by the laws of the state.
Failure to obey posted traffic signs shall be a civil traffic violation.



(Ord. 922, passed 7-14-2011)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.07  CROSSWALKS, SAFETY ZONES AND TRAFFIC LANES.



   The Public Works Department, after consultation with the Chief of
Police, is hereby authorized, on approval of the Council:



   (A)   To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or
lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where, in
conformance with generally accepted engineering or design standards in effect
at the time, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway,
and at other places as may be deemed necessary by the city;



   (B)   To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at
such places as may be deemed necessary for the protection of pedestrians in
conformance with generally accepted engineering or design standards in effect
at the time; and



   (C)   To mark lanes for traffic on street pavement at such places as
may be deemed advisable, consistent with traffic laws of the town and in
conformance with generally accepted engineering or design standards in effect
at the time.



(Ord. 922, passed 7-14-2011)



§ 70.08  ONE-WAY ROADS AND ROTARY ISLAND TRAFFIC.



   (A)   The Council may designate any highway or street or any
separate roadway under its jurisdiction, for one-way traffic and shall cause
to be erected appropriate signs giving notice thereof. Upon a roadway
designated and sign posted for one-way traffic, a vehicle shall be driven
only in the direction designated.



   (B)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be
driven only to the right of the island.



(Ord. 922, passed 7-14-2011)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.09  STOP OR YIELD INTERSECTIONS.



   (A)   The Council shall, by resolution, designate through streets,
intersections where stops are required and intersections where vehicles shall
yield the right-of-way.



   (B)   When any resolution of the Council shall designate any through
street or intersection where vehicles are to stop or yield the right-of-way,
the Public Works Department shall erect and maintain the appropriate signs at
every location where a vehicle must stop or yield the right-of-way.



(Ord. 922, passed 7-14-2011)



§ 70.10  TOWING AND IMPOUNDING VEHICLES.



   (A)   Authorization. The Police Department may take charge, remove
and keep in custody any unoccupied vehicle of any kind or description
violating any of the provisions of this traffic code or any of the ordinances
of the city or laws of the state regulating the standing and parking of
vehicles.



   (B)   Impounded vehicles; release. The Police Department shall cause
return to be made to the owner of an impounded vehicle when the owner has
furnished evidence of his or her identity, ownership of the vehicle and proof
of current insurance, signed a receipt acknowledging return of the vehicle
and accepting responsibility for the cost for towing and storage fees set
forth by the commercial towing service authorized and designated to carry out
such function under the direction of the Police Department. The payment of
such removal and storage fees shall not release the owner or driver of such
vehicles of any other penalty imposed for a violation of this traffic code or
any of the ordinances of the city or laws of the state.



   (C)   Impounded vehicles; record, towing service. The Police
Department shall maintain a record of all vehicles impounded. Such records
shall show the date and the location from which the vehicle was removed, the
reason for such removal and impounding and location at which the vehicle is
presently stored. The Police Department shall further provide for adequate
towing service to implement the provisions of this traffic code. The Police
Department is authorized to use a commercial towing service for the towing
and storage of impounded vehicles.



(Ord. 922, passed 7-14-2011)



§ 70.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person found responsible for a civil traffic violation
shall be penalized by a civil sanction not to exceed $250, unless a different
penalty is specified in this traffic code. In addition, the Court shall levy
penalty assessments pursuant to A.R.S. §§ 16-116.01 and 16-116.02 and any
other applicable law.



   (B)   A peace officer or duly authorized agent of the city may stop
and detain a person as is reasonably necessary to investigate an actual or
suspected violation of this traffic code, to serve a copy of the traffic
complaint for any alleged violation of said traffic code and make appropriate
Court appearances in the prosecution of said offense.



   (C)   Any duty or authority granted to the Police Chief by this
traffic code may be performed by any authorized individual under the
supervision of the Police Chief.



(Ord. 922, passed 7-14-2011; Ord. 935, passed 8-8-2013)



CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



Section




Truck Traffic




   71.01   Definitions



   71.02   Application of regulations



   71.03   Designating streets for truck use



   71.04   Truck traffic of outside origin



   71.05   Truck traffic of inside origin



   71.06   Additional regulations; parking



   71.07   Enforcement



 



   71.99   Penalty




TRUCK TRAFFIC




§ 71.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DEVIATING TRUCK. A truck which leaves and departs from a truck route
while traveling within the city.



   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.



   TRUCK. Any vehicle designed or operated for the transportation of
property and whose body weight or whose combined body and load weight exceeds
10,000 pounds.



   TRUCK ROUTE. A way over certain streets, as designated herein, over and
along which trucks coming into and going out of the city must operate.



(Prior Code, § 6-4.01)



§ 71.02  APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.



   (A)   All trucks within the city shall be operated only over and
along the truck routes established in Ch. 74, Schd. II, of this code of
ordinances and on the other designated streets over which truck travel is
permitted.



   (B)   The exceptions to this are as follows:



      (1)   Operation on street of destination. The operation of
trucks upon any street where necessary to the conduct of business at a
destination point; provided, streets upon which such traffic is permitted are
used until reaching the intersection nearest the destination point;



      (2)   Emergency vehicles. The operation of emergency vehicles
upon any city street;



      (3)   Public utilities. The operation of trucks owned or
operated by the city, any contractor or material man, while engaged in the
repair, maintenance or construction of streets, street improvements or
utilities within the city; and



      (4)   Detoured trucks. The operation of trucks upon any
officially established detour in any case where such truck could lawfully be
operated upon the street for which such detour is established.



(Prior Code, § 6-4.02)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.03  DESIGNATING STREETS FOR TRUCK USE.



   In addition to those streets in the city constituting a part of a truck
route as established herein, the Superintendent of Streets may from time to
time, with the consent of the Council and Chief of Police, designate
additional streets as alternate truck routes and shall so post the same.



(Prior Code, § 6-4.04)



§ 71.04  TRUCK TRAFFIC OF OUTSIDE ORIGIN.



   (A)   One inside destination point. All trucks entering the city for
a destination point in the city shall proceed only over an established truck
route and shall deviate only at the intersection with the street, on which
such traffic is permitted, nearest to the destination point. Upon leaving the
destination point, a deviating truck shall return to the truck route by the
shortest route.



   (B)   Multiple inside destination points. All trucks entering the
city for multiple destination points shall deviate only at the intersection
with the street upon which such traffic is permitted nearest to the first
destination point. Upon leaving the first destination point, a deviating
truck shall proceed to other destination points by the shortest direction.
Upon leaving the last destination point, a deviating truck shall return to
the truck route by the shortest route.



(Prior Code, § 6-4.05)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.05  TRUCK TRAFFIC OF INSIDE ORIGIN.



   (A)   Outside destination point. All trucks on a trip originating in
the city and traveling in the city for a destination point outside the city
shall proceed by the shortest direction to a truck route as herein
established.



   (B)   Inside destination points. All trucks on a trip originating in
the city and traveling in the city for destination points in the city shall
proceed over the truck route to the fullest extent possible under the
circumstances.



(Prior Code, § 6-4.06)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.06  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS; PARKING.



   (A)   No truck shall be parked on any city street or right-of-way
for any period in excess of two hours.



   (B)   No truck shall be parked on private or public property unless
said property is adjacent to a designated truck route and there is provided
an adequate exit from the street so as not to harm the shoulder or edge of
the street.



(Prior Code, § 6-4.07)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.07  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Maps. The City Clerk shall be furnished accurate maps setting
out the truck route and streets upon which truck traffic is permitted; and
the maps shall be kept on file in the office of the Clerk and shall be
available to the public. Such maps shall be furnished by the Superintendent
of Streets.



   (B)   Sign maintenance. The Superintendent of Streets of the city
shall cause all designated truck routes to be properly posted as such.



   (C)   Weigh-in. The police shall have the authority to require any
person driving or in control of any truck not proceeding over a truck route
or street over which truck traffic is permitted to proceed to any public or
private scale available for the purpose of weighing and determine whether
this traffic code has been complied with.



(Prior Code, § 6-4.08)



§ 71.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 70.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Any violation of any portion of §§ 71.01 through 71.07 of
this chapter shall be punishable as a Class 3 misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 6-4.08)



CHAPTER 72:  PARKING AND STOPPING RULES



Section



   72.01   Parking zones



   72.02   Parallel parking



   72.03   Angle parking



   72.04   Wrong way parking



   72.05   Downtown parking



   72.06   Stopping for repairs



   72.07   Blocking traffic



   72.08   Parking on sidewalks



   72.09   Parking for physically disabled persons



   72.10   Parking or displaying vehicle for sale



   72.11   Recreational vehicle parking



   72.12   Restricted areas; loading areas



 



   72.99   Penalty



§ 72.01  PARKING ZONES.



   Special parking zones, limited parking zones, no parking zones and
loading zones shall be established by the Public Works Director, after
consultation with the Chief of Police and upon approval of the Council. No
such zone shall be effective until properly marked and posted.



(Ord. 922, passed 7-14-2011)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.02  PARALLEL PARKING.



   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to stop the same, or
cause or permit the same to be stopped, in or upon any street unless the
wheels of such vehicle nearest the curb or curb line, are not more than 18
inches distant from such curb or curb line; provided, however, that, the
provisions of this section shall not apply when such stop is made for the
purpose of allowing another vehicle or pedestrian to pass in front of such
vehicle so stopping or when in compliance with a signal or order of law
enforcement officer.



(Ord. 922, passed 7-14-2011)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.03  ANGLE PARKING.



   All parking on public streets, except specified, striped and posted
otherwise, shall be parallel. On uncurbed city streets, every vehicle sopped
or parked shall be stopped or parked on the right-hand side of the roadway as
far as is practical.



(Ord. 922, passed 7-14-2011)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.04  WRONG WAY PARKING.



   It shall be unlawful to park in the opposite lane facing oncoming
traffic.



(Ord. 922, passed 7-14-2011)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.05  DOWNTOWN PARKING.



   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in the Downtown Parking
District between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any day.



(Ord. 922, passed 7-14-2011)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.06  STOPPING FOR REPAIRS.



   No person shall leave standing, or cause, or permit to be left
standing, upon any public street a vehicle undergoing repair or which has
been stopped for the purpose of having repairs made thereon or for storage;
provided, however, that, this provision shall not apply to a vehicle which
has been disabled while on such a street and in such a manner and to such
extent that it shall be impossible to avoid stopping such vehicle on such
street and impracticable to remove the same until repairs have been made.



(Ord. 922, passed 7-14-2011)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.07  BLOCKING TRAFFIC.



   (A)   It is a violation for any person to stop, stand or park any
motor vehicle, or other vehicle, upon a street in the town in such manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than 20 feet of the width of
the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic; except that, a person
may stop temporarily in the actual loading or unloading of passengers, or
when necessary, in the observance of traffic signs or signals of the Police
Chief.



   (B)   It is a violation for any person to park a motor vehicle, or
other vehicle, within an alley or entrance to a private driveway, except for
the loading or unloading of materials, and then not unless such loading or
unloading can be accomplished without blocking the alley to the free movement
of vehicular traffic.



(Ord. 922, passed 7-14-2011)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.08  PARKING ON SIDEWALKS.



   It is a violation for any person to park any vehicle, whether in usable
condition or not, or for an owner to permit his or her vehicle to be parked
upon any sidewalk in the town.



(Ord. 922, passed 7-14-2011)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.09  PARKING FOR PHYSICALLY DISABLED PERSONS.



   (A)   For purposes of this section and its enforcement, the term
RESTRICTED PARKING AREA FOR PHYSICALLY DISABLED PERSONS shall refer to those
spaces designated by a sign stating “Reserved Parking” and bearing the
internationally accepted symbol of access in accordance with A.R.S. §
28-882(C). Additionally, such a restricted parking area shall include any
loading/unloading zone directly adjacent to the parking space designated by
painted stripes.



   (B)   Those persons or business required by law or otherwise
electing to provide restricted parking areas for physically disabled persons
shall maintain such parking so that its designation as parking restricted to
such persons is readily obvious. Maintenance shall include the repainting of
the lines delineating the area needed to ensure adequate visibility and the
upkeep of the sign designating the space as restricted in accordance with
A.R.S. § 28-882(C).



   (C)   No person shall park in a restricted parking area for
physically disabled persons unless the vehicle has displayed thereon a
distinguishing insignia complying with A.R.S. § 28-884(A)(1) or numbered
plates bearing the international symbol of access complying with A.R.S. §
28-884(A)(2).



   (D)   No person shall park in the loading/unloading zone area
designated by stripes adjacent to a restricted parking are for physically
disabled persons.



   (E)   Any person or business which causes a parking space to be set
aside as a restricted parking area for physically disabled persons shall be
deemed to have given consent to the Police Chief to enforce a violation of
this section when such violation occurs on the private property of such
person or business.



(Ord. 922, passed 7-14-2011)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.10  PARKING OR DISPLAYING VEHICLE FOR SALE.



   (A)   It is a violation for any person to park or display for sale,
or cause to be parked or displayed for sale, any vehicle, trailer or
combination thereof, adjacent to, or upon, the right-of-way of any street or
highway, upon any vacant lot or upon a public parking lot which serves
businesses not licensed by the town to sell vehicles or trailers.



   (B)   It is a violation for any person owning a vehicle or trailer
to allow or permit a vehicle or trailer to be parked or displayed in
violation of division (A) above. Proof of ownership or evidence of
registration in the person’s name or any vehicle or trailer found to be in
violation shall be prima facie evidence that the person is responsible.



   (C)   The following exemptions are made to this section:



      (1)   Vehicles registered in the name of the person or
immediate family member listed as the real owner of the property upon which
the vehicle is parked; and



      (2)   Vehicles displaying non-obstructive “For Sale” signs
driven upon the public parking lot of businesses while the owner or operator
of the vehicle is actively patronizing the business or businesses or is an
employee of the business.



(Ord. 922, passed 7-14-2011)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.11  RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKING.



   (A)   No boat or utility trailer shall be parked upon any street,
highway, municipal property or alleyway within the city, except for the
purpose of loading or unloading of such boat or utility trailer, not to
exceed 24 consecutive hours.



   (B)   No recreational vehicle shall be parked upon any city street,
highway, public right-of-way, municipal property or alleyway within the city,
except for the following purposes.



      (1)   A recreation vehicle may be parked upon a city street,
highway, public right-of-way or alleyway, which is not otherwise designated
as a no-parking zone or which does not have posted time restrictions for the
purpose and during the time required for the loading or unloading of such
recreational vehicle, not to exceed 24 consecutive hours and not to exceed 48
cumulative hours in any seven-day period, nor more than seven cumulative days
in any 30-day period.



      (2)   When the driver of the recreational vehicle is not a
resident of the city and is visiting a resident of the city or business
within the city the recreational vehicle may be parked for up 72 consecutive
hours in any seven-day period.



      (3)   For the purposes of division (B)(1) above, a
recreational vehicle shall be deemed parked on a city street for 24
consecutive hours if the vehicle is observed parked in the same location for
at least three separate occasions, each of which is at least eight hours
apart.



(Ord. 922, passed 7-14-2011)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.12  RESTRICTED AREAS; LOADING AREAS.



   (A)   The city’s Traffic Engineer shall designate restricted
parking areas or zones by the use of signs, or painted curbs, or both.



      (1)   If the curb is painted red, parking shall be prohibited
in the red area adjacent to the painted curbs at all times.



      (2)   If the curb is painted yellow or white, the space
adjacent to the curb so painted shall be used exclusively by vehicles during
the loading or unloading of freight or passengers. Signs placed at either one
or both ends of such zone may further restrict use of a loading zone for
specific vehicles or purposes.



      (3)   Curb markings to show a time limit restriction of less
than 30 minutes shall be green.



   (B)   (1)   Taxicab, horse carriage rides, bicycle cab, shuttle
and tour services standing and/or loading areas shall be designated by signs.



      (2)   The city’s Traffic Engineer shall determine and
designate by proper signs or markings, placed in locations in which the
stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would create a hazardous condition
or would cause delay to traffic, parking of any vehicles in such places is
prohibited.



   (C)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose
or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or
pickup and loading of materials in any place marked by signs and yellow
painted curb as a freight curb loading zone during the hours indicated by
such signs. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials
exceed 20 minutes. Vehicles displaying the state’s “Disabled Parking”
identifying insignia may stand or park in a freight loading zone while in the
act of loading or unloading passengers.



(Ord. 922, passed 7-14-2011)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 70.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Violation of any parking restriction posted pursuant to §
72.01 of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine to be adopted by Council
resolution at a duly constituted meeting. Each day that a violation continues
shall be considered a separate offense.



   (C)   (1)   Subject to the provisions of division (C)(2) below,
upon adjudication that any person has violated any portion of § 72.09 of
this chapter, the Court may order the person to pay a civil sanction of not
less than $50 and not more than $300. In addition, the Court may collect any
applicable Court costs and fees. Any sign required or otherwise erected
pursuant to § 72.09 of this chapter shall, in addition to all other required
information, have displayed thereon a notice that the maximum penalty for a
violation is $300.



      (2)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (C)(1) above,
upon written determination that any person or business is in non-compliance
with § 72.09(B) of this chapter, a written warning shall first be either
mailed or hand-delivered to the person or business, giving ten days to such
person or business to come into compliance. After the expiration of such
ten-day period and after an adjudication that such person or business has
violated § 72.09(B) of this chapter, the Court may order the person or
business to pay a civil sanction in an amount of not less than $50, nor more
than $300, in accordance with division (C)(1) above, together with Court
costs and fees. The civil sanction as is set forth in division (C)(1) above
may be imposed anew for each day the person or business fails to come into
compliance, and each day that such person or business fails to come into
compliance shall constitute a separate violation.



(Ord. 922, passed 7-14-2011)



CHAPTER 73:  RECREATIONAL VEHICLES



Section




Bicycles and Toy Vehicles




   73.01   Application; special provisions



   73.02   Traffic laws apply



   73.03   Clinging to vehicles



   73.04   Riding on roadway



   73.05   Helmets



 



   73.99   Penalty




BICYCLES AND TOY VEHICLES




§ 73.01 APPLICATION; SPECIAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   The parent of a child and the guardian of a ward shall not
authorize or knowingly permit the child or ward to violate any of the
provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to wagons,
wheelchairs and strollers or other devices designed and used for the purpose
of transporting children, infants, physically disabled or incapacitated
persons or carts or other devices intended and used for transporting
merchandise or materials when used for the purposes for which they are
intended.



   (C)   When used in this subchapter, the term PLAY VEHICLE shall
include a coaster, roller skates, scooter, roller ski, tricycle, unicycle,
sled, toboggan or any other non-motorized device with wheels, rollers or
rails upon which a person may ride.



(Ord. 922, passed 7-14-2011)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.02  TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY.



   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all the
rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of
a vehicle by this subchapter, except as to special regulations in this
subchapter and except as to those provisions of this subchapter which, by
their nature, can have no application.



(Ord. 922, passed 7-14-2011)



§ 73.03  CLINGING TO VEHICLES.



   No person riding upon any bicycle, skateboard or play vehicles shall
attach the same or himself or herself to any vehicle upon a roadway.



(Ord. 922, passed 7-14-2011)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.04  RIDING ON ROADWAY.



   (A)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as
near to the right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care
when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.



   (B)   Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more
than two abreast, except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles.



   (C)   Bicycles and play vehicles may be ridden on sidewalks, except
in the Downtown Parking District and where otherwise posted.



(Ord. 922, passed 7-14-2011)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.05  HELMETS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to
operate or ride upon a bicycle on any highway, street, road, sidewalk,
bike-way or trail unless that person wears a protective helmet that is
properly fitted and fastened.



   (B)   No parent or guardian of any unemancipated minor under 18
years of age shall knowingly allow a minor to violate this section.



(Ord. 922, passed 7-14-2011)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 70.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   (1)   Violation of § 73.05 of this chapter shall
constitute a civil traffic offense and shall be punishable by a fine for each
offense in an amount adopted by Council resolution at a duly constituted
meeting.



      (2)   The first time a person is charged with a violation of
§ 73.05 of this chapter, the Court may dismiss the charge upon presentation
of evidence that the person has purchased or obtained a protective helmet.



(Ord. 922, passed 7-14-2011)



CHAPTER 74:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



      I.   Speed limits



      II.   Truck traffic



SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.



   (A)   The speed limit within the city shall be 25 mph, except as
otherwise posted.



   (B)   (1)   School speed zones are established upon the following
roadways at the locations stated:

 

School
 
Location


Heritage Elementary School
 
790 Rodeo Road, commencing at the intersection of Rodeo Road and Frankway,
continue westerly 550 feet on Rodeo Road


Williams High School
 
440 S. 7th Street, commencing 150 feet south of intersection of S. 7th Street
and W. Sheridan Avenue, continue southerly to intersection of S. 7th Street
and W. Meade Avenue, commencing at intersection of S. 7th Street and W.
Sheridan Avenue, continue westerly to the intersection of W. Sheridan Avenue
and S. 8th Street


Williams Middle School
 
601 N. 7th Street, commencing at the intersection of N. 7th Street and W.
Franklin Avenue, continue northerly 200 feet past the intersection of N. 7th
Street and W. Edison Avenue, commencing at the intersection of N. 7th Street
and W. Edison Avenue, continue easterly 300 feet on W. Edison Avenue



 



      (2)   Portable signs indicating that school is in session and
that the speed limit in the school speed zone is 15 mph shall be placed in
the roadway at the point of commencement of the school speed zone from either
direction by the school authorities. School authorities shall maintain these
signs when school is in session and shall cause them to be removed
immediately thereafter.



      (3)   No vehicle shall proceed at a speed to exceed 15 mph
between the portable signs placed upon the roadway in accordance with
division (B)(2) above.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle above the
posted speed limit, or in violation of a traffic-control device or sign
placed or approved by the city’s Traffic Engineer, in a marked construction
zone or in a marked construction zone detour route.



(Ord. 922, passed 7-14-2011)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE II. TRUCK TRAFFIC.



   The following truck routes are hereby established in the city:



 

Street/Location
 

Direction(s)

 
Provisions




Airport Road
 


 
From Edison Avenue north to the city limits


Bill Williams Avenue
 

Eastbound and westbound

 
When entering the city from the east or west and traveling in an eastbound or
westbound direction through the city


Edison Avenue
 


 
From Airport Road west to Grand Canyon Boulevard


Fourth Street
 

Northbound and southbound

 
When entering the city from the south on the Perkinsville Road and traveling
in a northerly direction through the city from the city limits to either Bill
Williams Avenue or Railroad Avenue. Traffic proceeding in a southerly
direction shall utilize the same route in reverse


Railroad Avenue
 

Eastbound and westbound

 
When entering the city from the east or west and traveling in an eastbound or
westbound direction through the city


Rodeo Road
 


 
From the east city limits to Airport Road


Trucks exiting I-40 at Grand Canyon Boulevard (Exit 163) Eastbound 1 or
westbound trucks exiting I-40 at Grand Canyon Boulevard (Exit 163)
 

Eastbound or westbound

 
Only move in a southerly direction to Bill Williams Avenue or Railroad Avenue




 



(Prior Code, § 6-4.03)



TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   ANIMALS



      91.   HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES



      92.   ABANDONED VEHICLES



      93.   PARKS AND RECREATION



      94.   FIRE PREVENTION



CHAPTER 90:  ANIMALS



Section



   90.01   Definitions



   90.02   Animals running at large



   90.03   Vicious dog or animal at large



   90.04   Impoundment; seizure; redemption; disposition



   90.05   Enforcement; citations



   90.06   Rabies control; vaccination



   90.07   Licenses



   90.08   Collars



   90.09   Prohibited acts



   90.10   Cleaning up of litter



   90.11   Adequate shelter for dogs



 



   90.99   Penalty



§ 90.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANIMAL. Any animal of a species that is susceptible to rabies, except
humans.



   AT LARGE. Off the premises of the owner, not under the control of the
owner or other persons acting for the owner.



   CITY POUND. Any establishment authorized by the Council for the
confinement, maintenance, safekeeping and control of dogs or other animals
that come into the custody of the city enforcement agent in the performance
of his or her official duties.



   COLLAR. A band, chain, harness or suitable device worn around the neck
of a dog to which a license may be affixed.



   DOG. A member of the Canis Familiaris family.



   ENFORCEMENT AGENT. A city humane officer, and any assistant humane
officer, appointed by Council and all commissioned police officers of the
city.



   IMPOUND. The reception into custody by the enforcement agent of any
dog, animal, livestock or poultry for confinement as provided for in this
chapter.



   LIVESTOCK. Meat animals, horses, mules, asses, sheep, goats and swine.



   POULTRY. Any domesticated fowl.



   PREMISES. Any property that is owned, leased or occupied by the dog
owner, or the person having charge, care, custody or control over the dog.



   SERVICE ANIMAL. A dog or miniature horse individually trained to do
work or perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability,
including a physical, sensory, psychiatric, intellectual or other mental
disability.



   STRAY ANIMAL. Any livestock, or other animal, whose owner is unknown or
cannot be located, or any animal included in the definition of livestock,
whose owner is known, but permits the animal to roam at large on the streets,
alleys or roads of the town or on the premises of another without permission.



   VACCINATION. An anti-rabies vaccination using a type of vaccine
approved by the state’s Veterinarian Association.



(Ord. 919, passed - -2011)



§ 90.02  ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE.



   (A)   Animals at large.



      (1)   Every person owning or having charge, care, custody or
control of any dog or animal of any age shall keep such dog or animal
exclusively upon his or her own premises; provided, however, that, the dog
may be off such premises if it is under the control of a competent person and
restrained by a substantial chain, leash, rope or cord of sufficient strength
and no longer than eight feet in length.



      (2)   Injury to any persons or damage to any property by a dog
or any other animal while at large shall be the full responsibility of the
owner or custodian at the time such damages were inflicted.



   (B)   Unconfined.



      (1)   A dog or animal shall be deemed to be running at large
if it is unconfined. A dog or animal is unconfined if, while on the premises
of its owner or harborer, the dog or animal is not securely indoors or within
securely enclosed and locked pen or dog run area upon the premises of the
person having charge, care, custody or control of such dog or animal. Such
pen or dog run area must be adequate to prevent against the escape from the
area.



      (2)   A dog shall not be considered unconfined if it is on the
premises of its owner or harborer and under the supervision of the owner or
harborer.



   (C)   Tethered.



      (1)   A dog that is tethered upon the property of its owner
shall be at least ten feet from a publicly accessible sidewalk, street or
walkway at the farthest point of the tether.



      (2)   A dog that is securely tethered at least ten feet from a
publicly accessible sidewalk, street or walkway is not at large.



(Ord. 919, passed - -2011)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.03  VICIOUS DOG OR ANIMAL AT LARGE.



   (A)   Vicious dog or animal. A VICIOUS DOG OR ANIMAL shall mean any
one of the following:



      (1)   Any dog or animal that has bitten a person, or caused
bodily injury or disfigurement to any person on public or private property;



      (2)   Any dog or animal with a known propensity, tendency or
disposition to bite human beings or engage in any action toward a person
under circumstances which would indicated danger to personal safety;



      (3)   Any dog or animal that while at large kills or causes
injury to domestic animals; and



      (4)   Any dog or animal so declared by the City Magistrate
after a determination at a hearing of a pattern of aggressive behavior that
has caused injury, or a reasonable apprehension injury, or intimidation of
individuals.



   (B)   Control.



      (1)   Any person having charge, care, custody or control of a
vicious dog or animal shall not permit such dog or animal off his or her
premises unless such dog or animal is securely leashed with a leash no longer
than six feet in length and muzzled.



      (2)   No persons shall permit a vicious dog or animal to be
unconfined.



   (C)   Exhibitions or parades. Exhibitions or parades of animals
which are non-domestic in the eyes of the law may be conducted only upon
securing a permit from the Chief of Police.



(Ord. 919, passed - -2011)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.04  IMPOUNDMENT; SEIZURE; REDEMPTION; DISPOSITION.



   (A)   (1)   Any dog or other animal, including livestock, found
running at large shall be impounded or in the case of livestock, seized and
sold as a stray animal in accordance with the procedures set forth in A.R.S.
§§ 3-1401 - 3-1404, at the discretion of the enforcement agent. If any
dangerous, vicious or fierce dog or animal is unconfined and poses a
potential danger to the public, that animal may be immediately slain.



      (2)   Upon the impounding of any dog or other animal, the
enforcement agent shall immediately give the owner or custodian notice of the
impounding, either personally or by certified mail, addressed to the owner or
custodian’s last known address if the owner or custodian is known or can be
ascertained by reasonable investigation. The enforcement agent shall, within
24 hours after taking up and impounding any animal, except a dog, make a
report to the office of the City Clerk, stating the kind of animal and
describing it by color otherwise, or by any marks or brands that may be on it
and when it was taken up and impounded.



      (3)   If the owner of a dog found running a large within the
city limits can be ascertained at the time of or immediately following the
occurrence of the violation of this chapter, and the owner immediately
confines or leashes the dog, the enforcement agent may issue a citation to
that owner in lieu of impounding the dog.



   (B)   The enforcement officer and police officers may enter upon any
premises and seize any animal that the enforcement officer or police officer
has probable cause to believe is involved in a violation of a state statute
or city ordinance.



   (C)   (1)   Any dog or other impounded animal may be redeemed by
the owner or custodian upon providing proof of legal right to possession of
said dog or other animal and the payment of an impoundment fee to defray part
of the cost of maintenance of such dog or animal. A surcharge shall be added
to the impound fee for each subsequent time the same dog or other animal is
impounded.



      (2)   If the animal is a dog and unlicensed, the owner must,
in addition to the fees provided for above, pay the license fee for the
current year and present a current, valid certificate of vaccination against
rabies. If the dog is licensed and the tag bearing the license number is lost
or damaged, the owner shall pay for a replacement tag before the dog is
released.



      (3)   The fees for impoundment shall be adopted by Council
resolution at a duly constituted meeting and shall include fine amounts for
first offense, second offense, and third and each subsequent offense. In
addition to the initial fee for impoundment, there shall be a per day charge
for boarding and animal maintenance adopted by Council resolution at a duly
constituted meeting.



      (4)   If the animal is believed to be the victim of a crime,
the animal may be held by the city so long as necessary for the criminal case.



   (D)   Any dog or other animal, which is not claimed within 72 hours
(excluding weekends and legal holidays) after notification of the impoundment
is sent to the owner, may be purchased for the cost of the impoundment fee,
including spaying or neutering. Any dog or other animal not redeemed or
purchased may be destroyed or transferred to an animal shelter. If the dog or
cat is not reclaimed within the impoundment period, the enforcement agent
shall take possession of and may place the dog or cat for sale or may dispose
of the dog or cat in a humane manner. The enforcement agent may destroy
impounded sick or injured dogs or cats if destruction is necessary to prevent
the dog or cat from suffering or to prevent the spread of disease.



(Ord. 919, passed - -2011)



§ 90.05  ENFORCEMENT; CITATIONS.



   (A)   An enforcement agent shall be appointed by the Chief of
Police. It is unlawful for any person to, in any manner, intervene, impede,
prevent, obstruct or intimidate the enforcement agent in the discharge of his
or her duties, in taking up or attempting to take up and impound any and all
animals which it shall be his or her duty to impound under the provisions of
the chapter, or who shall rescue or attempt to rescue any animal so taken up
or to release any animal so impounded.



   (B)   Whenever any person is in violation of the provisions of this
chapter, the city enforcement agent or any peace officer may hand deliver or
mail to the last known mailing address of such person a violation citation.
Such citation shall be on the uniform civil traffic citation form, or other
form approved as to form by the City Attorney and the City Magistrate and
shall advise the person involved of the specific violation with which he or
she is charged, including the particulars thereof.



(Ord. 919, passed - -2011)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.06  RABIES CONTROL; VACCINATION.



   (A)   (1)   Whenever a dog or other animal susceptible to rabies
bites any person, the incident shall be reported to the enforcement agent
immediately by any person having knowledge thereof. It is unlawful for any
person to destroy or dispose of any dog or other animal which has bitten any
person within a period of ten days after such biting. Any dog or other animal
that bites any person shall be impounded and quarantined by the enforcement
agent or, at the request of and at the expense of the owner, placed in a
veterinary hospital for a period of not less than ten days to determine
whether the dog or other animal has rabies. The owner may cage the dog or
other animal on his or her premises, subject to verification by the
enforcement agent, and the payment of an inspection fee to defray the cost
thereof, to be fixed by the Council.



      (2)   The owner of any dog or other animal that has bitten a
person may voluntarily deliver the dog or other animal to the enforcement
agent at the pound; otherwise, there shall be a charge against the owner if
the enforcement agent must pick up the dog. The owner shall pay the costs of
pickup and maintaining the dog or other animal during the period of
quarantine. Upon the failure of the owner to obtain the release of charges
and costs within three days after expiration of said quarantine period,
including compliance with the license and vaccination provisions herein, the
enforcement agent may sell or otherwise humanely dispose of such dog or other
animal.



   (B)   Every person who shall keep a dog within the city shall cause
such dog to be vaccinated against rabies at three months of age by an
approved veterinarian.



(Ord. 919, passed - -2011)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.07  LICENSES.



   (A)   All dogs kept, harbored or maintained in the city must be
licensed and registered if over three months of age. Dog licenses shall be
issued by the enforcement agent upon payment of a license fee and
presentation of proof of rabies vaccination, and shall be valid for the
calendar year purchased. The license fee payable shall be an amount adopted
by Council resolution at a duly constituted meeting. The owner shall state at
the time application is made for such license, his or her name and address,
the name, breed, color and sex of each dog owned or kept by him or her and
shall provide proof of spaying or neutering, if applicable.



   (B)   Tourists or transient owners keeping or maintaining a dog
within the city shall not be required to obtain a license for the dog if the
dog is kept confined and if the dog has a valid current license from another
city, town or county during the entire period the dog is kept in the city.



   (C)   A service animal belonging to a person with a disability who
is a resident of the state or any bona fide nonprofit organization which is
in the business of breeding, raising or training dogs that are to be used as
service animals, upon application by the owner or organization to the city
and upon presentation of proper proof, shall be licensed pursuant to this
chapter, without payment of a fee.



   (D)   Each person obtaining a dog license under the terms of this
chapter shall receive at the time of licensing, a tag on which shall be
inscribed the name of the city, the number of the license and the year in
which it expires. The tag shall be attached to a collar or harness which
shall be worn by the dog at all times, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter. If the dog license is lost or destroyed, the owner shall immediately
procure a duplicate license tag from the enforcement agent for which a fee of
one-half the original fee shall be charged.



   (E)   It is unlawful for any person to fail to obtain a license for
a dog required to be licensed, or counterfeit or attempt to counterfeit an
official dog tag or remove such tag from any dog for the purpose of willful
and malicious mischief or place a dog tag upon a dog unless the tag was
issued to that dog.



   (F)   Whenever the ownership of a dog has been changed, the new
owner must secure a transfer of license to such owner. A transfer fee shall
be equal to one-half of the original fee charged.



   (G)   Dogs while being used for hunting, or while being exhibited at
American Kennel Club approved shows, or while engaged in races approved by
the state’s Racing Commission, and such dogs while being transported to and
from such events, need not wear a collar or harness with a valid license
attached; provided, they are properly vaccinated and licensed.



   (H)   The enforcement agent shall apprehend and impound any dog
found without a current valid license tag.



   (I)   A kennel license shall be available upon conditions and at a
fee to be determined by the Council.



   (J)   Before a license is issued to any dog, the owner must present
a vaccination certificate signed by a veterinarian stating the owner’s name
and address, and giving the dog’s description, date of vaccination and
type, manufacturer and serial number of the vaccine and the date
revaccination is due. A duplicate of each rabies vaccination certificate
issued shall be transmitted to the enforcement agent on or before the tenth
day of the month following the month during which the dog was vaccinated. No
dog shall be licensed unless it is vaccinated in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.



   (K)   A dog vaccinated in any other place prior to entry into the
city may be licensed in the city; provided that, at the time of licensing,
the owner of such dog presents a vaccination certificate, signed by a
veterinarian licensed to practice in that place or a veterinarian employed by
a governmental agency in that place, stating the owner’s name and address
and giving the dog’s description, date of vaccination and type,
manufacturer and serial number of the vaccine used. The vaccination must be
in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.



   (L)   The enforcement agent may make provisions for vaccination
clinics as deemed necessary. The vaccination shall be performed by a
veterinarian.



   (M)   The license and dog tags issued under this chapter shall
expire and become automatically ineffective as a means of protection to dogs
on December 31 of each year.



(Ord. 919, passed - -2011)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.08  COLLARS.



   Every such dog shall have a collar around his or her neck with the
metal license tag aforesaid securely fastened thereto and in such manner as
to permit ready examination.



(Ord. 919, passed - -2011)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.09  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (A)   Dog fighting. No person shall own or harbor any dog for the
purpose of dog fighting or training of a dog to attack or cause any injury to
any domestic animal.



   (B)   Neglect. It is unlawful for any person owning or having
charge, care, custody or control of any dog within the city limits to not
properly care for said dog. To properly care for a dog requires providing the
dog with sufficient food and water, maintaining the dog in good health,
providing the dog with adequate shelter from the elements, and keeping dog
pens or dog runs clean and sanitary, generally free of fecal and other matter
that may attract flies, rodents or cause an offensive odor that may disturb
the comfort of any person. Any dog found in a neglected manner may be taken
into custody and impounded by the enforcement agent.



   (C)   Interference with peaceful enjoyment of peoples’ lives. Any
person maintaining any dog or other animal, livestock or poultry in such a
manner as to become a public nuisance or to deprive others of the peaceful
enjoyment of the lives and property shall be in violation of this chapter.



   (D)   Barking or howling dogs.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person owning or having the care,
custody or control of any dog to permit said dog to bark, bay, howl or make
any other noise, day or night, in such an unreasonable manner as to disturb
the peace and quiet of any person or persons.



      (2)   The following behavior would meet the threshold of
disturbing the peace and quiet of any person or persons:



         (a)   A dog barking, baying, howling or making other
noise which can be heard off the owner’s or caretaker’s premises
continuously for 30 minutes or more, or intermittently for 60 minutes or more
in a 24-hour period; and/or



         (b)   A dog barking, baying, howling or making other
noise which can be heard off the owner’s or caretaker’s premises
continuously for more than five minutes, or intermittently for periods of at
least three minutes with less than one minute of interruption, between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.



   (E)   Ballparks. Dogs shall be prohibited from coming on or crossing
over the city’s ballparks. This prohibition shall not apply to “guide
dogs” or “service animals”, as defined under the Americans With
Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. 12101 et seq.



(Ord. 919, passed - -2011; Ord. 941, passed 5-22-2014)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.10  CLEANING UP OF LITTER.



   (A)   The owner of any animal or person have the custody or control
of any animal shall be responsible for cleaning up any feces of the animal
and disposing of such feces in a sanitary manner on a weekly basis, at a
minimum, and when on the property of others or on public property.



   (B)   The owner or person having custody of the dog or other animal,
while on public property or the property of another, shall have a plastic bag
or other such container in his or her possession for picking up the
animal’s feces and must clean up the feces immediately and dispose of it in
a sanitary manner.



(Ord. 919, passed - -2011)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.11  ADEQUATE SHELTER FOR DOGS.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ADEQUATE SHELTER.



         (a)   For dogs that are restrained in any manner
outdoors, shade by natural or artificial means to protect the dog from direct
sunlight at all times when exposure to sunlight is likely to threaten the
health of the dog; and



         (b)   For all dogs that are left outdoors in inclement
weather, a housing facility, which must:



            1.   Have a water-proof roof;



            2.   Be structurally sound with insulation and
ventilation appropriate to local climatic conditions and sufficient to
protect the dog from inclement weather and be adequate to protect the animal
from exposure below 50°F or above 85°F;



            3.   Be constructed to allow each dog adequate
freedom of movement to make normal postural adjustments, including the
ability to stand up, turn around and lie down with its limbs outstretched; and



            4.   Allow for effective removal of excretions,
other waste material, dirt and trash from the hosing facility and the area
immediately around the facility.



      DOGS THAT ARE LEFT OUTDOORS. Dogs that are outdoors in inclement
weather without ready access to, or the ability to enter, a house, apartment
building, office building or any other permanent structure.



      INCLEMENT WEATHER. Weather conditions that are likely to
adversely affect the health or safety of the dog, including, but not limited
to, rain, sleet, ice, snow, wind or extreme heat and cold.



   (B)   Regulations.



      (1)   Any person who owns or has custody or control of a dog
that is left outdoors shall provide it with adequate shelter appropriate to
its breed, physical condition and the climate.



      (2)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the seizure of a
dog for a violation of this section pursuant to the authority granted in this
chapter. A dog may be seized for a violation of this section even if the dog
is healthy and unharmed.



   (C)   Impounding of dogs. Upon the impounding of any dog or other
animal, the enforcement agent shall immediately give the owner or custodian
notice of the impounding, either personally or by certified mail, addressed
to the owner or custodian’s last known address if the owner or custodian is
known or can be ascertained by reasonable investigation.



(Ord. 919, passed - -2011; Ord. 960, passed - -2017)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided, any person violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor.
Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punished as such hereunder. For a
second conviction under this chapter, the Court shall impose a fine in an
amount not less than $79. For a third conviction under this chapter, the
Court shall impose a fine in an amount not less than $179. For a fourth
conviction under this chapter, and every conviction thereafter, the Court
shall impose a fine in an amount not less than $236.



   (B)   Any violation of § 90.03 of this chapter shall be a Class 1
misdemeanor. In addition to any fine which might be assessed, the City
Magistrate may issue an order to the county’s animal enforcement agent to
destroy the vicious dog or animal in accordance with A.R.S. § 11-1014G.



   (C)   (1)   Any person who knowingly violates the provisions of
§ 90.11 of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation, punishable by a fine
of not less than $75 for a first offense, and a fine of not less than $100
for a second and subsequent offenses. Beginning 72 hours after a charge of
violating § 90.11 of this chapter, each day that a defendant fails to
correct the deficiencies in the dog shelter for a dog that he or she owns or
that is in his or her custody or control and that is left outdoors, so as to
bring it into compliance with the provisions of § 90.11 of this chapter,
shall constitute a separate offense.



      (2)   The Court may, in its discretion, reduce the amount of
any fine imposed for a violation of § 90.11 of this chapter by the amount
which the defendant proves he or she has spent providing a dog shelter or
repairing an existing dog shelter so that it complies with the requirements
of § 90.11 of this chapter.



(Ord. 919, passed - -2011; Ord. 960, passed - -2017)



CHAPTER 91:  HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES



Section




Nuisances




   91.01   Purpose and scope



   91.02   Definitions



   91.03   Public nuisances defined



   91.04   Litter control



   91.05   Abandoned or junk vehicles



   91.06   Building exteriors



   91.07   Accessory improvements



   91.08   Land



   91.09   Authority to enforce standards



   91.10   Inspections



   91.11   Violations



   91.12   Abatement; notice



   91.13   Special assessment liens and payments



   91.14   Appeals



   91.15   Interference with inspection or abatement



   91.16   False information



   91.17   Conflict of ordinances



 



   91.99   Penalty




NUISANCES




§ 91.01  PURPOSE AND SCOPE.



   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to promote the health,
safety, economic, aesthetic and general welfare of the citizens of the city,
and to protect neighborhoods against nuisances, blight and deterioration by
establishing requirements for maintenance of all building exteriors, whether
residential or non-residential, or structures of whatever kind, and
establishing requirements for the maintenance of all land, whether improved
or vacant.



   (B)   This subchapter shall apply to all buildings, structures and
lands within the city without regard to the use, the date of construction or
alteration.



(Prior Code, § 6-8.01)  (Ord. 791, passed - -1999)



§ 91.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED OR JUNKED VEHICLE. Any vehicle without the current required
license plates and tags; or that it is inoperable, unused, stripped,
scrapped, junked, discarded, dismantled, wrecked, on blocks or similar
devices or vehicles with deflated tires.



   ACCESSORY IMPROVEMENTS. Improvements to land other than buildings
including, but not limited to, driveways, sidewalks, walkways, exterior
steps, railings, fences, screening walls and retaining walls.



   AIRCRAFT. Any contrivance invented, used or designated for navigation
or for flight in the air, including, but not limited to, helicopters and
lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons.



   ATTRACTIVE NUISANCE. The maintenance of a condition, instrumentality,
machine or other agency, which is dangerous to young children because of
their inability to appreciate peril and which may reasonably be expected to
attract them.



   AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE. A litter storage and collection
receptacle, as required and authorized in this subchapter.



   BLIGHT or BLIGHTED. Unsightly conditions including, but not limited to:
the accumulation of debris; fences characterized by holes, breaks, rot,
crumbling, cracking, peeling or rusting; landscaping that is dead, damaged,
characterized by uncontrolled growth or lack of maintenance; and any other
similar conditions of disrepair and deterioration that contribute to the
depreciation of neighborhood property values or affect the health, safety,
economic, aesthetic or general welfare of citizens.



   BUILDINGS or STRUCTURES. Any human-made structure intended to be used
by humans or animals on whole or in part with the purpose of living,
sleeping, eating, cooking, sanitation, commerce, trade, manufacturing,
business, advertising, governmental, worship, education, office, medical,
storage or recreation.



   COMPLIANCE ORDER. An order notifying the recipient that he or she is
subject to civil or criminal prosecution for a violation of this subchapter
unless the violation is corrected.



   DEBRIS. Junk, lumber, furniture, furniture parts, stoves, sinks,
cabinets, household fixtures, refrigerators, car parts, abandoned, broken or
neglected equipment or the scattered remains of something of little or no
apparent economic value.



   DETERIORATED or DETERIORATION. A lowering in the quality in the
condition or appearance of a building or structure or parts thereof, the fact
or process of decay or degeneration, characterized by holes, breaks, rot,
crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting, vermin infestation, unsafe or
unsanitary conditions or any other evidence of physical decay or neglect or
excessive use or lack of maintenance.



   EXTERIOR SURFACES. Building exterior surfaces and attachments to said
buildings including, but not limited to, walls, roofs, doors, windows,
gutters, down spouts, antennas, porches, garages, patios and chimneys.



   GARBAGE. Any spoiled or discarded animal or vegetable material
resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of food for
humans or animals, as well as other organic waste material subject to rapid
decomposition.



   GRAFFITI. Drawings or inscriptions carved or painted on a surface, in a
place which can be seen by the public and that degrades the beauty and
appearance of the property.



   IMMINENT HAZARD. A condition that presents an immediate likelihood for
causing serious personal harm due to a condition of incompletion,
deterioration, breaking, leaking, exposure, blight or scattered with debris,
litter or garbage.



   INFESTATION. The apparent presence of insects, rodents or other pests.



   LAND. All land in the city whether improved or unimproved.



   LITTER. All putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes consisting of
both combustible and non- combustible wastes including, but not limited to,
ashes, street cleanings, garbage, rubbish, dead animals, abandoned or junked
vehicles or parts thereof, solid market and industrial waste, paper, rags,
empty barrels, crates, packing cases, excelsior, packing material, wrappings,
cigarettes, cardboard, cans, yard clippings, leaves, metal, mattresses,
bedding, crockery, trash, boxes, bottles, glass, cartons, refuse, plaster,
plastic, asphalt, tile, rock, bricks or other materials tending to create an
unsightly condition and having an adverse effect upon the health, safety,
economic, aesthetic or general welfare of adjoining properties or occupants
thereof.



   MAJOR REPAIR. The removal from any vehicle of a major portion thereof
including, but not limited to, the differential, transmission, head, engine
block or oil pan.



   NOTICE TO ABATE. A notice issued to a property owner concerning a
violation of this subchapter, and that failure to correct the violation will
result in abatement action by the city.



   PARK. An area used for a reservation, playground, recreation center or
any other public area in the city owned or used by the city and devoted to
recreation.



   PERSON. A human being, enterprise, corporation, association,
partnership, limited liability company, trust, firm or society.



   POLLUTED. A condition that exists in water and is characterized by
bacterial growth, algae, insect infestation, the remains of litter, debris,
garbage or any other foreign matter of which because of its nature or
location, constitutes an unhealthy, unsafe or unsightly condition.



   POOL. A constructed or excavated exterior area designed to contain a
regular supply of water.



   PUBLIC PLACE. Any street, sidewalk, boulevard, alley or other public
way and any public park, square, space, ground or building.



   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every
way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular traffic.



   VEGETATION. Plant growth, whether living or dead, characterized by
grass, weeds, bushes, cactus and trees.



   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracts.



(Prior Code, § 6-8.02)  (Ord. 791, passed - -1999)



§ 91.03  PUBLIC NUISANCES DEFINED.



   The following specific acts, omissions, conditions and things in or
upon any lot, building, structure or premises, or in or upon any
right-of-way, street, avenue, alley, park, parkway, drainage way, easement or
other place in the city are public nuisances, the existence of which are
hereby declared unlawful.



   (A)   All land shall be kept free of privies, vaults, cesspools,
sumps, pits or like places which are not securely protected from insects or
rodents, or which are foul or malodorous.



   (B)   All land shall be maintained free from animal manure in any
quantity which is not securely protected from insects and the elements, or
which is kept or handled in violation of any ordinance of the city or the
county; provided, however, that, nothing in this subchapter shall be deemed
to prohibit the utilization of such animal manure on any farm, garden or
ranch in such manner and for such purposes as are compatible with customary
methods of good husbandry.



   (C)   All places used or maintained as junkyards or dumping grounds,
or for the wrecking, dissembling, repair or rebuilding of automobiles,
trucks, tractors or machinery of any kind, or for the storing or leaving of
worn-out, wrecked or abandoned automobiles, trucks, tractors, trailers or
other vehicles, machinery of any kind or of any of the parts thereof, or for
the storing or leaving of any machinery or equipment used by contractors or
builders or by other persons, which places are kept or maintained as to
essentially interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by
others; provided, however, that, nothing contained in this subchapter shall
be deemed to prohibit any automobile wrecking yard or other junkyard where
permitted by the Zoning Ordinance; provided further that, nothing contained
in this subchapter shall be deemed to prohibit the disassembling, repair or
rebuilding or the storage of any of the parts thereof on any land where the
disassembling, repair, rebuilding or storage are customary and incidental to
the principle use on the land.



   (D)   All land shall be kept free from any putrid, unsound or
unwholesome bones, meat, hides, skins or the whole or any pail of any dead
animal, fish or fowl, butcher’s trimmings and offal, or any waste
vegetation or animal matter in any quantity, garbage, human excreta, sewage
or other offensive substances; provided, nothing herein contained shall
prevent the temporary retention of waste in receptacles in the manner
approved by the Health Officer of the county or ordinances of the city.



   (E)   All land, buildings, rooms or other places in the city used
for any trade, employment or manufacturing, shall be kept free of noxious
exhalations, including, but not limited to, smoke, soot, dust, fumes or other
gases, offensive odors or other annoyances that are discomforting or
offensive or detrimental to the health or safety of individuals or of the
public, or contributes to the depreciation of neighborhood property values.



   (F)   Burning or disposing of refuse, sawdust or other material in
such a manner as to cause or permit ashes, sawdust, soot or cinders to be
cast upon the streets or alleys of the city, or to cause or permit the smoke,
ashes, soot or gases arising from such burning to interfere substantially and
unnecessarily with the use and enjoyment of public or private property, or to
injure or endanger the health of others; provided, this division (F) shall
not apply where the person responsible for the action has properly obtained a
fire permit from the city’s or the county’s Health Officer; provided
that, nothing contained in this subchapter shall be deemed to authorize any
burning not authorized under the provisions of other ordinances of the city.



   (G)   Any unguarded or abandoned excavation, pit, well or hole which
is or could be dangerous to life.



   (H)   Leaving or permitting to remain outside of any dwelling,
building or other structure, or within any unoccupied or abandoned building,
dwelling or other structure under the control of any person and in a place
accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox,
refrigerator or other container which has an air-tight door or lid, snap-lock
or other locking device which may not be released from the inside, without
first removing the door or lid, snap-lock or other locking device from the
icebox, refrigerator or container.



   (I)   No person shall create or maintain any condition that
obstructs or renders dangerous the use or passage of any park, stream, water
course, sidewalk, parkway, square, alley, street, highway or easement.



   (J)   Buildings which are abandoned, partially destroyed, or left in
a state of partial construction.



(Prior Code, § 6-8.03)  (Ord. 791, passed - -1999)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.04  LITTER CONTROL.



   (A)   Persons owning or occupying property or places of business
shall keep the sidewalk and any landscape area surrounding their premises
free of litter, garbage, debris or blighting influence.



   (B)   No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle
within the city unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent
any load, contents, litter, garbage or debris from being blown or deposited
upon any street, alley or other public place. No person shall drive or move
any vehicle or truck within the city, the wheels or tires of which carry onto
or deposit in any street or other public place sticky substances, litter,
garbage, debris or foreign matter of any kind.



   (C)   No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit
within the city any litter, handbill or any other object.



   (D)   No person shall throw or deposit any litter, garbage or debris
on any occupied private property within the city; except that, the owner or
person in control of private property may maintain authorized private
receptacles for collection in such manner that litter, garbage or debris will
be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property.



   (E)   No person shall throw or deposit any litter, garbage or debris
on any property within the city.



   (F)   The owner or person in control of any private property shall
at all times maintain the premises free of litter, garbage, debris or
blighting influence. This division (F) does not prohibit the storage of
litter, garbage or debris in authorized private receptacles for collection,
or within any building when, not in violation of any health, fire, building
or other regulation, order, ordinance or statute.



   (G)   No person occupying or employed in any business establishment
shall deposit any litter, garbage or debris in any receptacle unless such
receptacle shall be provided with lid of sufficient weight to prevent the
escape of any litter, garbage or debris from the receptacle.



(Prior Code, § 6-8.04)  (Ord. 791, passed - -1999)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.05  ABANDONED OR JUNK VEHICLES.



   (A)   All abandoned or junk vehicles, or vehicles being repaired or
restored, shall be stored in an enclosed area by the owner or occupant of the
property upon which such vehicle is located in such a manner as to not be
visible from any point lying without the property upon which the abandoned
vehicle or junk vehicle is stored or parked.



   (B)   No cover shall be placed over any vehicle which is visible
from any point lying without the property so as to conceal its plates or tags.



(Prior Code, § 6-8.05)  (Ord. 791, passed - -1999)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.06  BUILDING EXTERIORS.



   (A)   Exterior surfaces.



      (1)   All exposed exterior surfaces shall be maintained so as
to be free of deterioration or blight.



      (2)   All exterior surfaces shall be maintained in such a
state so as not to constitute a health or safety hazard.



      (3)   No graffiti shall be allowed on any exterior building
surfaces.



   (B)   Structural integrity. Foundations, walls, roofs, chimneys and
all other exterior surfaces shall be maintained in structurally sound and
weather-proof condition. The foundation elements shall adequately support the
building at all points in accordance with the Uniform Building Code, as
amended thereto and adopted by this code of ordinances, and shall be free of
defects, deterioration or blight.



(Prior Code, § 6-8.06)  (Ord. 791, passed - -1999)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.07  ACCESSORY IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   All accessory improvements shall be maintained so as to be
kept free of deterioration or blight.



   (B)   No graffiti shall be allowed on any accessory improvements.



(Prior Code, § 6-8.07)  (Ord. 791, passed - -1999)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.08  LAND.



   (A)   All land shall be maintained free from any accumulation of
garbage, litter, debris, blight or deterioration.



   (B)   All land shall be kept free of attractive nuisances.



   (C)   All land shall be kept free of poison oak, poison ivy, any
noxious or toxic weeds, uncultivated or overgrown plants; any dry or dead
vegetation or grass greater than 12 inches in height. Any land that is zoned
as Rural Residential (RR) or Agriculture Residential (AR) is exempt from the
requirement that dry or dead vegetation or grass be less than 12 inches in
height. Property that is zoned as Rural Residential (RR) or Agriculture
Residential (AR) shall maintain the vegetation or grass at a height that is
consistent with the aesthetics of the adjacent parcels of land.



   (D)   All land shall be kept free of conditions which constitute or
are likely to constitute a fire hazard, or would adversely affect the health
or safety of adjacent property owners or occupants of those properties, or
would depreciate adjacent property values.



   (E)   All land shall be kept free of overgrown vegetation that
interferes with or obstructs or renders dangerous the free passage or use of
sidewalks, roadways, streets, public rights-of-way or easements; or obstructs
or blocks the vision of drivers and their ability to observe traffic-control
devices or signs.



   (F)   All land shall be kept free of noxious or objectionable stench
or odors.



   (G)   All land shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation
and noxious pests or conditions which cause the property to harbor insects,
rodents or noxious pests.



   (H)   All pools, spas and other bodies of water shall be properly
maintained so as not to create a safety hazard, harbor insect infestation, be
polluted, become stagnant, deteriorated or blighted.



   (I)   All land shall be maintained so as to prevent the accumulation
of stagnant water where such water causes a hazardous or unhealthy condition,
breeding area for insects or erosion of foundation walls.



   (J)   Any business that sells new or used tires and which chooses to
store any tires outside the exterior of a building shall place those tires in
a storage area no larger than ten feet by ten feet in dimension, or 100
square feet of total area, and the storage area shall be enclosed with a
six-foot tall fence. The fencing shall be constructed in such a way that the
tires are not visible from the exterior of the property. Tires may not be
stacked or stored higher than the top of the fence. Any point on the exterior
storage area shall not be located any less than ten feet from the property
line or any building on the property because of the potential fire hazard for
tires.



(Prior Code, § 6-8.08)  (Ord. 791, passed - -1999; Ord. 815, passed -
-2001)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.09  AUTHORITY TO ENFORCE STANDARDS.



   The City Manager, his or her designee or any peace officer shall
enforce the provisions of this subchapter and is hereby authorized and
directed to make inspections in the normal course of job duties; or in
response to a complaint that an alleged violation of the provisions of this
subchapter may exist; or when there is a reason to believe that a violation
of this subchapter has been or is being committed.



(Prior Code, § 6-8.09)  (Ord. 791, passed - -1999)



§ 91.10  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Unscreened exterior areas may be inspected at any time with or
without the involvement of the owner or occupant in accordance with legal
requirements governing administrative inspections of private property.



   (B)   Screened exterior areas shall be inspected only during the
normal business hours of the city unless otherwise arranged, and only upon
invitation or with the concurrence of the occupant, or owner or agent for the
owner when the premises are unoccupied, or when ordered by a Court when
probable cause exists to believe that conditions may be detrimental to
health, safety, economic or general welfare of the public.



   (C)   Except in cases of alleged imminent hazard, if the occupant is
not the owner of the premises to be inspected, the City Manager or designee
shall provide notice in writing or by telephone to the owner or agent of the
owner as to the date and time of inspection. The owner or agent may be
present for the inspection if the occupant concurs. The inability to contact
the owner or owner’s agent, or the convenience of the owner or agent shall
not require the rescheduling of the inspection.



(Prior Code, § 6-8.10)  (Ord. 791, passed - -1999)



§ 91.11  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessor, lessee,
manager, agent or other person having lawful control over a building,
structure or parcel of land to cause, allow, permit, facilitate or aid or
abet any violation of any provision of this subchapter or to fail to perform
any act or duty required by this subchapter.



      (2)   The owner of record, as recorded in the County
Recorder’s office, of the property upon which the violation of this
subchapter exists shall be presumed to be a person having lawful control over
a structure or parcel of land. If more than one person shall be recorded as
the owner of the property, such persons shall be jointly and severally
presumed to be persons having lawful control over a structure or parcel of
land. This presumption shall not prevent the enforcement of the provisions of
this subchapter against any person specified in division (A) above.



(Prior Code, § 6-8.11)



   (B)   The City Manager, Fire Chief, the Building Official and/or
their authorized representatives may proceed, pursuant to this subchapter, by
citation for civil sanctions or by complaint for criminal sanctions.



(Prior Code, § 6-8.12)



(Ord. 791, passed - -1999)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.12  ABATEMENT; NOTICE.



   (A)   (1)   In addition to or in lieu of filing a civil or
criminal complaint, the city may file a notice to abate any violation of this
subchapter. Such abatement shall proceed independently of any civil or
criminal violation filed pursuant to this subchapter.



      (2)   If the property owner, occupant, lessee or other person
served with a notice to abate by the city pursuant to this subchapter fails
to comply with such notice or order, the city may correct or abate the
conditions subject to the notice.



(Prior Code, § 6-8.25)



   (B)   If a situation presents an imminent hazard to life or public
safety, the city may issue a notice to abate directing the owner, occupant,
operator or agent to take such action as is appropriate to correct or abate
the emergency upon notice by the enforcement official to the responsible
person(s). In addition, the city may act to correct or abate the emergency.
In the event the city is unable to contact the owner, occupant, agent or
responsible party, it in no way affects the city’s right to correct or
abate the emergency. The owner, occupant, operator, agent or responsible
party shall be granted a hearing before the Building Advisory Board of
Appeals on the matter upon his or her request, as soon as practicable, but
such appeal shall in no case stay the abatement or correction of such
emergency.



(Prior Code, § 6-8.26)



   (C)   (1)   If, after an inspection, the city finds one or more
violations of this subchapter, and the city elects to use the abatement
process, the city shall in writing, notify the owner, agent for the owner,
lessee or occupant.



      (2)   The notice to abate shall set forth the following
information:



         (a)   The owner, lessee or occupant has 30 days from the
mailing of the notice to abate to correct the violation;



         (b)   A legal description of the property, as well as
identify the property by street address if known;



         (c)   A statement of the violation(s) in sufficient
detail to allow a reasonable person to identify and correct the violation(s);



         (d)   A date and time for re-inspection of the property;



         (e)   Name, address and phone number of the City
Inspector who sent the notice to abate;



         (f)   A warning stating that if the violations are not
corrected within the 30-day period the city can abate the problem and assess
the owner the cost of such abatement and record a lien on the property for
the assessment;



         (g)   If the city decides to retain its right to abate a
violation of this subchapter, the city shall include in the notice the costs
of abating the violation if the owner or lessee does not comply;



         (h)   The right to appeal the notice of abatement; and



         (i)   The 30-day notice set forth in this subchapter
shall not apply to emergency abatements pursuant to division (B) above, nor
orders to vacate pursuant to this section.



(Prior Code, § 6-8.27)



   (D)   (1)   Any notice required to be given for any purposes
under this subchapter shall be provided by either having the City Manager or
designee deliver the notice to the property owner or owner’s agent,
occupant or lessee, or by mailing the notice to the owner or owner’s agent,
occupant or lessee by certified mail, return receipt requested. In complying
with the obligation to mail notice to the owner of the property, the City
Manager or designee can mail the notice to the last address on the tax bill.
If the owner does not live on the property, the City Manager or designee can
also send the notice to the last known address of the owner.



      (2)   Notice is deemed effective on the date it is hand
delivered or deposited in the United States mail.



      (3)   Nothing herein shall preclude the city from giving
additional oral or written notice at its discretion. If the city does elect
to give any additional notice in any instance, it shall not thereby become
obligated to give such additional notice thereafter in the same or other
situation.



(Prior Code, § 6-8.28)



   (E)   The notice to abate shall run with the land. The city, at its
sole option, may record a notice to abate with the County Recorder and
thereby cause compliance by any person thereafter acquiring such property.
The non-filing of any notice to abate shall in no way affect the validity of
such notice as to entities so notified. When the property is brought into
compliance by the responsible party, a satisfaction of notice to abate shall
be filed with the County Recorder.



(Prior Code, § 6-8.29)



(Ord. 791, passed - -1999)



§ 91.13  SPECIAL ASSESSMENT LIENS AND PAYMENTS.



   (A)   In the event the city corrects or abates a violation of this
subchapter, the city shall prepare a verified statement and account of the
actual cost of such removal or abatement, including the cost of labor and
expenses incurred by the city, any associated legal costs for abatement and
injunctions, as well as an additional 5% for inspection and other incidental
costs in connection with such correction or abatement.



   (B)   The city shall prepare the verified statement and account
within 45 days from the last day in which the city performed any work on the
property. The verified statement and account shall be an assessment on the
property.



   (C)   The assessment shall be recorded in the office of the County
Recorder and, from the date of its recording, shall be a lien on the lot or
tract of land. Such lien is prior to and superior to all other liens,
obligations, mortgages or other encumbrances, except liens for general taxes.



   (D)   The assessment shall be payable in equal annual installments
from the date the assessment is recorded and according to the following
schedule:



      (1)   Less than $500: within one year after assessment
recorded;



      (2)   Five hundred dollars to $1,000: within two years after
assessment recorded;



      (3)   One thousand dollars to $5,000: within three years after
assessment recorded;



      (4)   Five thousand dollars to $10,000: within six years after
assessment recorded; and



      (5)   Over $10,000: within ten years after assessment recorded.



   (E)   If, at any time, payments are not made in a timely manner, the
city may file an action for judgment on foreclosure and order of sale in
Superior Court for both the amount past due as well as the entire,
outstanding amount of the lien. The failure to enforce the lien or the
foregoing payment schedule shall not affect either the validity of the lien
or the right to receive payments.



   (F)   The recorded assessment shall be prima facie evidence of the
truth of all matters recited therein and of the regularity of all proceedings
prior to the recording thereof.



   (G)   A prior assessment pursuant to this subchapter shall not be a
bar to a subsequent assessment, and any number of liens on the same lot or
tract of land may be enforced in the same action.



(Prior Code, § 6-8.30)  (Ord. 791, passed - -1999)



§ 91.14  APPEALS.



   (A)   (1)   Any notice to abate or assessment may be appealed to
the City Council.



      (2)   An appeal must be filed within 15 days of the service of
the notice to abate or assessment, and must be filed with the City Clerk’s
office.



      (3)   Failure of a person entitled to appeal under this
subchapter to timely file an appeal shall constitute a waiver of the right to
a hearing of the complaint and such person shall be estopped to deny the
validity of any notice or assessment which could have been timely appealed.



      (4)   The notice of appeal shall set forth, in writing, the
person’s reasons for believing they are not in violation of the subchapter
or that the assessment is excessive.



      (5)   The individual appealing shall accompany the written
appeal with an appeal fee of $100, such sum to be deposited in the General
Fund of the city.



      (6)   In case of financial hardship, the fee may be suspended.



(Prior Code, § 6-8.31)



   (B)   Any person may appeal a notice to abate or assessment:



      (1)   When it is claimed the property or building subject to
the notice is not in violation of this subchapter;



      (2)   When it is claimed the one intent of this subchapter or
standards described in the subchapter have been incorrectly interpreted; or



      (3)   When it is claimed that the city’s costs for
correcting or abating the violation are excessive.



(Prior Code, § 6-8.32)



   (C)   (1)   The City Council shall set a date for hearing on
appeal within 30 days of the receipt of notice of appeal by the City Clerk.
The notice to appellant shall be substantially in the following form, but may
include other information:



 


You are hereby notified that a hearing will be held before the City of
Williams City Council at                                  
                  on the               day of          
                at the hour                     , upon the
notice and order served upon you. You may be present at the hearing. You may
be, but need not be, represented by counsel. You may present any relevant
evidence and will be given full opportunity to cross-examine all witnesses
testifying against you.




 



      (2)   A record of the entire proceedings shall be made by tape
recording or by any other means of permanent recording determined to be
appropriate by the Council. The proceedings at the hearing may also be
reported by a certified court reporter if requested by appellant and paid for
by appellant. If the appellant retains the services of a court reporter, a
copy of the transcript shall be made available to the city, if requested,
upon payment of the court reporter’s fee for a copy of the transcript.



      (3)   The Council shall take testimony from all parties to the
appeal. The City Council has the power to administer oaths and affirmations
and to certify to official acts.



      (4)   Each party shall have these rights at the hearing, among
others:



         (a)   To call and examine witnesses on any matter
relevant to the issues of the hearing;



         (b)   To introduce documentary and physical evidence;



         (c)   To cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter
relevant to the issues of the hearing;



         (d)   To impeach any witness regardless of which party
first called the witness to testify;



         (e)   To rebut the evidence;



         (f)   To be represented by anyone who is lawfully
permitted to do so in the state;



         (g)   The City Council may inspect any building or
premises involved in the appeal as part of the hearing; provided that:



            1.   Notice of such inspection shall be given to
the parties before the inspection is made;



            2.   The parties are given an opportunity to be
present during the inspection; and



            3.   The City Council shall state for the record
upon completion of the inspection the material facts observed and the
conclusions drawn therefrom. Each party then shall have a right to rebut or
explain the matters so stated by the City Council.



         (h)   The Council shall prepare a written summary of the
hearing and shall set forth the decision reached. A decision shall be
rendered within 15 days of the hearing and the findings and decision shall be
mailed to all parties to the appeal.



(Prior Code, § 6-8.33)



   (D)   (1)   Any person may request a variance or time extension
of a notice to abate or assessment. Such request shall be made to the City
Council.



      (2)   The same time limits for filing, fees and written
requirement that appear in division (A) above on appeal applies to this
subchapter.



      (3)   The procedure shall be the same as set forth in this
division (D).



      (4)   Where the Council grants a variance, it shall set forth
its reasons for granting the variance



and the extent of the variance.



      (5)   The Council may grant a variance only where it is
determined that all of the following apply:



         (a)   Special circumstances or conditions apply to this
appeal application such as hardship;



         (b)   Authorizing of the variance is necessary for the
preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights; and



         (c)   Authorizing of the variance will not be materially
detrimental to persons residing or working in the vicinity, to adjacent
property or adjacent property values, to the neighborhood or to the public
welfare in general.



      (6)   The Council may grant one extension of the time limit
set forth in § 91.12(C) of this chapter. Such extension shall not exceed 180
days. The extension period granted by the Council starts to run on the day
the Board issues its decision pursuant to this division (D). The Board may
grant an extension only where it is shown that:



         (a)   It would create a hardship to bring the property
into compliance within the 30-day period of § 91.12(C) of this chapter; or



         (b)   The moving party presents a plan, that is approved
by the Council by which the property will be brought into compliance within
180 days.



(Prior Code, § 6-8.34)



   (E)   Any party aggrieved by a decision of the Council may appeal to
the county’s Superior Court in accordance with the Rules of Procedure for
Special Actions.



(Prior Code, § 6-8.35)



   (F) During appeal to Council, except for orders to vacate or violations
presenting an imminent hazard, the timely filing of an appeal shall stay
enforcement of a notice to abate or assessment until the appeal is finally
determined by the Council.



(Prior Code, § 6-8.36)



(Ord. 791, passed - -1999)



§ 91.15  INTERFERENCE WITH INSPECTION OR ABATEMENT.



   Any person who interferes, prevents or attempts to interfere or prevent
an individual employed by the city or other person contracted for by the
city, from investigating an alleged violation of this subchapter, or from
correcting or abating a violation of this subchapter is guilty of a Class 1
misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 6-8.37)  (Ord. 791, passed - -1999)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.16  FALSE INFORMATION.



   Any person who knowingly makes a false or fraudulent statement, or
knowingly misrepresents a fact, or misleads an individual employed by the
city or other person contracted for by the city, when that individual is
investigating, correcting or abating a violation of this subchapter, is
guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 6-8.38)  (Ord. 791, passed - -1999)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.17  CONFLICT OF ORDINANCES.



   (A)   In any case where a provision of this subchapter is found to
be in conflict with a provision of any Zoning, Building, Fire, Safety or
Health Ordinance or Code of the city existing on the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this subchapter, the provision which establishes the
higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of
the people shall prevail.



   (B)   It is not intended by this subchapter to repeal, abrogate,
annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other
laws or ordinances, except those specifically repealed by this subchapter, or
with private restrictions placed upon the property by covenant, deed or other
private agreement.



   (C)   In cases where two or more provisions of this subchapter are
in conflict or any other chapter of this code of ordinances, the most
stringent or restrictive shall prevail.



(Prior Code, § 6-8.39)  (Ord. 791, passed - -1999)



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   (1)   Civil penalties. Upon a finding of responsibility to
a civil violation of §§ 91.01 through 91.17 of this chapter, the Court
shall impose a civil sanction of not less than $250, nor more than $1,000. No
judge shall suspend the imposition of the $250 sanction unless at the time of
sentencing the Court finds by a preponderance of the evidence that the
violation(s) the defendant was found responsible for has now been completely
corrected, and that the defendant is now in full compliance with §§ 91.01
through 91.17 of this chapter. In that event, the judge may suspend all or
part of the fine.



(Prior Code, § 6-8.13)



      (2)   Criminal penalties.



         (a)   A person who is convicted of a violation of §§
91.01 through 91.17 of this chapter is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor and
shall be sentenced to no more than a fine of $2,000, six months in jail and
three years’ probation, nor less than a fine of $500 and be placed on
probation for not less than one year. A judge shall not suspend any or all of
the impositions or execution of the sentence required by §§ 91.01 through
91.17 of this chapter.



         (b)   Notwithstanding division (B)(1) above if a judge
finds at the time of sentencing, and by a preponderance of the evidence, that
the violation(s) the defendant was convicted of has been corrected, and that
the defendant is now in compliance with §§ 91.01 through 91.17 of this
chapter, the Court may:



            1.   Sentence the defendant to pay a fine of not
less than $100; and



            2.   Suspend all or part of the probation.



(Prior Code, § 6-8.14)



      (3)   Restitution. In addition to any sanction or penalty
provided for in divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) above, such person shall be
liable for all costs which may be associated with the city’s bringing the
property into compliance with §§ 91.01 through 91.17 of this chapter. The
Court shall impose restitution as part of its sentence.



(Prior Code, § 6-8.15)



      (4)   Jurisdiction of City Court. Jurisdiction of all
proceedings to enforce the provisions of §§ 91.01 through 91.17 of this
chapter shall be in City Court.



(Prior Code, § 6-8.16)



      (5)   Civil violation; commencement of action.



         (a)   A civil violation may be commenced by issuance of
a citation or by complaint.



         (b)   The citation will be issued with a form modeled
after the state’s traffic ticket and complaint and shall direct the
defendant to appear in the City Court within ten days after issuance of the
citation.



         (c)   The citation will further notify the defendant
that if he or she fails to appear on or before the date specified in the
complaint, a judgment by default will be entered against him or her, and the
Court may, in its discretion, impose a civil sanction no less than $250 and
no more than $2,000.



         (d)   Service of the citation may be accomplished and
will be deemed proper and complete by any of the following methods:



            1.   By having the defendant sign the citation
with a promise to appear in Court within ten days of the issuance of the
citation;



            2.   By hand delivering a copy of the citation to
the defendant;



            3.   By mailing a copy of the citation to the
person charged by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to
the person’s last known address; or



            4.   In the event service cannot be accomplished
as set forth in divisions (B)(5)(d)1., (B)(5)(d)2. or (B)(5)(d)3. above, the
state may serve the defendant by any means allowed by the state’s Rules of
Civil Procedure 4.1 and 4.2.



(Prior Code, § 6-8.17)



      (6)   Civil citation, authority to issue. The City Manager or
designee, or any peace officer, may issue a civil citation pursuant to §§
91.01 through 91.17 of this chapter. DESIGNEE shall mean an individual
employed by the city who has been appointed by the City Manager, in writing,
to have the authority to issue civil code violations. Such authorization
shall be filed with the City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 6-8.18)



      (7)   Appearance by defendant. The defendant shall, within ten
days of the issuance of the citation, appear in person or through his or her
attorney in the City Court and shall either admit or deny the allegations
contained in the citation. If the defendant admits the allegations, the Court
shall enter judgment against the defendant and impose a civil sanction of the
violation. If the defendant denies the allegations contained in the citation,
the Court shall set the matter for hearing.



(Prior Code, § 6-8.19)



      (8)   Default judgment. If a person served with a complaint
fails to appear on or before the time directed to appear or at the time set
for hearing by the Court, the allegations in the complaint shall be deemed
admitted and the Court shall enter judgment for the city and impose a civil
sanction.



(Prior Code, § 6-8.20)



      (9)   Rules of procedure for civil violations. The state’s
Rules of Procedure for Civil Traffic Violation Cases shall be followed by the
City Court for civil violations of §§ 91.01 through 91.17 of this chapter,
except as modified or where inconsistent with the provisions of §§ 91.01
through 91.17 of this chapter, local rules of the City Court or rules of the
state’s Supreme Court.



(Prior Code, § 6-8.21)



      (10)   Collection of fines. Any judgment for civil sanctions
taken pursuant to this division (B) may be collected as any other civil
judgment, including, but not limited to, the right to record the civil
judgment and foreclose on the judgment.



(Prior Code, § 6-8.22)



      (11)   Violations not exclusive. Violations of §§ 91.01
through 91.17 of this chapter are in addition to any other violation
enumerated within city ordinances or the city code and in no way limits the
penalties, actions or abatement procedures which may be taken by the city for
any violation of §§ 91.01 through 91.17 of this chapter, which is also a
violation of any other ordinance or code provision of the city or statutes of
the state.



(Prior Code, § 6-8.23)



      (12)   Each day separate violation. Each day any violation of
any provision of §§ 91.01 through 91.17 of this chapter is committed or
permitted to continue, such violation shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punished as such hereunder. Each day there is a failure to perform
any act or duty required by §§ 91.01 through 91.17 of this chapter shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punished as such hereunder.



(Prior Code, § 6-8.24)



(Ord. 791, passed - -1999)



CHAPTER 92:  ABANDONED VEHICLES



Section



   92.01   Definitions



   92.02   Prohibited material



   92.03   Abatement of nuisance



   92.04   Notification



 



   92.99   Penalty



§ 92.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED. Worn out, without the current license plates or tabs,
inoperable, unused, stripped, unclaimed, scrapped, junked or discarded. When
such motor vehicles without current licenses or tabs are in the same location
more than 15 successive calendar days without any repairs, there shall be a
presumption of intent to abandon.



   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any automobile, bus, truck, tractor or other motorized
vehicle.



   PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any land owned by any person, firm, partnership or
corporation other than the United States, the state, the county or the city,
including streets, rights-of-way, easements and open spaces not dedicated to
the general public for unrestricted public use.



   UNSHELTERED. Anything outside a carport, garage or other building; or
without the confines of a suitable fenced area allowing the vehicle to be
visible to others.



(Prior Code, § 6-5.01)



§ 92.02  PROHIBITED MATERIAL.



   The unsheltered storage, parking, standing or placement of an abandoned
motor vehicle for a period of 15 days or more on any private property within
the corporate limits of the city, except where permitted hereby relating to
zoning, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and dangerous to the public
safety.



(Prior Code, § 6-5.02)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.03  ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.



   The owner, owners, tenants, lessees, occupant and/or other occupants of
any private property within the corporate limits of the city, upon which such
storage is made and also the owner or owners of such abandoned motor vehicles
involved in such storage, shall jointly and severally abate said nuisance.



(Prior Code, § 6-5.03)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.04  NOTIFICATION.



   (A)   Any owner, tenant, lessee, occupant or other person who fails,
neglects or refuses to abate such nuisance shall be notified in writing
either by personal service from the Police Department, or by certified mail,
return receipt requested, by the City Manager or his or her representative to
abate such nuisance within ten days from the date appearing on such written
notice.



   (B)   (1)   When any such owner, tenant, lessee, occupant or
other person to whom notice is given, fails, neglects or refuses for more
than ten days from the date appearing on said notice to abate said nuisance,
the City Manager or his or her representative is hereby authorized and
directed to remove said abandoned motor vehicle from said premises, and
dispose of same according to the provisions of A.R.S. § 28-4801 et seq.,
relating to abandoned vehicles including a report of the Superintendent of
the Motor Vehicle Division of the state’s Highway Department.



      (2)   The City Manager may, upon request from any such owner,
tenant, lessee, occupant or other person to whom notice has been given grant
an extension of the time required to repair or remove any vehicle.



      (3)   The City Manager shall issue written notification of the
granting and length of the extension.



(Prior Code, § 6-5.04)



§ 92.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Every owner, tenant, lessee, occupant or other person who
shall fail, neglect or refuse to abate the aforementioned nuisance as
provided above, shall also be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. Each day that
the violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. The
imposition of any sentence shall not exempt the offender from compliance with
the requirements of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 6-5.05)



   (B)   The powers described herein relating to removal of abandoned
vehicles from private property are in addition to those powers granted in
A.R.S. Title 28, Art. 5, relating to removal of abandoned vehicles from
public property; A.R.S. § 28-872, relating to removal of illegally stopped
vehicles on a public way; and to any other police powers vested in the city
by statute.



(Prior Code, § 6-5.06)



CHAPTER 93:  PARKS AND RECREATION



Section




General Provisions




   93.01   Presence in parks



   93.02   Vehicles on grounds



   93.03   Damaging facilities



   93.04   Swimming, wading and boating in parks



   93.05   Speed limit



   93.06   Reserved use permit; rules




Camping




   93.20   Prohibited conduct



   93.21   Exceptions



   93.22   Proof of intent



 



   93.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 93.01  PRESENCE IN PARKS.



   No person shall trespass upon or be upon, the grounds, other than
public sidewalks or streets located therein, of any municipal park,
playground or golf course without the express written permission of the Parks
and Recreation Director between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.;
provided, however, with respect to any municipal park, playground or other
facility that is equipped with either general area or athletic lighting which
is functioning, the closing time shall be extended to 12:00 midnight.



(Prior Code, § 8-6.01)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.02  VEHICLES ON GROUNDS.



   No person shall drive or ride at any time any automobile, truck,
motorcycle, motor scooter or any other vehicle upon the grounds of any
municipal park, playground or golf course, except in public streets running
through such premises or within designated parking areas located upon the
premises, or in such areas as are designated in writing in advance by the
City Manager or his or her designee. No person shall ride, bring, guide,
cause or allow any horse or any animal under his or her control to be in or
upon the grounds of any municipal park, playground or golf course, except in
such areas thereof as are designated in writing in advance by the City
Manager or his or her designee.



(Prior Code, § 8-6.02)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.03  DAMAGING FACILITIES.



   No person shall damage or wastefully or improperly use the toilet,
water and sewer facilities in any municipal park, playground or golf course
or cause the lighting facilities or electrical appliances to be turned on or
used without the express written permission of the Parks and Recreation
Director.



(Prior Code, § 8-6.03)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.04  SWIMMING, WADING AND BOATING IN PARKS.



   No person shall swim, wade or operate a boat upon any lake, lagoon or
other water facility located in any city park or area within the city limits
without the express written permission of the Parks and Recreation Director.



(Prior Code, § 8-6.04)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.05  SPEED LIMIT.



   No person shall drive, operate or ride any automobile, truck,
motorcycle, motor scooter or any other motor vehicle in or upon the grounds
of any municipal park, playground or golf course at a speed greater than five
mph.



(Prior Code, § 8-6.05)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.06  RESERVED USE PERMIT; RULES.



   (A)   (1)   A permit shall be obtained from the Director whenever
any person or group desires to reserve any portion of the public parks or
recreational facilities for any activity. The Director shall interpret this
subchapter and may act in any case not specifically covered by this
subchapter. Any request for a use not contemplated or prohibited in this
subchapter may be forwarded to the City Manager, who will take the matter
before the City Council for its consideration.



      (2)   Department-organized recreation activities shall be
given first preference for use of facilities.



      (3)   An application for permission to reserve a park or
portion thereof or parks and recreation facilities by persons or groups not
officially a part of the Parks and Recreation Department shall be initiated
at least two weeks prior to the requested date and have written approval of
the Director; provided that, in extraordinary cases, the Director may waive
or shorten the time.



(Prior Code, § 8-6.06)



   (B)   (1)   The city employee on duty shall exercise authority
over the organization or its activities. If the adult supervision is
inadequate, it shall be the responsibility of the recreation leader on duty
to report same to the city. Clean up of the contracted area will be the
responsibility of the user. The user shall be charged on an hourly basis to
pay for clean up if it is necessary for the city to provide additional clean
up services. The fees or charges shall be established by the City Council and
administered by the Parks and Recreation Director; provided, however, the
City Council may, in appropriate cases, waive the user fee or charge.



      (2)   All permits shall be revocable for cause by the Parks
and Recreation Director or upon the finding of a violation of any rule, this
code or other city ordinance or state statute, if notice of cancellation of a
request is not received at the city office at least 48 hours prior to the
date of the event, the permit holder may be held responsible for all charges
at the discretion of the Director.



      (3)   No apparatus such as scenery or furniture and equipment
shall be moved into a park facility unless special permission is granted in
advance and so stated in the permit. Such apparatus, furniture or equipment,
provided by the holder of the permit, shall be removed from the park area
promptly after use and before 8:30 a.m. the following morning so there shall
not be any interference with normal park and recreation programs. Failure to
comply shall prohibit such groups from using facilities at a later date.



      (4)   The organization using facilities shall indemnify the
city for any and all damage to the facility by any person or persons
attending the affair, and all liability and damages to any person for
injuries, including death. Adequate insurance as determined by the legal
staff of the city shall be provided by each organization using park
facilities to cover such liability listing the city as an “additional
insured”. Responsibility for loss, breakage or need for repair of any piece
of furniture, equipment or portion of the facility or area rests solely with
the person in charge, the individual signing the agreement, who shall report
same to the Parks and Recreation Director.



      (5)   Building facilities and areas must be vacated by 10:30
p.m. unless permission is otherwise granted specifically in the permit to
assure that this policy is administered. Programs shall be conclude in time
to provide for cleanup and clearance of the facility as stated in the permit.



      (6)   The following specific rules shall be observed while
using any facility and the permittee shall be responsible for any loss or
damage growing out of such violation.



         (a)   The use of tobacco in any facility in any form
shall be carefully controlled. No smoking shall be allowed unless proper and
adequate containers are provided.



         (b)   Functions shall be confined to the specific part
of the facility assigned to the permittee.



      (7)   (a)   The sale of intoxicating beverages is
prohibited, except for concession premises with appropriate licensing and
written permission from the City Manager.



         (b)   The following activities shall be prohibited
unless approved by the City Council:



            1.   Weddings and wedding receptions;



            2.   Religious ceremonies;



            3.   Continuous use of park and recreation
facilities for religious services or political purposes;



            4.   The use of intoxicating beverages; and



            5.   Activities not sponsored or conducted by a
city resident.



      (8)   The total number of people admitted for any usage shall
not exceed the seating capacity of the facility involved, as determined by
the Parks and Recreation Department.



      (9)   All statutes and ordinances of the state, county and
city shall be complied with.



      (10)   A minimum of one city employee shall be on duty at all
times when Parks and Recreation Department facilities are rented. He or she
shall be responsible to the Parks and Recreation Director, paid by the Parks
and Recreation Department and no organization using a parks and recreation
facility shall make any payment to such employee.



      (11)   The use of special equipment shall be permitted only
when operated by Parks and Recreation Department employees or other persons
specifically authorized in the permit. When used by other than parks and
recreation employees, and so stated in the permit, the special equipment must
be returned in the condition in which it was found, with exception of normal
wear, or the user shall be responsible for repair or replacement charges.



      (12)   No material of any kind shall be attached to any part
of the facility or area without express written approval from the Parks and
Recreation Director.



      (13)   If control personnel, parking attendant and the like
are necessary, such personnel shall be supplied by the applicant. The Parks
and Recreation Director, Chief of Police or others as determined by the City
Manager shall specify when control personnel are necessary.



      (14)   Concession rights shall be reserved unless specifically
staled otherwise in the permit.



      (15)   No Parks and Recreation Department kitchen facility
shall be used except as specifically outlined by the Parks and Recreation
Department. The usual rental charge shall be consistent with actual cost
incurred by the city. Facilities must be cleaned after use and approval
inspection given.



      (16)   Sidewalks, roadways and parking facilities shall be
those specially surfaced areas within the park property constructed for that
purpose.



         (a)   A maximum speed of five mph shall be in effect at
all times.



         (b)   Parking shall not be allowed, except within
specifically designated parking areas.



         (c)   Unlicensed motor vehicles or unlicensed operators
shall not be allowed on any park property. With the exception of city or
authorized maintenance vehicles, all motor vehicles shall remain on surfaced
roadways at all times.



         (d)   Horses shall be allowed only on specific bridle
paths or other designated locations.



      (17)   Continuous use of facilities by clubs or enterprises
shall be permitted through signed agreements which shall be reissued as
necessary at the direction of the Parks and Recreation Director. No permit
shall exceed a period of time of one year. Permits may be reissued each year
with the approval of the Director of Parks and Recreation.



      (18)   When an application for use of the facilities has been
approved by the Parks and Recreation Department, notification shall contain
the date, hours of use, age of group, type of activity and the number of
participants.



(Prior Code, § 8-6.07)




CAMPING




§ 93.20  PROHIBITED CONDUCT.



   It shall be unlawful:



   (A)   For any person to set up, use or maintain any temporary
structure, tent, bag, vehicle, a camper or any other thing for the purpose of
camping, lodging, sleeping, cooking or starting or maintaining a campfire; or
establish a temporary place of rest, on any private or public property within
the city limits, including property owned, operated or managed by any local,
state or federal agency or department, unless such use is exempted by any of
the following sections;



   (B)   For any person to sleep in or upon any public building, alley,
sidewalk, public way or any federal, state, county or municipal designated
trail head, or any property owned, operated or managed by any local, state or
federal agency or department, or any other public place or facility within
the corporate limits of the city, unless exempted by § 93.21 of this
chapter; and/or



   (C)   For the owner of any private property, or any manager, renter,
lessee or agent thereof, to knowingly permit any person to violate this
subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 6-3.01)  (Ord. 816, passed - -2001)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.21  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   No person shall be arrested or cited for a violation of any
provision in this subchapter unless such person continues to engage in such
conduct after a warning by any police officer; an authorized representative
of the governmental entity managing or responsible for such public property;
or the property owner, manager, renter, lessee or agent thereof, as the case
may be; or unless such property is conspicuously posted, warning of the
provisions of § 93.20 of this chapter and designated such violation as a
misdemeanor.



   (B)   This subchapter shall not apply to the ordinary and permitted
uses of improved residential lots subject to and in conformity with the city
code, nor shall this subchapter be interpreted to limit the use of such lots
by the owners thereof for any lawful purpose.



   (C)   This subchapter shall not apply to legally permitted
campgrounds operated or controlled by any private person or governmental
agency, including, but not limited to, the United States Forest Service
and/or the county.



   (D)   This subchapter shall not be construed to limit the customary
activity of camping on the city’s rodeo grounds in conjunction with any
rodeos, fairs or other public events held on the rodeo grounds.



   (E)   This subchapter shall not apply to the parking of any vehicle,
camper or recreational vehicle for a period of less than 24 hours with the
consent, either express or implied, of the respective governmental entity,
property owner, manager, renter, lessee or agent thereof, unless the property
upon which any such vehicle, camper or recreational vehicle is parked is
conspicuously posted as provided in division (A) above, or unless an
authorized agent of the respective governmental entity managing or
responsible for such property, or the property owner, manager, renter, lessee
or agent thereof, specifically requests that such vehicle, camper or
recreational vehicle be moved within the 24-hour period.



(Prior Code, § 6-3.02)  (Ord. 816, passed - -2001)



§ 93.22  PROOF OF INTENT.



   Unless otherwise specifically permitted by this subchapter, the parking
of any vehicle, tent, camper, recreational vehicle or other similar device in
any location for more than 24 hours when not upon one’s own real property
shall be prima facie evidence of an intent to violate this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 6-3.03)  (Ord. 816, passed - -2001)



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Any violation of §§ 93.20 through 93.22 of this chapter
shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than
$2,500, or by six months in jail, or both.



(Prior Code, § 6-3.04)  (Ord. 816, passed - -2001)



CHAPTER 94:  FIRE PREVENTION



Section




Fireworks




   94.01   Definitions



   94.02   Prohibited fireworks; exceptions



   94.03   Sale of fireworks; posting signs



   94.04   Authority; enforcement



   94.05   Liability for emergency responses




Open Burning




   94.20   Ban on open burning; exceptions



 



   94.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Fire Chief, see § 31.07



   Fire Department, see §§ 35.30 through 35.34



FIREWORKS



§ 94.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONSUMER FIREWORK. Those fireworks defined by A.R.S. § 36-1601.



   DISPLAY FIREWORK. Those fireworks defined by A.R.S. § 36-1601.



   FIREWORKS. Any combustible or explosive composition, substance or
combination of substances, or any article prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration
or detonation, that is a consumer firework, display firework or permissible
consumer firework as defined by A.R.S. § 36-1601.



   NOVELTY ITEMS. Federally deregulated novelty items that are known as
snappers, snap caps, party poppers, glow worms, snakes, toy smoke devices,
sparklers and certain toys as defined in A.R.S. § 36-1601.



   PERMISSIBLE CONSUMER FIREWORKS. Those fireworks as defined by A.R.S. §
36-1601 that may be sold within the city even where the use of those items
has been prohibited.



   SUPERVISED PUBLIC DISPLAY. A monitored performance of display fireworks
open to the public and authorized by permit by the Fire Chief or his or her
designee.



(Ord. 917, passed 1-13-2011)



§ 94.02  PROHIBITED FIREWORKS; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   The use, discharge or ignition of fireworks within the city is
prohibited.



   (B)   Nothing in this section or chapter shall be construed to
prohibit the use, discharge or ignition of novelty items or the occurrence of
a supervised public display of fireworks.



   (C)   Permits may be granted by the Fire Chief or designee for
conducting a properly supervised public display of fireworks. Every such
public display of fireworks shall be of such character and so located,
discharged or fired, only after proper inspection and in a manner that does
not endanger persons, animals or property. A permit shall not be issued, and
may be revoked, during time periods of high fire danger warnings. The Fire
Chief has authority to impose conditions on any permits granted.



(Ord. 917, passed 1-13-2011)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.03  SALE OF FIREWORKS; POSTING SIGNS.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall sell or permit or authorize the sale
of permissible consumer fireworks to a person who is under 16 years of age.



      (2)   No person shall sell or permit or authorize the sale of
permissible consumer fireworks in conflict with state law.



   (B)   (1)   Prior to the sale of permissible consumer fireworks,
every person engaged in such sales shall prominently display signs indicating
the following.



         (a)   The use of fireworks, except novelty items as
defined by city code, including permissible consumer fireworks is prohibited.



         (b)   Consumer fireworks authorized for sale under state
law may not be sold to persons under the age of 16.



      (2)   Signs required under this section shall be placed at
each cash register and in each area where fireworks are displayed for sale.



      (3)   The Fire Chief or designee shall develop regulations
concerning the size and color of the required signs and shall develop a model
sign. The required sign regulations and model sign shall be posted on the
city’s website and filed with the Clerk’s office.



(Ord. 917, passed 1-13-2011)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.04  AUTHORITY; ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The Fire Chief or designee, a city police officer or marshal
or the City Attorney may issue civil complaints to enforce violations of this
subchapter designated as civil offenses.



   (B)   Any person authorized pursuant to this section to issue a
civil complaint may also issue a notice of violation specifying actions to be
taken and the time in which they are to be taken to avoid issuance of a civil
or criminal complaint.



   (C)   A city police officer or marshal or the City Attorney may
issue criminal complaints to enforce this subchapter.



(Ord. 917, passed 1-13-2011)



§ 94.05  LIABILITY FOR EMERGENCY RESPONSES.



   (A)   (1)   A person who uses, discharges or ignites permissible
consumer fireworks, fireworks or anything that is designed or intended to
rise into the air and explode or to detonate in the air or to fly above the
ground, is liable for the expenses of any emergency response that is required
by such use, discharge or ignition.



      (2)   The fact that a person is convicted or found responsible
for a violation(s) of this subchapter is prima facie evidence of liability
under this section.



   (B)   The expenses of an emergency response are a charge against the
person liable for those expenses pursuant to division (A) above. The charge
constitutes a debt of that person and may be collected proportionately by the
public agencies, for-profit entities or not-for-profit entities that incurred
the expenses. The liability imposed under this section is in addition to and
not in limitation of any other liability that may be imposed.



   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      EXPENSES OF AN EMERGENCY RESPONSE. Reasonable costs directly
incurred by public agencies, for-profit entities or not-for-profit entities
that make an appropriate emergency response to an incident.



      REASONABLE COSTS. Includes the costs of providing police,
firefighting, rescue and emergency medical services at the scene of an
incident and the salaries of the persons who respond to the incident.



(Ord. 917, passed 1-13-2011)



OPEN BURNING



§ 94.20  BAN ON OPEN BURNING; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   The Mayor and City Council hereby impose a ban on all open
fires, campfires, fireworks and other pyrotechnic displays within the
incorporated boundaries of the City of Williams, effective at any time and
for such times in which restrictions are declared in effect by U.S. Forest
Service, Kaibab National Forest.



   (B)   Excepted from this ban are all areas designated by the Fire
Chief and Community Development Director as fire flow areas, petroleum-fueled
stoves, enclosed charcoal barbeque grills operated in residential yards, and
special events specifically approved by the City Council.



(Ord. 965, passed 6-14-2018)



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   The penalty for violating any prohibition or requirement
imposed by this chapter is a Class 3 misdemeanor unless another penalty is
specifically provided for.



   (B)   Failure to comply with any permit requirements, as per §
94.02 of this chapter, issued by the Fire Chief is a civil offense punishable
by a fine of $500 for each violation thereof.



   (C)   Failure to comply with § 94.03(B)(1) and (B)(2) of this
chapter is a civil offense punishable by civil fine of $500 for each
violation thereof.



   (D)   Any person found guilty of violating any provisions of §
94.20 shall be guilty of a class one misdemeanor. Each occurrence of a
violation shall be separate offense punishable as herein described.
Violations of § 94.20 shall be enforced under the same conditions and
procedure as set forth in A.R.S. § 13-3903.



(Ord. 917, passed 1-13-2011; Ord. 965, passed 6-14-2018)



TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   PRIVILEGE AND EXCISE TAXES



      111.   BUSINESS LICENSES



      112.   HOSPITALITY BUSINESSES



      113.   GASOLINE STATIONS



      114.   JUNK SHOPS, PAWNBROKERS AND SECOND-HAND STORES



      115.   FRANCHISES



      116.   MOBILE FOOD VENDORS



CHAPTER 110:  PRIVILEGE AND EXCISE TAXES



Section



   110.01   Regulations adopted by reference



§ 110.01  REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The city’s provisions concerning privilege and excise taxes, and any
and all amendments, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as
if set out in full.



(Ord. 911, passed 10-8-2009; Ord. 926, passed 2-23-2012; Ord. 932, passed
12-13-2012)



CHAPTER 111:  BUSINESS LICENSES



Section



   111.01   Definitions



   111.02   General business license tax



   111.03   Separate licenses for different locations



   111.04   License application



   111.05   Time for payment of license tax



   111.06   Basis for denial of business licenses



   111.07   Rules applicable to all business licenses



   111.08   Period for general business license



   111.09   Temporary business permits for mobile vendors



   111.10   License not transferable



   111.11   Unlawful to operate without a license



   111.12   Register of licenses



   111.13   Public display of licenses



   111.14   Revocation or suspension of license



   111.15   Appeals



   111.16   Fees in addition to transaction privileges



   111.17   Uniformity with other ordinances



 



   111.99   Penalty



§ 111.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   FOOD PRODUCTS. Defined under this chapter as it is under A.R.S. §
3-561(2).



   GOODS. Defined in this chapter as it is under the state’s version of
the Uniform Commercial Code, A.R.S. § 47-2105, as well as the authorities
interpreting the term “goods” under the Uniform Commercial Code, with the
exception of “food products”.



   MOBILE VENDOR. Any person selling goods or services from any vehicle,
kiosk or any other point of sale that is not a permanent structure having a
postal address. This definition shall not include any person providing or
offering to provide scheduled delivery of food products to the door of any
residence or business within the city at least once every 14 days.



   PEDDLE. Traveling by foot, automobile or any other type of vehicle, or
pulling a trailer from place to place or door-to-door, whether invited or
uninvited, carrying, conveying or transporting goods or services to potential
purchasers, as well as soliciting orders for goods or services. The word
PEDDLE does not include the following:



      (1)   Any person who holds a general business license and who
provides, or offers to provide, scheduled delivery of food products to the
door of any residence or business within the city at least once every 14 days;



      (2)   Any person who holds a general business license and who
uses a vehicle on the roads on a seasonal basis to offer for sale frozen
dessert products, candy drinks, and toys; and who is generally considered to
be the “ice cream man”; and



      (3)   Any person selling subscriptions for delivery of
newspapers to the door of a residence on a regular daily or weekly schedule.



   PERSON. Any individual, company, corporation, firm, partnership,
limited liability partnership, limited liability company or trust. The word
PERSON also includes any individual hired by or acting on behalf of another
individual, company, corporation, partnership, limited liability partnership,
limited liability company or trust to engage in street sales or door-to-door
sales.



   PRODUCER. Owners, proprietors or tenants of agricultural lands,
orchards, farms and gardeners whereon food products are grown, raised or
prepared for market, as set forth in A.R.S. § 3-561(1).



   PUSHCART. A vehicle propelled by human power which has been
specifically designed for the sales of goods or services.



(Prior Code, § 3-1.01)  (Ord. 792, passed - -1999; Ord. 855, passed - -2006)



§ 111.02  GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSE TAX.



   All persons regularly engaged in any pursuit, business, trade,
occupation or employment within the city limits, who do not qualify for
mobile merchant’s license and who will sell goods and/or services from a
permanent structure having a mailing address under § 111.09 of this chapter
shall pay a license tax of an amount to be determined by the City Council
subject to the following exceptions:



   (A)   No local church, local church organization, fraternal order,
social organization, charitable organization or school is required to pay a
license tax for:



      (1)   Any casual business or occupation in which admission is
free; or



      (2)   When the revenue from the business or occupation is
designated for a charitable, educational or benevolent use.



   (B)   Any person who has less than three apartments, houses, trailer
spaces or other lodging spaces available for rent, lease or license, is not
considered to be regularly engaged in a business; provided, however, if that
person is also receiving income from renting, leasing or licensing one or
more commercial properties, such person is considered to be regularly engaged
in business and must obtain licenses for all rental, lease or license
properties.



(Prior Code, § 3-1.02)  (Ord. 792, passed - -1999; Ord. 855, passed - -2006)



§ 111.03  SEPARATE LICENSES FOR DIFFERENT LOCATIONS.



   (A)   If any person carries on a business, trade or occupation at
more than one location within the city, the person must obtain a separate
license for each place of business, trade or occupation.



   (B)   If a person carries on several businesses, trades or
occupations under one management, or as one business, the person shall pay a
license fee for each separate business, trade or occupation.



   (C)   If a person carries on several businesses, trades or
occupations independently and by separate and distinct managements, the
person shall pay a license fee for each separate business, trade or
occupation.



(Prior Code, § 3-1.03)  (Ord. 792, passed - -1999; Ord. 855, passed - -2006)



§ 111.04  LICENSE APPLICATION.



   (A)   Every person shall obtain an application for a license to
carry on a trade, business or occupation in the office of the City Clerk.



   (B)   The applicant must state in the application:



      (1)   The business, trade or occupation for which the
application is sought;



      (2)   The name of the applicant:



         (a)   If the applicant is a partnership, the name of the
person applying for the license on behalf of the partnership and the names of
the partners;



         (b)   If the applicant is a limited liability company,
the name of the person applying for the license on behalf of the limited
liability company and the names of the members of the limited liability
company;



         (c)   If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the
person applying for the license on behalf of the corporation and the names of
the officers of the corporation; or



         (d)   If the applicant is a church, club or charitable
institution that is not located in the city, the name of the person applying
for the license on behalf of the church, club or charitable institution and
the names of the members of the board of the club or charitable organization.



      (3)   The location where the business, trade or occupation is
to be carried on, even if the person is acting as a mobile merchant;



      (4)   Whether the business, trade or occupation will be
carried on from a vehicle; or “building”; “building accessory”;
“dwelling”; “mobile home”; “modular home”; “recreational
vehicle”; “structure”; and specify the kind of “structure”;
“trailer utility”; or “travel trailer”; as those phrases are defined
in Ch. 158 of this code of ordinances;



      (5)   Shall certify to the City Clerk that the location of the
business, trade or occupation will not constitute a violation of provisions
of this code of ordinances pertaining to zoning, buildings, housing, fire,
plumbing, dangerous buildings and nuisances, or conflict with any provision
of this chapter; and



      (6)   Shall provide to the City Clerk a copy of that
person’s state transaction privilege license.



   (C)   The application for license shall be filed with the City Clerk
at or before the time of issuing the license.



(Prior Code, § 3-1.04)  (Ord. 792, passed - -1999; Ord. 855, passed - -2006)



§ 111.05  TIME FOR PAYMENT OF LICENSE TAX.



   (A)   The annual license tax shall be paid in advance on January 1
of each year. If a person fails to pay any license fee by January 31, that
person shall also be assessed a late fee in an amount to be determined by the
City Council.



   (B)   For any businesses, trades or occupations, every person shall
pay the City Clerk before engaging in any business, trade or occupation.



(Prior Code, § 3-1.05)  (Ord. 792, passed - -1999; Ord. 855, passed - -2006)



§ 111.06  BASIS FOR DENIAL OF BUSINESS LICENSES.



   (A)   The City Clerk has the discretion to have any business license
application reviewed by other city officials for recommendations on whether,
if the application is granted, the applicant will be in violation of the
provisions of this code of ordinances and which will subject the applicant to
revocation or suspension of the license. Any official who reviews such an
application at the request of the City Clerk and believes that there will be
a violation, shall state in writing the basis for the belief and the
provisions of this code of ordinances that would be violated if the
application were granted.



   (B)   After receipt of the written comments of the city official,
the City Clerk shall have the discretion to either grant the application for
a license or deny the applicant a business license.



   (C)   If the City Clerk denies an application for a business
license, the Clerk shall state in writing the basis for the denial. The City
Clerk shall also notify the applicant of the right to appeal the denial to
the City Council and the deadline for filing such an appeal.



   (D)   If the City Clerk grants a business license and there is a
written statement that there may be a violation of a provision of this code
of ordinances, the city will not be barred or estopped from enforcing this
code of ordinances. If the City Clerk grants a business license, but has not
requested review of the application by another city official, the city will
not be barred or estopped from enforcing this code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 3-1.06)  (Ord. 792, passed - -1999; Ord. 855, passed - -2006)



§ 111.07  RULES APPLICABLE TO ALL BUSINESS LICENSES.



   (A)   The regulations in this section apply to any person who holds
a general business license or any person who holds a temporary business
license. Any mobile merchant who is using a vehicle or trailer cannot claim
or attempt to establish any exclusive right to park at a particular street
location. Any person who is using a vehicle or trailer cannot park at any
location on a public street for more than one hour within any eight-hour
period.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to sell any personal property
from any vehicle, pushcart, stand or other movable or temporary contrivance
within 500 feet of any school grounds between that time period commencing
one-half hour prior to the start of each school day and ending one-half hour
after school was dismissed.



   (C)   No person shall sell any personal property, including, but not
limited to, food and drink, from any vehicle, pushcart, stand or other
movable or temporary contrivance within a public park; provided, however,
that:



      (1)   The City Council may authorize the calling of
competitive bids to approve food sales in one or more public parks and may
award a franchise to one or more persons submitting the best bids; or



      (2)   The City Manager may authorize a person to sell food and
drink in any city park that does not have a permanent concession facility
without respect to competitive bid provisions if a private group or
organization meeting there requests that the specific mobile merchant be
permitted to sell to their group during a specified period at a specified
location. A permit hereunder must be obtained for liquor sales in addition to
the provisions of this section.



   (D)   It is unlawful for any person to sell any type of personal
property from any vehicle, pushcart, stand or other movable or temporary
contrivance or by peddling within 200 feet of any competing or like-type
business within the city unless such person has the written permission of all
competing or like-type businesses within such limit.



   (E)   If a like-type business locates within 200 feet of an existing
sidewalk vendor location, the mobile merchant will be required to relocate
unless obtaining permission under this section.



(Prior Code, § 3-1.07)  (Ord. 792, passed - -1999; Ord. 855, passed -
-2006)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.08  PERIOD FOR GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSE.



   (A)   All new licenses shall be issued for a period from the date of
the issuance of the license to the end of the calendar year, unless the
license is suspended or revoked.



   (B)   All licenses that are renewed shall be issued for the entire
calendar year.



(Prior Code, § 3-1.08)  (Ord. 792, passed - -1999; Ord. 855, passed - -2006)



§ 111.09  TEMPORARY BUSINESS PERMITS FOR MOBILE VENDORS.



   (A)   Every person who does not have a general business license and
wishes to sell goods or services on a sidewalk, street, alley or any public
place; or any person who is a mobile vendor.



   (B)   The application for a temporary business license shall include:



      (1)   The name of the applicant:



         (a)   If the applicant is a partnership, the name of the
person applying for the license of behalf of the partnership and the names of
the partners;



         (b)   If the applicant is a limited liability company,
the name of the person applying for the license on behalf of the limited
liability company and the names of the members of the limited liability
company;



         (c)   If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the
person applying for the license on behalf of the corporation and the names of
the officers of the corporation; or



         (d)   If the applicant is a church, club or charitable
institution that is not located in the city, the name of the person applying
for the license on behalf of the church, club or charitable institution and
the names of the members of the board of the club or charitable organization.



      (2)   The permanent and local address of the person. If the
applicant is applying on behalf of a partnership, corporation or limited
liability company, the applicant must include his or her permanent address
and local address, and credentials establishing the nature of the
relationship the partnership, corporation or limited liability company;



      (3)   A brief description of the nature of the business and
the goods or services to be sold;



      (4)   State the place or places where the goods or services
are to be sold;



      (5)   If sales are to be made on streets, sidewalks or alleys,
proof that adjoining landowners or occupants have no objection to the
issuance of a sidewalk sale license;



      (6)   If a vehicle is going to be used to assist the seller of
goods or services in any way, a description of the vehicle and the license
plate number of the vehicle;



      (7)   Proof of a valid and current transaction privilege
license in the name of the person or organization to whom the license will be
issued; shall provide to the City Clerk a copy of that person’s state
transaction privilege license;



      (8)   The date on which the person will conduct the sales,
which are not to exceed seven days from the date of the issuance of the
license; and



      (9)   The names and permanent and local addresses of all
individuals who will be selling goods or services on behalf of the person
named in the application. Copies of such identification of each person shall
be in a form acceptable to the City Clerk.



   (C)   The applicant shall pay a fee for the temporary license in an
amount to be determined by the City Council.



   (D)   The temporary license shall only be valid for seven calendar
days from the date of its issuance.



   (E)   The city will issue no more than four temporary licenses for
any one person during a calendar year.



   (F)   The city will issue to the applicant one certificate for the
temporary license. If there is more than one individual who may sell goods
and services on behalf of the person who obtains the temporary license, the
applicant must make copies of the certificate for each individual. Each
individual must have available the temporary business permit available for
review by city staff or law enforcement. Failure to do so may result in a
citation under this section. Subsequent proof of a valid temporary business
license at the time of citation is a complete defense to the citation.



   (G)   No person shall transfer a temporary license to any other
person.



   (H)   All persons who have a temporary business license shall abide
by the following regulations.



      (1)   No street or alley shall be blocked.



      (2)   A three-foot passageway shall be left open for
pedestrians on sidewalks.



      (3)   Goods shall be securely placed so that they will not
endanger the health, safety or welfare of pedestrians or fall or extrude into
a street or alley.



      (4)   Sales shall not be conducted to create a fire or safety
hazard.



      (5)   Any individual engaging in sidewalk sales or peddling
shall not hinder the efforts of any law enforcement officer or the Fire
Department.



      (6)   No person shall shout, cry out, blow a horn, ring a bell
or use any sound device, including a radio or sound amplification system on
any streets, alleys, parks or other public places in a manner that would be
an inconvenience or annoyance to the public. For purposes of this section, a
complaint by a citizen or the good faith judgment of a police officer shall
be deemed conclusive as to whether the sound is an inconvenience or annoyance
to the public.



      (7)   Any person who is peddling cannot maintain a stationary
location on the street, private property, sidewalks or alley for more than
seven days.



      (8)   No license shall be issued until satisfactory evidence
is presented that the mobile merchant has obtained public liability insurance
in a company or companies agreeable to the city, naming the city as an
additional insured, and in an amount not less than $1,000,000 for injury to
one person and $2,000,000 aggregate damages, insuring the city against any
and all liability or expense that may be incurred by reason of any accident
to any person, persons or property arising from or in any way growing out of
the use of the right-of-way by the mobile merchant.



   (I)   The licensing provisions of this section do not apply to
persons who have a general business license and may be using a sidewalk near
their place of business for sale of goods or services.



   (J)   Unless a person has first obtained a license from the city, it
is a Class 1 misdemeanor for any person to display for sale, sell or vend
goods or services in the following manner:



      (1)   On sidewalks, streets, alleys or any public place within
the city limits; and/or



      (2)   By peddling.



   (K)   Nothing in this section restricts or denies the right to sell
food products by a producer, or to impose a tax, license or fee on the sale
of food by a producer pursuant to A.R.S. §§ 3-561 to 3-563.



(Prior Code, § 3-1.09)  (Ord. 792, passed - -1999; Ord. 855, passed -
-2006)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.10  LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.



   No license shall be transferable to any other person, or any other
business, trade or occupation.



(Prior Code, § 3-1.10)  (Ord. 792, passed - -1999; Ord. 855, passed - -2006)



§ 111.11  UNLAWFUL TO OPERATE WITHOUT A LICENSE.



   (A)   Any person engaged in the operation of a business, trade or
occupation without first having obtained a license required by this chapter,
shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.



   (B)   Any person who continues to operate a business, trade or
occupation after that person’s license has been revoked or suspended, is
guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.



   (C)   Every day, a business, trade or occupation is conducted
without a license, constitutes a separate violation of this section.



(Prior Code, § 3-1.11)  (Ord. 792, passed - -1999; Ord. 855, passed -
-2006)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.12  REGISTER OF LICENSES.



   The City Clerk shall maintain a register containing the name of every
person to whom a general business or temporary license was issued, the date
the license was issued, the purpose for which it was granted and the amount
paid for the license. The City Clerk shall not distribute copies of the
register, but the City Clerk will make such register available for inspection
if a person makes a public records request.



(Prior Code, § 3-1.12)  (Ord. 792, passed - -1999; Ord. 855, passed - -2006)



§ 111.13  PUBLIC DISPLAY OF LICENSES.



   Every person shall display a valid city business license in a public
and conspicuous place.



(Prior Code, § 3-1.13)  (Ord. 792, passed - -1999; Ord. 855, passed -
-2006)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.14  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Any general or temporary business license shall be dated as of
the date of its issuance. If a person violates the conditions under which the
license has been issued, the City Manager may revoke the license. The license
shall be void from the date of any revocation and the amount paid for the
license shall be forfeited to the city.



   (B)   The City Manager may suspend any business license if the
business is in violation of this code of ordinances.



   (C)   The City Manager may initiate the process to revoke or suspend
a business license by issuance of a notice to abate a violation. The notice
shall state the basis for the notice by informing the holder of the license
of the condition or conditions noted and the provisions of this code of
ordinances that are believed to be in violation. The notice shall give the
holder of the license 30 days to abate the violation; except that, the holder
of a temporary license will have 24 hours to abate the violation. The notice
shall also inform the holder that if the condition or conditions are not
abated, the city can issue a civil citation pursuant to § 111.99(A) of this
chapter, issue a notice of revocation or suspension of the license, or both.



   (D)   If, after the expiration of the time designated in division
(C) above, the violation has not been abated and the City Manager deems it
appropriate to revoke or suspend a license, the City Manager shall issue a
notice of revocation or suspension of a business license.



      (1)   The notice shall be served on the holder either by
personally serving the notice or by mailing the notice by certified mail,
return receipt requested. In complying with the obligation to “personally
serve” the notice, the City Manager may follow Arizona Rules of Civil
Procedure 4.1 and 4.2. In complying with the obligation to mail notice to the
holder of the business license, the City Manager can mail the notice to the
location of the business, trade or occupation, or to the last known address
of the applicant. Notice is deemed effective on the date that it is hand
delivered, sent or deposited in the United States mail. Proof of service of
the notice and order shall be certified to at the time of service by a
written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the persons
effecting service, declaring the time, date and manner in which service was
made. The declaration, together with any receipt card returned in
acknowledgment of receipt by certified mail shall be affixed to the copy of
the notice and order.



      (2)   The notice shall state the basis for the revocation or
suspension by informing the holder of the license of the condition or
conditions noted and the provisions of this code of ordinances that have been
violated.



      (3)   The notice shall state that the revocation or suspension
will take effect 15 days later, or immediately in the case of a temporary
business license, unless the decision is appealed to the City Council under
the provision set forth in § 111.15 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 3-1.14)  (Ord. 792, passed - -1999; Ord. 855, passed -
-2006)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.15  APPEALS.



   (A)   Appeals to City Council.



      (1)   Any denial of any type of business license may be
appealed to the City Council. Any notice of revocation or suspension of a
business license may be appealed to the City Council.



      (2)   An appeal must be filed within 15 days of the service of
the denial of the business license or within 15 days of the date of service
of a notice of revocation or suspension of a business license. An appeal must
be filed with the City Clerk’s office.



      (3)   Failure of a person entitled to appeal under this
chapter to timely file an appeal shall constitute a waiver of the right to a
hearing of the denial and such person shall be stopped to deny the validity
of the denial of the business license or revocation or suspension of a
business license.



      (4)   The notice of appeal shall set forth, in writing, the
person’s reasons for believing that the denial of the application was
incorrect, or why the decision to revoke or suspend a business license was
incorrect.



      (5)   The individual appealing shall accompany the written
appeal with an appeal fee in an amount to be determined by the City Council
and to be deposited in the General Fund of the city.



      (6)   In case of financial hardship, the fee may be suspended.



(Prior Code, § 3-1.15)



   (B)   Matters on appeal. Any person may appeal a denial of an
application of any type of business license or the decision to revoke or
suspend a business license. The issues on appeal are whether:



      (1)   The applicant and/or application was in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter or any provisions of this code of ordinances
that have been incorporated by reference; and



      (2)   The holder of a business license violated the provisions
in this chapter or any other chapter of this code of ordinances that the
holder of a business license must comply with, which is cause for revocation
or suspension of the business license.



(Prior Code, § 3-1.16)



   (C)   Procedure on appeal.



      (1)   The City Council shall set a date for hearing on appeal
within 30 days of the receipt of notice of appeal by the City Clerk. The
notice to appellant shall be substantially in the following form, but may
include other information:



 


You are hereby notified that a hearing will be held before the City of
Williams City Council at                     on the          
            day of                                   ,
20            at the hour of upon the notice and order served upon you.
You may be present at the hearing. You may be, but need not be, represented
by counsel. You may present any relevant evidence and will be given full
opportunity to cross-examine all witnesses testifying against you.

 



 



      (2)   A record of the entire proceedings shall be made by tape
recording or by any other means of permanent recording determined to be
appropriate by the Council. The proceedings at the hearing may also be
reported by a certified court reporter if requested by appellant and paid for
by appellant. If the appellant retains the services of a court reporter, a
copy of the transcript shall be made available to the city, if requested,
upon payment of the court reporter’s fee for a copy of the transcript.



      (3)   The Council shall take testimony from all parties to the
appeal. The City Council has the power to administer oaths and affirmations
and to certify to official acts.



      (4)   Each party shall have these rights, among others:



         (a)   To call and examine witnesses on any matter
relevant to the issues of the hearing;



         (b)   To introduce documentary and physical evidence;



         (c)   To cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter
relevant to the issues of the hearing;



         (d)   To impeach any witness regardless of which party
first called the witness to testify;



         (e)   To rebut the evidence; and



         (f)   To be represented by anyone who is lawfully
permitted to do so in the state.



      (5)   If the City Council deems it appropriate, the City
Council may inspect any building, vehicle, structure or premises involved in
the appeal as part of the hearing; provided that:



         (a)   Notice of such inspection shall be given to the
parties before the inspection is made;



         (b)   The parties are given an opportunity to be present
during the inspection; and



         (c)   The City Council shall state for the record upon
completion of the inspection the material facts observed and the conclusions
drawn therefrom. Each party then shall have a right to rebut or explain the
matters so stated by the City Council.



      (6)   The Council shall prepare a written summary of the
hearing and shall set forth the decision reached. A decision shall be
rendered within 15 days of the hearing, and the findings and decision shall
be mailed to all parties to the appeal.



(Prior Code, § 3-1.17)



(Ord. 792, passed - -1999; Ord. 855, passed - -2006)



§ 111.16  FEES IN ADDITION TO TRANSACTION PRIVILEGES.



   (A)   Application fees levied under this chapter are in addition to
the transaction privilege tax that may be required under § 110.01 of this
code of ordinances.



   (B)   If an applicant or business license holder fails to comply
with § 110.01 of this code of ordinances, the City Manager is authorized to
initiate the process for suspension or revocation of the business license in
§ 111.99(C) of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 3-1.26)  (Ord. 792, passed - -1999; Ord. 855, passed - -2006)



§ 111.17  UNIFORMITY WITH OTHER ORDINANCES.



   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way
impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances of
the city, except those specifically repealed by this chapter. Issuance of a
license by the city does not certify that the person is in compliance with
any other statute, law, code or ordinance, including this code of ordinances.
Issuance of any kind of business license does not bar or estop the city from
enforcing any other statute, law, code or ordinance, including this code of
ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 3-1.27)  (Ord. 792, passed - -1999; Ord. 855, passed - -2006)



§ 111.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Civil violation; commencement of action.



      (1)   A civil violation may be commenced by issuance of a
citation or by complaint.



      (2)   The citation will be issued with a form modeled after
the state’s traffic ticket and complaint and shall direct the defendant to
appear in the City Court within ten days after issuance of the citation.



      (3)   The citation will further notify the defendant that, if
he or she fails to appear on or before the date specified in the complaint, a
judgment by default will be entered against him or her, and the Court may, in
its discretion, impose a civil sanction not to exceed $1,000.



      (4)   Service of the citation may be accomplished and will be
deemed proper and complete by any of the following methods:



         (a)   By having the defendant sign the citation with a
promise to appear in court within ten days of the issuance of the citation;



         (b)   By hand delivering a copy of the citation to the
defendant; or



         (c)   By mailing a copy of the citation to the person
charged by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the
person’s last known address.



      (5)   In the event service cannot be accomplished as set forth
in divisions (A)(4)(a), (A)(4)(b) or (A)(4)(c) above, the state may serve the
defendant by any means allowed by the Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure 4.1
and 4.2.



      (6)   Jurisdiction of all proceedings to enforce the
provisions of this chapter shall be in the City Court.



(Prior Code, § 3-1.18)



   (B)   Civil citation; authority to issue. The City Manager or
designee, or any peace officer, may issue a civil citation pursuant to this
chapter. The DESIGNEE shall mean an individual employed by the city who has
been appointed by the City Manager, in writing, to have the authority to
issue civil code violations. Such authorization shall be filed with the City
Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 3-1.19)



   (C)   Appearance by defendant. The defendant shall, within ten days
of the issuance of the citation, appear in person or through his attorney in
the City Court and shall either admit or deny the allegations contained in
the citation. If the defendant admits the allegations, the Court shall enter
judgment against the defendant and impose a civil sanction of the violation.
If the defendant denies the allegations contained in the citation, the Court
shall set the matter for hearing.



(Prior Code, § 3-1.20)



   (D)   Default judgment. If a person served with a complaint fails to
appear on or before the time directed to appear or at the time set for
hearing by the Court, the allegations in the complaint shall be deemed
admitted and the Court shall enter judgment for the city and impose a civil
sanction.



(Prior Code, § 3-1.21)



   (E)   Rules of procedure for civil violations. The Arizona Rules of
Procedure for Civil Traffic Violation Cases shall be followed by the City
Court for civil violations of this chapter, except as modified or where
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, local rules of the City
Court or rules of the state’s Supreme Court.



(Prior Code, § 3-1.22)



   (F)   Violations not exclusive. Violations of this chapter are in
addition to any other violation enumerated within city ordinances or the city
code and in no way limits the penalties, actions or abatement procedures
which may be taken by the city for any violation of this chapter which is
also a violation of any other ordinance or code provision of the city or
statutes of the state.



(Prior Code, § 3-1.23)



   (G)   Each day separate violation. Each day any violation of any
provision of this chapter is committed or permitted to continue, such
violation shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished as such
hereunder. Each day there is a failure to perform any act or duty required by
this chapter shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished as
such hereunder.



(Prior Code, § 3-1.24)



   (H)   Civil penalties. Any person who is found guilty of a civil
violation of this chapter shall be sentenced to a fine of no more than $1,000
and no less than $200, and may be forbidden from obtaining a business license
or temporary business license no more than three years.



(Prior Code, § 3-1.25)



(Ord. 792, passed - -1999; Ord. 855, passed - -2006)



CHAPTER 112:  HOSPITALITY BUSINESSES



Section




Hotels and Motels




   112.01   Application of subchapter



   112.02   Advertising room rates



   112.03   Filing with City Clerk



   112.04   Register




Transient Rental, Lounge and Restaurant Taxes




   112.15   Definitions



   112.16   Administration



   112.17   Purpose of tax



 



   112.99   Penalty




HOTELS AND MOTELS




§ 112.01  APPLICATION OF SUBCHAPTER.



   This subchapter shall apply to operators and owners of motels, motor
hotels, motor courts, motor camps, hotels and like establishments.



(Prior Code, § 3-2.01)



§ 112.02  ADVERTISING ROOM RATES.



   (A)   In the event a hotel or motel operator posts, advertises or
otherwise displays room rates that are visible from the street from which the
hotel or motel fronts, such rates shall have lettering at least four inches
high and not more than six inches high. No more than two signs may be used by
each hotel or motel to post, advertise or display rates.



   (B)   A hotel or motel operator shall not post, advertise or display
a rate on a sign which is visible from the street unless the sign upon which
the rate is posted, advertised or displayed contains both a minimum and
maximum room rental rate. Any posted, advertised or displayed maximum rate
shall not exceed the posted, advertised or displayed minimum rate by more
than 25%. Unless otherwise posted, advertised or displayed, all rates posted,
advertised or displayed shall be for a single room with double occupancy. All
rates and the descriptive data relating to the room rate, posted, advertised
or displayed shall be of the same size and prominence.



   (C)   The motel or hotel operator shall make available for rent at
least 50% of the motel’s or hotel’s rooms at the posted, advertised or
displayed minimum rate or less of a double occupancy every day of hotel or
motel operation.



   (D)   All hotel and motel operators that post, advertise or display
on a sign visible from the street minimum and maximum room rates for double
occupancy shall post or display the same rates in each hotel or motel in full
view of the registration desk and in each hotel or motel room on the door.
The posting or display of minimum and maximum room rates in full view of the
registration desk shall be of lettering at least two inches high, and shall
be located sufficiently close to the registration desk to allow a person with
normal vision to read the posting or display of the minimum and maximum rate
from the registration desk.



(Prior Code, § 3-2.02)  (Ord. 762, passed - -1996)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.03  FILING WITH CITY CLERK.



   Each hotel or motel operator who posts, advertises or displays rates
that are visible from the street must file with the City Clerk, on forms
approved by the City Clerk, the minimum and maximum rates to be charged by
the hotel or motel operator. The hotel or motel operator shall not rent a
room or post, advertise or display a rate which is different than the rate
filed with the City Clerk, unless the amount charged is less than the minimum
filed for double occupancy with the City Clerk. Each filing with the City
Clerk shall be for the rates to be charged in the succeeding month(s) after
filing and such rates shall not be changed by any hotel or motel operator
until the first day of the month after the filing.



(Prior Code, § 3-2.03)  (Ord. 762, passed - -1996)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.04  REGISTER.



   (A)   A register shall be maintained at every establishment subject
to this subchapter and each guest shall be required to register his or her
name and home address. The date of arrival and departure shall be clearly
indicated and the register shall be maintained for a period of at least one
year following registration.



   (B)   The register shall be open for inspection to any authorized
person.



(Prior Code, § 3-2.04)  Penalty, see § 112.99




TRANSIENT RENTAL, LOUNGE AND RESTAURANT TAXES




§ 112.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BAR/LOUNGE. Any public or private establishment where spirituous
liquor, as defined by A.R.S. § 4-101.26 is sold for consumption on the
premises.



   GROSS INCOME. The consideration charged, whether or not received, for
the occupancy of space in a hotel, motel, campground or gross sales of a bar,
lounge or restaurant valued in cash, money, goods, labor or otherwise,
including all receipts, cash, credits, property and services of any kind or
nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.



   HOTEL/MOTEL/CAMPGROUND. Any public or private establishment which
provides transient lodging for compensation except hospitals, rest homes,
nursing homes, foster homes, sheltered care homes or residential treatment
facilities operated on a not-for-profit basis.



   RECREATIONAL FACILITIES. Swimming pools, playgrounds, municipal golf
courses, ball parks and municipal ski areas.



   RESTAURANT. Any business activity where articles of food, drink or
condiment are customarily prepared or served to patrons for consumption on or
off the premises, also including bars, cocktail lounges, the dining rooms of
hotels, and all caterers. For the purposes of this chapter, a “fast food”
business, which includes street vendors and mobile vendors selling in public
areas or at entertainment or sports of similar events, who prepares or sells
food or drink for consumption on or off the premises is considered a
RESTAURANT and not a “retailer”.



   TOURISM. The guidance, management, marketing, accommodation, promotion
and encouragement of tourists.



   TRANSIENT. A person who obtains at his or her own or another’s
expense, lodging for 30 days or less.



(Prior Code, § 3-9.01)  (Ord. 779, passed - -1998)



§ 112.16  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   The administration of this subchapter is vested in and shall
be exercised by the Director of Finance, or such other person to whom it may
be assigned the duty of administering, assessing and collecting the taxes
hereby imposed, except as otherwise specifically provided herein, subject to
the direction and supervision of the City Manager and the Mayor and Council;
the Director of Finance, or such other person to whom he or she may assign
the duty of administering, assessing and collecting the taxes hereby imposed,
is hereby empowered to enforce the provisions of this subchapter, together
with the City Attorney, who is hereby charged with the duty of taking,
commencing and prosecuting such legal remedies as are provided by law,
including this subchapter.



   (B)   The Director of Finance shall keep such records and accounts
as shall be necessary to adequately show separately the taxes collected under
each of the classifications and amounts collected from business taxes by this
subchapter; the Director of Finance shall keep full and accurate records of
all monies received by him or her and shall preserve all reports and tax
returns filed with him or her pursuant to the terms hereof for a period of
four years.



(Prior Code, § 3-9.03)  (Ord. 779, passed - -1998)



§ 112.17  PURPOSE OF TAX.



   Taxes collected at 1.25% shall be used for tourism development and for
the promotion, construction and maintenance of recreation facilities and
their supporting infrastructure.



(Prior Code, § 3-9.04)  (Ord. 779, passed - -1998)



§ 112.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Any person or business found guilty of violating any provision
of §§ 112.02 through 112.04 of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class 1
misdemeanor. Each day that the violation continues shall be a separate
offense. Conviction for a first offense under this division (B) shall have a
minimum fine of $1,000. Conviction for a second offense under this division
(B) shall have a minimum fine of $2,000. Conviction for a third offense under
this division (B) shall have a minimum fine of $2,500 and shall result in a
suspension of the operator’s business license for a period of three months.
All fines shall be paid within 24 hours. If the fine is not paid within 24
hours, a warrant will be issued for the operator’s arrest.



(Prior Code, § 3-2.05)  (Ord. 762, passed - -1996)



CHAPTER 113:  GASOLINE STATIONS



Section



   113.01   Price display



 



   113.99   Penalty



§ 113.01  PRICE DISPLAY.



   All merchants selling gasoline and diesel fuel at retail, through
dispensing pumps, are required to have their displayed pump price coincide
with any and all advertised pricing.



(Prior Code, § 4.01)  (Ord. 641, passed - -)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.99  PENALTY.



   Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. Each day that violation continues
shall be a separate offense punishable as hereinabove described.



(Prior Code, § 4.02)



CHAPTER 114:  JUNK SHOPS, PAWNBROKERS AND SECOND-HAND STORES



Section



   114.01   Definitions



   114.02   License



   114.03   Prohibited purchases and inspections



   114.04   Maintenance of records



§ 114.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   JUNK SHOP. Any enterprise engaged in the processing of junk, waste,
discarded or salvaged materials, machinery or equipment including automobile
wrecking and dismantling.



   PAWNBROKER. Every person who makes a business of lending money on the
security of personal property deposited in his or her keeping.



   SECOND-HAND STORE. Every person, who deals in the purchase and sale of
goods of any type that have been used or previously sold at retail one or
more times.



(Prior Code, § 3-5.01)



§ 114.02  LICENSE.



   (A)   Application for a license shall be made to the office of the
City Clerk.



   (B)   Said application shall request such information as, but not
limited to, a description of the location of the applicant, together with a
statement concerning the type of business contemplated.



   (C)   Upon receipt of a properly completed application and the
payment of a fee as specified in this chapter, the City Clerk may issue a
license for a junk shop, pawnbroker or a second-hand store, subject to all
the provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 3-5.02)



§ 114.03  PROHIBITED PURCHASES AND INSPECTIONS.



   No person licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall make any
purchase from any minor without first obtaining the approval of the Marshal.
The Marshal or other designated official shall be permitted at any reasonable
time to inspect any property contained on the premises of any person licensed
under this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 3-5.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.04  MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS.



   Any person licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall maintain
a written record of all business transactions, including a description of the
item purchased, the date and time of purchases and the name and address of
the person from whom it was purchased. This record shall be in the English
language and shall be available at any reasonable time for inspection by the
police or other designated official.



(Prior Code, § 3-5.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 115:  FRANCHISES



Section



   115.01   Gas company franchise



   115.02   Electric company franchise



   115.03   Cable television franchise



§ 115.01  GAS COMPANY FRANCHISE.



   (A)   The city granted a gas distribution franchise to Citizens
Utilities Company.



   (B)   The city granted a gas distribution franchise to UNS Gas, Inc.



(Prior Code, §§ 3-7.01—3-7.11)  (Ord. 726, passed - -1994; Ord. 964,
passed 6-14-2018)



§ 115.02  ELECTRIC COMPANY FRANCHISE.



   The city granted an electricity distribution franchise to Arizona
Public Service Company.



(Prior Code, §§ 3-8.01—3-8.05)  (Ord. 643, passed - -)



§ 115.03  CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE.



   The city granted a cable television franchise to Star Cablevision Group.



(Prior Code, §§ 3-6.01—3-6.19)  (Ord. 512, passed - -)



CHAPTER 116:  MOBILE FOOD VENDORS



Section



   116.01   Purpose



   116.02   Definitions



   116.03   Compliance with state licensing requirements



   116.04   Permit requirements



   116.05   Operational requirements



   116.06   Fees



   116.07   Violations; suspension; revocation



   116.08   Fines; penalties



   116.09   Appeals



§ 116.01  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is adopted to protect the health, safety and welfare of
the community of the city by enacting reasonable regulation for mobile food
vendors, their employees, agents, lessees or independent contractors by
requiring compliance with minimum standards for safety and security.



(Ord. 971, passed - - )



§ 116.02  DEFINITIONS.



   The below words and phrases, wherever used in this chapter shall be
construed as defined in this section unless, clearly from the context, a
different meaning is intended. Words used in the present tense include the
future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and
words in the singular number include the plural number.



   APPLICANT. The person who applies for a permit pursuant to this chapter.



   CONTROLLING PERSON. A natural person who either:



      (1)   Has a 10% or greater interest in the ownership or
earnings of the business; or



      (2)   Is any of the following:



         (a)   An officer, director, or any stockholder who owns
10% or more, of a corporation permittee/applicant;



         (b)   A general partner of a limited partnership
permittee/applicant or partner of a non-limited partnership
permittee/applicant;



         (c)   An officer, president, or secretary of a limited
liability company/corporation permittee/applicant; or



         (d)   The sole proprietor of a sole proprietorship
permittee/applicant.



   DESIGNATED AGENT. The person designated by the permittee/applicant to
receive notices from the city pursuant to this chapter.



   LEGAL PARKING SPACE.



      (1)   Means an area designated for vehicle parking in the city
right-of-way that may be paved or unpaved and may be delineated by road
surface markings.



      (2)   Does not include a parking space in a parking lot on
property owned by the city.



   MOBILE FOOD UNIT. A food establishment that is licensed by this state,
that is readily movable and that dispenses food or beverages for immediate
service and consumption and other incidental retail items from any vehicle as
defined in A.R.S. § 28-101.



   MOBILE FOOD VENDOR. Any person who owns, controls, manages or leases a
mobile food unit or contracts with a person to prepare foods and vend from,
drive or operate a mobile food unit.



   PERMITTEE. The person who applied for a permit pursuant to this chapter
and in whose name such permit was issued by the city pursuant to this chapter.



   PERSON. An individual, partnership, corporation, association or any
other entity of whatever kind or nature.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY. An area of land owned by the city and is used for street
or highway purposes as well as any area of land fitting the definition set
forth in § 152.01.



   SEMI-PERMANENT STRUCTURE. Equipment, or any dining area, including, but
not limited to, tables, chairs, booths, bar stools, benches, and standup
counters.



(Ord. 971, passed - - )



§ 116.03  COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a mobile food
unit or act as a mobile food vendor without having first obtained a valid
license from the State of Arizona Department of Health Services pursuant to
A.R.S. § 36-1761.




   (B)   It shall be a class one misdemeanor to violate this section.



(Ord. 971, passed - - )



§ 116.04  PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person to operate a mobile food
unit at any location within the city without obtaining a permit from the City
Clerk in accordance with City Code. The mobile food vendor shall comply with
the requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   A permit issued pursuant to this chapter, including a renewal
of a permit, is valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance if
the mobile food vendor is in compliance with this chapter. The permit is
non-transferable.



(Ord. 971, passed - - )



§ 116.05  OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to operate a mobile food unit
that does not meet the requirements in this section.



   (B)   Fire safety and inspection. A mobile food vendor must ensure
that all mobile food units comply with the version of the International Fire
Code in effect at the time when the license is issued, state law, and the
city code relating to fire and explosion safety standards.



   (C)   A mobile food unit(s) shall be inspected by the city's Fire
Department, or the mobile food vendor shall provide evidence that the mobile
food unit passed a fire inspection by another city or town fire department in
this state within the preceding 12 months.



   (D)   Refuse, trash and litter maintenance. A mobile food unit shall:



      (1)   Provide a minimum of one 15 gallon trash receptacle
within 15 feet of each individual mobile food unit for customers and
employees;



      (2)   Maintain an area around the mobile unit clear of litter,
garbage, rubble and debris; and



      (3)   Transport the trash from the area of operation to an
authorized waste disposal location.



   (E)   Noise restrictions.



      (1)   A mobile food vendor shall not use, play, or caused to
be used or played any amplifier, loudspeaker, microphone, amplified music, or
any other amplified instrument or device used for the production of sound in
a vending area when the motor vehicle or mobile food unit from which mobile
food vendor is vending is stationary or mobile upon any right-of-way, park or
other public place. For the purposes of this subsection, the factors for
determining whether a sound is amplified include, but are not limited to, the
following:



         (a)   The proximity of the sound to sleeping facilities,
whether residential or commercial;



         (b)   The land use, nature, and zoning of the area from
which the sound emanates and the area where it is received or perceived;



         (c)   The time of day or night when the sound occurs; it
shall be presumed that any amplified noise between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
is reasonably disturbing;



         (d)   The duration of the sound; and



         (e)   Whether the sound is recurrent, intermittent, or
constant.



      (2)   All mobile food vendors using generators must use
generators self-contained to the mobile food unit. No remote location
generators are allowed. Any generator of any kind shall not produce noise in
excess of 70 decibels (dB), which standard is considered a safe noise level
by the Environmental Protection Agency.



   (F)   Security.



      (1)   The mobile food unit and the surrounding vending area
shall be maintained in a safe and clean manner at all times.



      (2)   A mobile food unit shall have adequate lighting to
ensure customer safety in the vending area. Lighting shall be directed
downwards and away from rights-of-way and adjacent properties.



      (3)   The mobile food unit and its customers shall not
obstruct the movement of pedestrians or other vehicles using the sidewalk,
street, alley, or other public right-of-way.



   (G)   Insurance.



      (1)   If the mobile food unit operates an event sponsored by
the city or operates on public property, including rights-of-way or property
owned by the city, the mobile food vendor shall obtain insurance naming the
city as an additional insured in amounts as required by the city and in
accordance with the requirements of A.R.S. Title 9, Chapter 4, Article 7.2.



      (2)   The insurance company issuing the policy shall be
authorized to issue commercial liability policies in Arizona by the Arizona
Department of Insurance.



      (3)   The policy shall designate by manufacturer's serial or
identification number all mobile food units for which coverage is granted.



      (4)   The policy shall insure the person named in the policy
and any other person using the mobile food vendor with the express or implied
permission of the named insured against any liability arising out of the
ownership, maintenance or use of the mobile food unit in Arizona.



   (H)   Location. A mobile food vendor shall operate a mobile food
unit only in Commercial and Industrial zoning districts in accordance with
the City Zoning Code and subject to the following limitations and conditions:



      (1)   Residential area. A mobile food vendor shall not operate
in an area zoned for residential use or within 250 feet of an area zoned for
residential use, except:



         (a)   A mobile food vendor selling only ice cream may
operate on public rights-of-way in areas zoned for residential use; or



         (b)   Subject to applicable laws and the city code, a
mobile food vendor may operate on private property in a residential area if
the mobile food vendor obtains a separate agreement with the property owner
to operate a mobile food unit for a maximum of six hours within a 24 hour
period on the private property.



      (2)   City-owned property. A mobile food vendor shall only
operate in a legal parking space. If the mobile food vendor desires to
operate on city property other than a legal parking space in a right-of-way,
the mobile food vendor shall obtain from the city:



         (a)   A separate licensing for use, services contract,
or similar agreement, which will be entered into at the city's sole
discretion and applicable law; or



         (b)   A special event permit or similar permission in
accordance with the city code.



      (3)   Private property. A mobile food vendor shall obtain
written permission to use any private property where a mobile food unit is
operating and shall provide proof of such written permission on demand by the
city.



      (4)   Airports/public transit. Mobile food vendors shall not
operate at any city airport or public transit facility unless the mobile food
vendor has entered into a separate licensing for use agreement or similar
services agreement with the city, which the city will enter in its sole
discretion and applicable law.



      (5)   Semi-permanent structures.



         (a)   Semi-permanent structures shall not be allowed on
public property, whether city-owned property or any other form of public
property.



         (b)   Semi-permanent structures shall only be allowed on
private property if all of the following conditions are met:



            1.   Written permission from the owner of the
private property agreeing to the specific semi-permanent structures allowed
is provided to the city in advance. Written permission from tenants or
occupants will not be sufficient without written proof of the authority of a
tenant or occupant from the owner to permit such uses.



            2.   The private property involved must have:



               A.   Legal and sufficient on-site parking
pursuant to this code; and



               B.   Customer restrooms available. Portable
restrooms do not satisfy this requirement.



   (I)   Parking. A mobile food unit shall comply with this subsection
and applicable law as it pertains to parking, unless parking is governed by a
separate subsection in this chapter.



      (1)   A mobile food unit shall only operate in a legal parking
space.



      (2)   A mobile food unit, including any semi-permanent
structure used or associated with the mobile food unit, may use no more than
one legal parking space, unless the mobile food vendor has a separate
agreement with the city to use additional legal parking spaces or parking
spaces on city property other than right-of-way.



      (3)   No mobile food unit exceeding 24 feet may park
diagonally in a diagonal parking space or park in any manner that occupies
more than one diagonal parking space.



      (4)   No mobile food unit shall operate with the serving
window facing street traffic.



      (5)   A mobile food unit shall abide by all parking
regulations, including posted time limits. If there are no other time
restrictions on the use of a legal parking space, a mobile food unit shall
not occupy a legal parking space for more than six hours in a 24 hour period.
OCCUPY within this section means within 100 feet of the place in which the
mobile food unit was initially parked.



      (6)   A mobile food unit shall not occupy a legal parking
space with insufficient parking capacity as prescribed by the City Zoning
Code and applicable law, and includes occupying a legal parking space that
reduces the number of available parking spaces surrounding the area which is
required for the principal use or uses of the property associated with the
parking spaces as set forth in A.R.S. Title 9, Chapter 4, Article 7.2.



      (7)   A mobile food vendor shall not claim or attempt to
establish any exclusive right to park at a particular street location, unless
the parking space is part of a permitted event.



   (J)   Signs. A mobile food vendor shall comply with the city Sign
Code pursuant to City Code.



(Ord. 971, passed - - )



§ 116.06  FEES.



   The fee for the permit shall be established by resolution of the City
Council.



(Ord. 971, passed - - )



§ 116.07  VIOLATIONS; SUSPENSION; REVOCATION.



   (A)   It is a violation of this chapter for any person to provide
false information on any permit application.



   (B)   It is a violation of this chapter for a person to operate a
mobile food unit that either fails to meet all the requirements in this
chapter.



   (C)   It is a violation of this chapter for a mobile food vendor to
fail to display the license or other required documents, including proof of
insurance or fire inspection, to a peace officer or city inspector on demand.



   (D)   The city shall give written notice of a violation to the
permittee or designated agent that may result in the suspension or revocation
of the permit. The notice shall include a description of the violation, the
statutory or code reference, how the permittee can comply with the
requirements, a description of the process whereby a hearing may be
requested, the time limit for requesting a hearing, and a warning that
failure to timely request a hearing may result in suspension or revocation of
the permit. The notice shall be served on the permittee or designated agent
by either personal service or registered/certified mail. Service of the
notice shall be deemed complete upon mailing to, or personal service on, the
permittee or designated agent.



   (E)   The permittee or designated agent receiving a notice under
this section may request a hearing pursuant to § 111.15 of the code. If the
permittee fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter by the date
provided in the notice, the city may suspend or revoke the permit as provided
in this section.



   (F)   In addition to any penalties set forth in this chapter, a
permittee shall be suspended if, during the term of the permit, the permittee
or a controlling person has violated any of the provisions of this chapter.
During the suspension period, the permittee shall not operate any mobile food
unit associated with the suspended permit. If a fine is associated with the
violation that is the basis for suspension, the suspension may continue
beyond the period set forth in this subsection until such time as the
permittee pays the fine. The penalty for a suspension of a permit shall be:



      (1)   For the first suspension of a permit during a
twelve-month period, the permit shall be suspended up to 14 calendar days and
a fine of $100 will be imposed.



      (2)   For the second suspension of a permit during a 12-month
period, the permit shall be suspended to a minimum of 15 calendar days up to
a maximum of 30 calendar days and a fine of $250 shall be imposed.



      (3)   For the third suspension of a permit during a
twelve-month period, the permit shall be revoked.



   (G)   In addition to a revocation for a third suspension as set
forth above, the city may revoke a permit issued pursuant to this chapter if
the city determines that:



      (1)   A mobile food unit associated with the suspended permit
was operated in the city during the suspension period;



      (2)   A permittee or designated agent or controlling person,
following the issuance of a permit, is convicted of any of the following
offenses:



         (a)   Felony involving trafficking in stolen property,
fraud, forgery, theft, burglary, robbery, extortion, conspiracy to defraud,
or any preparatory offenses of the aforementioned crimes;



         (b)   Felony involving a fraudulent or dishonest act;



         (c)   Felony involving the sale, manufacture or
transportation of any dangerous drug as defined under A.R.S. § 13-3401, a
“violent crime” under A.R.S. Title 13, Chapters 11, 12, 13 or a “sexual
offense” under A.R.S. Title 13, Chapter 14, or for conduct in another
jurisdiction which if carried out in Arizona would constitute an offense
under one of the statutory provisions enumerated in this section; or



         (d)   Misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.



      (3)   The permittee or designated agent operated, or attempted
to operate a mobile food unit without a permit;



      (4)   The city previously issued three or more notices of
suspension or violation within a six month period;



      (5)   The permittee or controlling person has not complied
with a provision of this chapter or has failed to provide information as
required by this chapter;



      (6)   The application fee, permit fee, or any transaction
privilege tax has not been paid; or



      (7)   The permittee fails to pay outstanding fines or resolve
any violations.



   (H)   If a permit is revoked pursuant to this section, the permittee
and its controlling person(s) may not apply for a permit under this chapter
for a period of one year from the date of revocation.



(Ord. 971, passed - - )



§ 116.08  FINES; PENALTIES.



   (A)   Each day any violation of any provision of this chapter shall
continue shall constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   Criminal penalty. Among other penalties that may apply,
including revocation or suspension of a permit (when applicable), any person
who violates any provision of this chapter, whether or not the act is
specifically stated as being unlawful, shall be guilty of a Class 1
misdemeanor.



(Ord. 971, passed - - )



§ 116.09  APPEALS.



   Appeals under this chapter for permits being denied, suspended, or
revoked, shall be handled under the same process as described in § 111.15 of
the code.



(Ord. 971, passed - - )



TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   GENERAL OFFENSES



CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL OFFENSES



Section




General Provisions




   130.01   Interference with city employees



   130.02   Impersonation



   130.03   Firearms; discharge



   130.04   Curfew for minors




Littering




   130.15   Definitions



   130.16   Litter in public places



   130.17   Litter on private property



   130.18   Placement of litter in receptacles



   130.19   Vehicles causing litter



   130.20   Abatement by city




Noise




   130.35   Noise curfew



   130.36   Exemptions



   130.37   Special permits



 



   130.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 130.01  INTERFERENCE WITH CITY EMPLOYEES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere in any matter with any
employee of the city in the performance of his or her duty.



(Prior Code, § 6-1.01)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.02  IMPERSONATION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person: to represent or hold himself or
herself out to be any employee of the city; to attempt to impersonate any
such officer; or who, without authority, performs or attempts to perform any
official act on behalf of any officer.



(Prior Code, § 6-1.02)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.03  FIREARMS; DISCHARGE.



   (A)   Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge
firearms of any kind or description within the city limits. This shall not
apply to law enforcement officers in the carrying out of their duties, nor
for hunting areas duly designated by the state’s Game and Fish Department
during lawful hunting seasons. The term FIREARMS includes BB guns and air
rifles.



   (B)   Exceptions. City Council may, at any time, upon receipt of
proper application, grant permits to shooting galleries, gun clubs and
others, for shooting in fixed localities and under specified rules. Such
permits shall be in writing, attested to by the Clerk and conforming to such
requirements as the Council shall demand, and the permit thus issued shall be
subject to revocation at any time by action of the Council.



(Prior Code, § 6-1.04)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.04  CURFEW FOR MINORS.



   (A)   After Labor Day and until Memorial Day, it shall be unlawful
for any person under 18 years of age to be upon any of the streets, alleys or
public places in the city between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 5:30 a.m. the
next day, Sunday evening through Friday morning, and between the hours of
12:30 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. each Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays, except as
provided in division (C) of this section.



   (B)   On Memorial Day and through Labor Day, it shall be unlawful
for any person under 18 years of age to be upon any of the streets, alleys or
public places in the city between 12:30 a.m. and 5:30 a.m., except as
provided in division (C) of this section.



   (C)   This section does not apply to a minor who is:



      (1)   Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;



      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or
guardian, without any detour or stop;



      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;



      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or
returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;



      (5)   Involved in an emergency;



      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or
abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not
complain to the police department about the minor's presence;



      (7)   Attending an official school, religious, or other
recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic
organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an
official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by
adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar
entity that takes responsibility for the minor;



      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the
United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech, and the right of assembly; or



      (9)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of
minority removed in accordance with state law.



(Prior Code, § 6-6.01)  (Ord. 738, passed - -1995)  Penalty, see § 130.99




LITTERING




§ 130.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AUTHORIZED RECEPTACLE. A litter storage and collection receptacle as
required and authorized by the city ordinances.



   GARBAGE. All rubbish, animal refuse, vegetable kitchen refuse,
household waste, bottles, tin or aluminum cans, waste paper, grass cuttings,
tree limbs or branches, weeds and all other scraps of similar nature.



   LITTER. Encompasses the definitions of GARBAGE, REFUSE and/or RUBBISH,
as described herein, and all other waste material which, if thrown or
deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health,
safety and welfare.



   PRIVATE PREMISES. Any dwelling, house, building or other structure,
designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purpose,
whether indicated or temporarily or continuously inhabited or vacant, and
shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or
mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other
structure.



   PUBLIC PLACE. Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or
other public ways and any and all public park, squares, spaces, grounds and
buildings.



   REFUSE. All putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes.



   RUBBISH. All non-putrescible solid wastes consisting of both
combustible and non-combustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cardboard,
tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar
materials.



(Prior Code, § 6-9.01)  (Ord. 495, passed - -)



§ 130.16  LITTER IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   (A)   No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street,
sidewalk, park, lake, fountain, stream or other body of water, or any public
place within the city, except in public receptacles, in authorized private
receptacles for collection, or in official city dumps.



   (B)   No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or
other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any
building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway.



   (C)   Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk
in front of their premises free of litter.



(Prior Code, § 6-9.02)  (Ord. 495, passed - -)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.17  LITTER ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied or
vacant private property within the city, whether owned by such person or not;
except that, the owner or person in control of private property may maintain
authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter
will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any
street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property.



   (B)   The owner or person in control of private property shall at
all times maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that, this
subchapter shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized receptacles
for collection.



(Prior Code, § 6-9.03)  (Ord. 495, passed - -)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.18  PLACEMENT OF LITTER IN RECEPTACLES.



   Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place
or upon private property.



(Prior Code, § 6-9.04)  (Ord. 495, passed - -)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.19  VEHICLES CAUSING LITTER.



   No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the
city unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load,
contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or
other public place; nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck
within the city, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any
street, alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or
foreign matter of any kind.



(Prior Code, § 6-9.05)  (Ord. 495, passed - -)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.20  ABATEMENT BY CITY.



   (A)   Notice to remove. The City Manager and/or his or her
authorized agent is hereby authorized and empowered to notify the owner of
any open or vacant private property within the city, or the agent of such
owner, to properly dispose of litter located on such owner’s property which
is dangerous to public health, safety or welfare. Such notice shall be by
registered mail addressed to said owner at his or her last known address.



   (B)   Action upon non-compliance. Upon the failure, neglect or
refusal of any owner or agent so notified, to properly dispose of litter
dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare within ten days after the
receipt of written notice provided for above, or within ten days after the
date of such notice, in the event the same is returned to the city’s Post
Office because of its inability to make delivery thereof; provided, the same
was properly addressed to the last known address of such owner, or agent, the
City Manager or his or her authorized agent is hereby empowered to pay for
the disposing of such litter or to order its disposal by the city.



   (C)   Charge to owner. When the city has effected the removal of
such dangerous litter or has paid for its removal, the actual costs thereof,
plus accrued interest at the rate of 9% per annum from the date of the
completion of the work, if not paid by such owner prior thereto, shall be
charged to the owner of such property.



   (D)   Recorded statement constitutes lien. Where the full amount due
the city is not paid by such owner within ten days after the disposal of such
litter, as provided for above, then, and in that case, the City Manager or
his or her authorized agent shall cause to be recorded in the official
records of the County Recorder’s office in Flagstaff a sworn statement
showing the cost and expense incurred for the work, the date the work was
done and the location of the property on which said work was done. The
recordation of such sworn statement shall constitute a lien on the property
and shall remain in full force and effect for the amount due in principal and
interest, plus costs of Court, if any, for collection, until final payment
has been made. Said costs and expenses shall be collected in the manner fixed
by law and shall be further subject to a delinquent penalty of 12% in the
event same is not paid in full within 30 days from the date of billing. Sworn
statements recorded in accordance with the provisions shall be prima facie
evidence that all legal formalities have been complied with and that the work
has been done properly and satisfactorily and shall be full notice to every
person concerned that the amount of the statement, plus interest, constitutes
a charge against the property designated or described in the statement and
that the same is due and collectible as provided by law.



(Prior Code, § 6-9.06)  (Ord. 495, passed - -)




NOISE




§ 130.35  NOISE CURFEW.



   (A)   It shall be a violation of this subchapter to knowingly or
recklessly create a sound that is clearly audible to a person with normal
hearing from any place other than the premises from which the source of the
sound is located, when the sound occurs between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m. in areas zoned for commercial and mixed use, and 10:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m. in areas zone for primarily residential use.



   (B)   Between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m., it shall be
unlawful for any person, without justification to knowingly make or continue,
or cause or permit to be made or continued, any unnecessary, excessive or
offensive noise, which disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or
which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal
sensitiveness residing in the area.



   (C)   The factors which will be considered in determining whether a
violation of the provisions of this subchapter exists will include, but not
be limited to, the following:



      (1)   The volume of the noise as compared to the volume of
background noise;



      (2)   Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;



      (3)   The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise
emanates;



      (4)   The time of day or night the noise occurs;



      (5)   The duration of the noise; and



      (6)   Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant.



   (D)   In addition to the foregoing, the following acts are
violations of this subchapter.



      (1)   It shall be a violation of this subchapter to play, use
or operate or allow to be played, used, or operated in any motor vehicle any
radio, television, digital media player, loudspeaker, sound amplifier,
musical instrument or any other machine or device for producing or
reproducing sound at a volume that is louder than necessary for the
convenient hearing of persons who are inside the vehicle within which such
sound is played, used or operated. Sound that is clearly audible 30 feet or
more from the vehicle is prima facie evidence of a violation of this
subchapter.



      (2)   It shall be a violation of this subchapter to play, use,
operate or allowed to be played, used or operated any radio television,
digital media player, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, musical instrument or any
other machine or device for producing or reproducing sound in such a manner
that the sound produced persists continuously or intermittently for a period
of at least 15 minutes and can be heard outside the immediate premises from
the location of the emitter by a person with normal hearing.



(Ord. 921, passed 7-8-2011)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.36  EXEMPTIONS.



   The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the provisions
of this subchapter:



   (A)   Non-amplified crowd noises resulting from legal activities,
between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. in areas zoned for primarily
residential use and the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. in areas zoned for
commercial or mixed use;



   (B)   Construction operations for which building permits have been
issued or construction operations for which a permit is not required, when
the construction operations occur between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., except on
Sundays and holidays. In order to be exempt, all equipment used in such
operations shall be operating with the manufacturer’s mufflers and noise
reducing equipment in use and in proper operating conditions;



   (C)   Construction operations or other work occurring at any time
when the work is necessary to restore property to a safe condition following
a public calamity or work required to protect persons or property from an
imminent exposure to danger, or work by private or public utilities when
restoring utility service;



   (D)   Noises of safety signals, warning devices and emergency
pressure relief valves;



   (E)   Noises resulting from any authorized emergency, fire or police
vehicle when responding to an emergency call, acting in time of emergency or
in connection with official Police or Fire Department business;



   (F)   Any aircraft operated in conformity with, or pursuant to,
federal law, federal air regulations and air traffic control and instructions
and pursuant to and within the duly adopted federal air regulations. Any
aircraft operating under technical difficulties in any kind of distress,
under emergency orders of air traffic control, or being operated pursuant to
and subsequent to the declaration of an emergency under federal air
regulations;



   (G)   All noises resulting from normal operations of railroad trains;



   (H)   Noises resulting from security alarms or other warning devices
when properly installed; providing, the cause for such alarm or warning
device sound is investigated and turned off within a reasonable period of
time;



   (I)   Noises resulting from municipal operations, including, but not
limited to, street sweeping, snow plowing and trash collection, utilizing any
mechanical equipment; and



   (J)   Any other noise resulting from activities of a temporary
duration permitted by law and for which a permit has been granted by the city
in accordance with § 130.37 of this chapter. Regulation of noises emanating
from operations under permit shall be according to the conditions and limits
stated in the permit.



(Ord. 921, passed 7-8-2011)



§ 130.37  SPECIAL PERMITS.



   Applications for a permit for relief from the regulations contained in
this subchapter shall be made in writing to the City Clerk. Any permit
granted by the City Council or its designee must be in writing and shall
contain all conditions upon which said permit shall be effective. The City
Council may prescribe any reasonable conditions or requirements it deems
necessary to minimize adverse effects upon the community or the surrounding
neighborhood.



(Ord. 921, passed 7-8-2011)



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   (1)   Any minor who shall violate the provisions of §
130.04 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and proceedings shall
be taken in accordance with and pursuant to A.R.S. §§ 8-201 et seq.



      (2)   Any person over the age of 18 years who is convicted of
a violation of § 130.04(B) of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class 1
misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 6-6.01)



   (C)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§ 130.15
through 130.20 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a Class 3
misdemeanor. Each day of such violation is committed or permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.



(Prior Code, § 6-9.01)



   (D)   (1)   Any person charged with violating the provisions of
§§ 130.35 through 130.37 of this chapter may, in the discretion of the
enforcement officer, be issued an official warning. If an official warning is
issued, it shall be considered as affording the violator one opportunity to
comply with §§ 130.35 through 130.37 of this chapter.



      (2)   Any violation of §§ 130.35 through 130.37 of this
chapter shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not
more than $2,500, or by six months in jail, or both.



(Ord. 495, passed - -; Ord. 738, passed - -1995; Ord. 921, passed 7-8-2011)



TITLE XV: LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION



      151.   DANGEROUS BUILDINGS



      152.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY



      153.   TREES AND SHRUBBERY



      154.   DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURES



      155.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION



      156.   AIRPORT



      157.   SUBDIVISIONS



      158.   ZONING



CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION



Section




General Provisions




   150.01   Adoption of codes



   150.02   Fences and address numbers




Fire Protection




   150.15   Purpose and policy



   150.16   Definitions



   150.17   Defensible space



 



   150.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 150.01  ADOPTION OF CODES.



   The following international codes are hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated herein as if set out in full:



   (A)   Adoption of International Building Code, 2015 Edition, and
amendments to the International Building Code, 2015 Edition;



   (B)   Adoption of the International Residential Code, 2015 Edition,
and amendments to the International Residential Code, 2015 Edition;



   (C)   Adoption of the International Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition,
and amendments to the International Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition;



   (D)   Adoption of the International Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition, and
amendments to the International Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition;



   (E)   Adoption of the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, and
amendments to the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition;



   (F)   Adoption of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 Edition, and
amendments to the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 Edition;



   (G)   Adoption of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2015
Edition, and amendments to the International Property Maintenance Code, 2015
Edition;



   (H)   Adoption of the International Existing Building Code, 2015
Edition, and amendments to the International Existing Building Code, 2015
Edition; and



   (I)   Adoption of the National Electric Code, 2014 Edition, and
amendments to the National Electric Code, 2014 Edition.



(Prior Code, Ch. 7-1)  (Ord. 956, passed 10-27-2016; Ord. 962, passed
5-24-2018)



§ 150.02  FENCES AND ADDRESS NUMBERS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain an
electric fence or any fence constructed in whole or in part of barbed wire,
or to use barbed wire as a guard to any parking lot or parcel of land within
the city limits.



(Prior Code, § 7-3.01)



   (B)   It shall be the duty of every person owning or controlling any
building or house (routing on or toward any public street or avenue in the
city limits to number the same, to cause the same to be numbered correctly
and in accordance with this section, and it shall be the duty of any of the
persons above mentioned or referred to owning or controlling any building
hereafter erected within the city limits, and fronting as herein mentioned,
to so number the same within 20 days after its completion or occupancy.



      (1)   Numbering. The starting or initial point for the so
numbering of buildings shall be the intersection of First Street and Bill
Williams Avenue, and all numbers shall commence at said point, and be
numbered, commencing with Number One and run thence northerly and southerly
along said First Street, and easterly and westerly along said Bill Williams
Avenue, to the limits of the city, with the odd numbers on the one side and
the even numbers upon the opposite side of all streets and avenues in the
city. All numbering shall be done with figures, in a good and plain
attractive appearance, and not to be less than three inches in length, and
placed in a conspicuous location.



      (2)   Incorrect numbering. In case any building shall be
numbered incorrectly, or numbered and the number thereof be defaced or
illegible, it shall be the duty of the owner or person, owning or controlling
the same, to do, or to cause the same to be numbered correctly, or a new
number placed properly thereon, as the case may be, within ten days after
notification thereof so to do, given by or under the direction of the City
Clerk.



      (3)   Notice. Such notice, heretofore mentioned, may be served
by delivering a copy thereof to the owner or person controlling such building
and addressed to the said owner or person controlling such building, giving
such description thereof as will serve to identify the same; but, in case the
owner or person controlling such building is not within the city limits, or
cannot be found therein, then in such case such notice shall be given by
posting a copy of such notice on the door or entrance way to such building on
which the same is posted has been correctly and properly numbered and, the
date of notice shall commence with the first date of such notice and the said
ten days of notice then commences to run.



(Prior Code, § 7-3.02)



(Ord. 125, passed 8-8-1924)  Penalty, see § 150.99




FIRE PROTECTION




§ 150.15  PURPOSE AND POLICY.



   The objective of this subchapter is to establish minimum requirements
to mitigate the risk of life and property from wild land fire exposures, fire
exposures from adjacent structures and to mitigate structure fires from
spreading to adjacent wild lands. This objective will be accomplished through
establishing a “defensible space” around proposed structures within the
city based on a calculated fire hazard rating.



(Prior Code, § 7-4.01)  (Ord. 843, passed - -2005)



§ 150.16  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY PROPERTY. Any property owned in fee by the city or any easements,
rights-of-way or other similar interests of the city in property.



   DEVELOPER. Any person who intends to develop any large tract of
property inside the city.



   DEVELOPMENT REVIEW TEAM. The city’s Development Review Team or its
successor.



   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, partnership, firm or their legal
entity, including the city.



   PLANNING DIRECTOR. The Planning Director of the city or his or her
designee.



   PROPERTY. Any land or area within the corporate limits of the city
which is subject to its regulatory authority.



   REMOVAL. Elimination, movement or taking away of any tree from its
present location.



   SHRUB. A woody perennial plant smaller than a tree, usually having
permanent stems branching from or near the ground.



   SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE. Any property located in a zone for
which the principal use is detached single-family residential. Typically,
this means the R1-7, RR, AR, ER and RMH Zones as shown on the city’s Zoning
Map.



   TREE.



      (1)   A woody perennial plant which has a trunk circumference
of 20 inches measured at 24 inches above the ground;



      (2)   A woody perennial plant at least 15 feet in height which
usually, but not necessarily, has a single trunk; or



      (3)   References to TREE shall include the plural. The
Planning Director or his or her designee shall have reasonable discretion to
distinguish between a TREE and a “shrub” within the confines of the
definitions found in this subchapter.



   TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE. A properly located in a zone for which,
the principal use is two-family or duplex residential. Typically, this means
the R-2 Zone as shown on the city’s Zoning Map.



   UNDESIRABLE TREE. Any tree species that is deemed to have or is proven
to have a negative environmental impact on the community.



   UNDEVELOPED PROPERTY. Any property which:



      (1)   Is not improved with a primary building (for example, a
dwelling unit or place of business); or



      (2)   Is improved with a primary building, but is of
sufficient land area that it could be subdivided. Subdivision potential shall
be based upon the minimum lot area requirement for the zone in which the
property is located. (Refer to the city’s Zoning Ordinance for minimum lot
areas in each zone.)



(Prior Code, § 7-4.02)  (Ord. 843, passed - -2005)



§ 150.17  DEFENSIBLE SPACE.



   (A)   Objective. Provisions of this section are intended to modify
the fuel load in areas adjacent to structures to create a defensible space
for unimproved properties. “Defensible space” and “fuel modification”
requirements shall be determined during the building permit process or during
the design review stage in the case of a new subdivision requiring a
Department Review Team approval.



   (B)   Fuel modifications.



      (1)   Fuel modifications shall be made in accordance with the
fire hazard rating form to provide a defensible space within property
boundaries a minimum distance of 60 feet from buildings or structures and
shall be measured along the grade from the perimeter or projection of the
building or structure. Persons owning, leasing, controlling, operating or
maintaining buildings or structures which exhibit a fire hazard rating of
high or extreme will require a defensible space around their structures and
are responsible for modifying or removing non-fire-resistive vegetation and
trees on the property owned, leased or controlled by said person. In new
subdivision developments, the developer or his or her agent(s) will remove
all three-inch diameter trees and slash from the property by approved means.
The individual lot owners will be required to submit a plot plan showing a
tree removal plan to meet the fuel management standards before a permit to
build will be issued. The work must be complete before a certificate of
occupancy will be issued.



      (2)   Ornamental vegetative fuels or cultivated ground cover,
such as green grass, ivy, succulents or similar plants used as ground cover,
are allowed to be within the designated defensible space; provided, they do
not form a means of readily transmitting fire from the native growth to any
structure.



      (3)   Trees are allowed within the defensible space provided
the horizontal distance between crowns of adjacent trees (or clumps of trees)
and the crowns of trees (or clumps of trees) and structures, overhead
electrical facilities or unmodified fuel is not less than the required fuel
management standards. Trees allowed within the defensible space that have
overhanging limbs and deadwood shall be trimmed and maintained to a vertical
distance of 15 feet from any adjacent structures or building roofs. The roofs
of structures and buildings shall be kept free of leaves, needles or other
dead vegetative growth.



   (C)   Corrective action. The City Council and its agents are
authorized to give notice to the owner of the property within the city, upon
which conditions exist that are not in compliance with the above listed fuel
modifications, to correct such conditions. Abatement and control priorities
shall be based on the property’s fire hazard rating and will be enforced as
follows:



      (1)   All properties bordering to federal government lands;



      (2)   All properties found to be over 75 on the fire hazard
rating;



      (3)   All properties found to be over 60 on the fire hazard
rating; and



      (4)   All other properties. If the owner fails to correct such
conditions, the City Council and its agents are authorized to cause the same
conditions to be corrected and make the expense of such correction a lien
upon the property where such condition exists.



   (D)   Appeal. The decision of the Building Official may be appealed
to the Department Review Team. A written appeal must be filed with the
Planning Director within ten days of the decision.



      (1)   No permit granted under the provisions of this chapter
shall be effective until expiration of ten days following the granting of
such permit. If an appeal is filed, action under any permit shall be
suspended pending the outcome of the appeal.



      (2)   The Department Review Team shall hear the appeal within
30 days of its filing. Notice of the time and place of the appeal hearing
shall be given to the applicant, appellant and other persons as deemed
appropriate by the Planning Director. The Department Review Team may affirm,
reverse or modify the decision of the Building Official. The decision of the
Department Review team shall be final.



(Prior Code, § 7-4.03)  (Ord. 843, passed - -2005)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   (1)   Planting or refusing to remove a tree in violation of
§§ 150.15 through 150.17 of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance and the Code Enforcement Officer, shall initiate the necessary
proceedings for abatement of the nuisance in a manner approved by civil law.



      (2)   Any person who maintains a tree in violation of §§
150.15 through 150.17 of this chapter or who violates the conditions of any
permit granted under this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000 for each
violation. Each tree maintained in violation of §§ 150.15 through 150.17 of
this chapter shall be considered a separate violation.



(Prior Code, § 7-4.04)  (Ord. 843, passed - -2005)



CHAPTER 151:  DANGEROUS BUILDINGS



Section




General Provisions




   151.01   Purpose and scope



   151.02   Alterations, additions and repairs



   151.03   Definitions



   151.04   Severability



   151.05   Slum property



   151.06   Conflict of ordinances




Administration and Enforcement




   151.20   Authority



   151.21   Inspections



   151.22   Abatement



   151.23   Violations



   151.24   Abatement by city



   151.25   Appeals




Notices and Orders of Building Official




   151.40   Commencement of proceedings to order repair, demolition or
vacation



   151.41   Notice and order



   151.42   Service of notice and order; method; proof



   151.43   Recordation



   151.44   Repair, vacation and demolition



   151.45   Notice to vacate



 



   151.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Building Regulations; Construction, see Ch. 150



   Development Procedures, see Ch. 154



   Housing Authority, see § 32.05



   Zoning, see Ch. 158




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 151.01  PURPOSE AND SCOPE.



   (A)   These regulations are adopted from the 1997 Edition of the
Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, §§ 102 through
401.2. Any centered, subject headings are for the assistance of any person
reading this chapter. The headings are not intended to be substantive pails
of this chapter.



   (B)   (1)   It is the purpose of this chapter to provide just,
equitable and practicable method to be cumulative with and in addition to any
other remedy provided by the Building Code, Housing Code or otherwise
available by law, whereby buildings or structures which from any cause
endanger the life, limb, health, morals, property, safety or welfare of the
general public or their occupants may be required to be repaired, vacated or
demolished.



      (2)   The purpose of this chapter is not to create or
otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who
will or should be especially protected or benefitted by the terms of this
chapter.



   (C)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all dangerous
buildings, as herein defined, which are now in existence or which may
hereafter become dangerous in this jurisdiction.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.01)  (Ord. 791, passed - -1999)



§ 151.02  ALTERATIONS, ADDITIONS AND REPAIRS.



   All buildings or structures which are required to be repaired under the
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of § 3403 of
the Building Code.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.02)  (Ord. 791, passed - -1999)



§ 151.03  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General. Words used in the singular include the plural and the
plural the singular. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine
and the feminine the masculine. For the purpose of this chapter, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



      BUILDING CODE. The Uniform Building Code promulgated by the
International Conference of Building officials, as currently adopted by this
jurisdiction.



      DANGEROUS BUILDING. Any building or structure deemed to be
dangerous under the provisions of § 302 of the Building Code.



      HOUSING CODE. The Uniform Housing Code promulgated by the
International Conference of Building Officials, as currently adopted by this
jurisdiction.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.08)



   (B)   Dangerous building factors. For the purpose of this chapter,
any building or structure which has any or all of the conditions or defects
hereinafter described shall be deemed to be a DANGEROUS BUILDING; provided
that, such conditions or defects exist to the extent that the life, health,
property or safety of the public or its occupants are endangered:



      (1)   Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other
means of exit is not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to
provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic;



      (2)   Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway,
stairway or other means or exit is so warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise
unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or
panic;



      (3)   Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion
thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one half times
the working stress or stresses allowed in the Building Code for new buildings
of similar structure, purpose or location;



      (4)   Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire,
earthquake, wind, flood or by any other cause, to such an extent that the
structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was
before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the
Building Code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location;



      (5)   Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof
is likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and
thereby injure persons or damage property;



      (6)   Whenever any portion of a building, or any member,
appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient
strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place
so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half of that
specified in the Building Code for new buildings of similar structure,
purpose or location without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the
Building Code for such buildings;



      (7)   Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped,
buckled or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions
have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in
the case of similar new construction;



      (8)   Whenever the building or structure, or any portion
thereof, because of:



         (a)   Dilapidation, deterioration or decay;



         (b)   Faulty construction;



         (c)   The removal, movement or instability of any
portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building;



         (d)   The deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its
foundation; or



         (e)   Any other cause, is likely to partially or
completely collapse.



      (9)   Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or
any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is
being used;



      (10)   Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical
structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line
passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one
third of the base;



      (11)   Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the
foundation, shows 33% or more damage or deterioration of its supporting
member or members, or 50% damage or deterioration of its non-supporting
members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings;



      (12)   Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged
by fire, wind, earthquake or flood or has become so dilapidated or
deteriorated as to become:



         (a)   An attractive nuisance to children;



         (b)   A harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral
persons; or as to



         (c)   Enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose
of committing unlawful or immoral acts.



      (13)   Whenever any building or structure has been
constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement
or prohibition applicable to such building or structure provided by the
building regulations of this jurisdiction, as specified in the Building Code
or Housing Code, or of any law or ordinance of the state or jurisdiction
relating to the condition, location or structure of buildings;



      (14)   Whenever any building or structure which, whether or
not erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any
non-supporting part, member or portion less than 50%, or in any supporting
part, member or portion less than 66% of the strength, fire-resisting
qualities or characteristics or weather-resisting qualities or
characteristics required by law in the case of a newly constructed building
of like area, height and occupancy in the same location;



      (15)   Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to
be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate
light, air or sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the
Health Officer to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a
condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease;



      (16)   Whenever any building or structure, because of
obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits,
lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas
connections or heating apparatus or other cause, is determined by the Fire
Chief to be a fire hazard;



      (17)   Whenever any building or structure is in such a
condition as to constitute a public nuisance known to the common law or in
equity jurisprudence; and



      (18)   Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains
on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or
whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six
months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive
nuisance or hazard to the public.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.09)



(Ord. 791, passed - -1999)



§ 151.04  SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, division, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter
should be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not
affect the remaining portions of this chapter, which shall remain in full
force and effect; and, to this end, the provisions of this chapter are hereby
declared to be severable.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.44)  (Ord. 791, passed - -1999)



§ 151.05  SLUM PROPERTY.



   (A)   Pursuant to 1999 Laws, Ch. 4 (to be codified by the Arizona
Legislature at A.R.S. § 33-1901(3)), property constitutes “slum
property” whenever any “residential rental property” has deteriorated
or is in a state of disrepair and that manifests one or more of the following
conditions that are a danger to the health or safety of the public:



      (1)   Structurally unsound exterior surfaces, roof, walls,
doors, floors, stairwells, porches or railings;



      (2)   Lack of potable water, adequate sanitation facilities,
adequate water or waste pipe connections;



      (3)   Hazardous electrical systems or gas connections;



      (4)   Lack of safe, rapid egress; and



      (5)   Accumulation of human or animal waste, medical or
biological waste, gaseous or combustible materials, dangerous or corrosive
liquids, flammable or explosive materials or drug paraphernalia.



   (B)   The phrase RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY is defined in the city
code as it has been defined by the Arizona Legislature in 1999 Laws, Ch. 4
(to be codified at A.R.S. § 33-1901(2)) as “property that is used solely
as leased or rented property for residential purposes. If the property is a
space rental mobile home park or a recreational vehicle park, RESIDENTIAL
RENTAL PROPERTY includes the rental space, but does not include the mobile
home or recreational vehicle that serves as the actual dwelling if the
dwelling is owned and occupied by the tenant of the rental space and not by
the owner of the rental space.



   (C)   The City Manager, Building Official and Fire Chief and/or
their authorized representatives are authorized to designate property as a
“slum property”. These individuals will designate property as “slum
property” by use of the notice provisions of § 151.41 of this chapter. The
notice will be served in accordance with the provisions of § 151.42 of this
chapter.



   (D)   (1)   State law provides that a property owner is entitled
to an administrative appeal of the designation of property as a “slum
property”.



      (2)   All appeals of the designation of property as a “slum
property” shall be made in accordance with provisions set forth in §
151.25(A) and (C) of this chapter.



      (3)   The matter on appeal will be whether the property
qualifies as a “slum property” as that phrase has been defined by the
state’s Legislature and in this code of ordinances or may be further
defined by the state courts interpreting the statute.



   (E)   The procedure on appeal will be the same procedure as is set
forth in § 151.25(C) of this chapter.



   (F)   Pursuant to 1999 Laws, Ch. 4 (to be codified at A.R.S. §
33-1905), “there shall be no further appeals from the decision” of the
City Council on whether property constitutes “slum property”.



   (G)   The provisions of this section shall become effective on the
date and time that 1999 Laws, Ch. 4 becomes effective.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.45)  (Ord. 791, passed - -1999)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.06  CONFLICT OF ORDINANCES.



   (A)   In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be
in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health
ordinance or other provision in this city code, the provision which
establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the
health and safety of the people shall prevail.



   (B)   It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul
or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or
ordinances, except those specifically repealed by this chapter, or with
private restrictions placed upon the property by covenant, deed or other
private agreement.



   (C)   In cases where two or more provisions of this chapter are in
conflict, the most stringent or restrictive shall prevail.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.43)  (Ord. 791, passed - -1999)




ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT




§ 151.20  AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The City Manager, Building Official and Fire Chief and/or
their authorized representatives are hereby authorized to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   The city shall have the power to render interpretations of
this chapter and to adopt and enforce rules and supplemental regulations in
order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations,
rules and regulations shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of
this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.03)  (Ord. 791, passed - -1999)



§ 151.21  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   (1)   The City Manager, the Fire Chief, the Building
Official and/or their authorized representatives are hereby authorized to
make such inspections and take such actions as may be required to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.



      (2)   When it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce
the provisions of this chapter, or when the Building Official or the Building
Official’s authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that
there exists in a building or upon a premises a condition which is contrary
to or in violation of this chapter which makes the building or premises
unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the Building Official may enter the building
or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed
by this chapter; provided that, if such building or premises be occupied that
credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such
building or premises be unoccupied, the Building Official shall first make a
reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or
control of the building or premises and request entry. If entry is refused,
the Building Official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to
secure entry. AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE shall include the officers named in
division (A)(1) above and their authorized inspection personnel.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.04)



   (B)   All buildings or structures within the scope of this chapter
and all construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject
to inspection by the Building Official in accordance with and in the manner
provided by this chapter and §§ 108 and 1701 of the Building Code.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.07)



(Ord. 791, passed - -1999)



§ 151.22  ABATEMENT.



   All buildings or portions thereof which are determined after inspection
by the Building Official to be dangerous, as defined in this chapter, are
hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair,
rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the procedure
specified in §§ 151.40, 151.41 and 151.42(A) and (B) of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.05)  (Ord. 791, passed - -1999)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.23  VIOLATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect,
construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or
demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or cause
or permit the same to be done in violation of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.06)  (Ord. 791, passed - -1999)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.24  ABATEMENT BY CITY.



   (A)   If the property owner, occupant, lessee or other person served
with a notice pursuant to this chapter fails to comply with such notice or
order, the city may correct or abate the conditions subject to the notice,
including the right to demolish the dangerous building if the cost to the
city to repair the building exceeds the cost to demolish the dangerous
building.



   (B)   If the city reserves the right to abate the nuisance itself,
it shall include in the notice issued under §§ 151.40 and 151.41 of this
chapter, the costs to the city of repair or demolition if the owner or lessee
does not comply with the notice.



   (C)   In the event the city corrects or abates a violation of this
chapter, the city shall prepare a verified statement and account of the
actual cost of such removal or abatement, including the cost of labor and
expenses incurred by the city, any associated legal costs for abatement and
injunctions, as well as an additional 5% for inspection and other incidental
costs in connection with such correction or abatement. The statement of
abatement costs shall be delivered or mailed, certified mail return receipt
requested, to the owner(s), occupants, lessees or other person(s) upon whom
the city served the notice or order. That statement shall further set forth
the following:



      (1)   The statement of costs is an assessment upon the lots
and tracts of land from which the city corrected or abated the violation;



      (2)   The assessment shall be payable in equal annual
installments from the date the assessment is recorded and according to the
following schedule:



 


Less than $500

 
Within one year after assessment recorded



$500 - $1,000

 
Within two years after assessment recorded



$1,000 - $5,000

 
Within three years after assessment recorded



$5,000 - $10,000

 
Within six years after assessment recorded



Over $10,000

 
Within ten years after assessment recorded



 



      (3)   The right to appeal the amount of the costs.



   (D)   The city shall prepare the verified statement and account
within 45 days from the last day in which the city performed any work on the
property. The verified statement and account shall be an assessment on the
property.



   (E)   The assessment shall be recorded in the office of the County
Recorder and, from the date of its recording, shall be a lien on the lot or
tract of land. Such lien is prior to and superior to all other liens,
obligations, mortgages or other encumbrances, except liens for general taxes.



   (F)   If, at any time, payments are not made in a timely manner, the
city may file an action for judgment on foreclosure and order of sale in
Superior Court for both the amount past due as well as the entire,
outstanding amount of the lien. The failure to enforce the lien or the
foregoing payment schedule shall not affect either the validity of the lien
or the right to receive payments.



   (G)   The recorded assessment shall be prima facie evidence of the
truth of all matters recited therein and of the regularity of all proceedings
prior to the recording thereof.



   (H)   A prior assessment pursuant to this section shall not be a bar
to a subsequent assessment and any number of liens on the same lot or tract
of land may be enforced in the same action.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.18)  (Ord. 791, passed - -1999)



§ 151.25  APPEALS.



   (A)   Appeals to City Council.



      (1)   Any notice or assessment may be appealed to the City
Council.



      (2)   An appeal must be filed within 15 days of the service of
the notice to abate or assessment, and must be filed with the City Clerk’s
office.



      (3)   Failure of a person entitled to appeal under this
chapter to timely file an appeal shall constitute a waiver of the right to a
hearing of the complaint and such person shall be estopped to deny the
validity of any notice or assessment which could have been timely appealed.



      (4)   The notice of appeal shall set forth, in writing, the
person’s reasons for believing they are not in violation of the chapter or
that the assessment is excessive.



      (5)   The individual appealing shall accompany the written
appeal with an appeal fee of $25, such sum to be deposited in the General
Fund of the city.



      (6)   In case of financial hardship, the fee may be suspended.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.19)



   (B)   Matters on appeal. Any person may appeal a notice to abate or
assessment:



      (1)   When it is claimed the property or building subject to
the notice is not in violation of this chapter;



      (2)   When it is claimed the true intent of the chapter or
standards described in the chapter have been incorrectly interpreted; or



      (3)   When it is claimed that the city’s costs for
correcting or abating the violation are excessive.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.20)



   (C)   Procedure on appeal.



      (1)   The City Council shall set a date for hearing on appeal
within 30 days of the receipt of notice of appeal by the City Clerk. The
notice to appellant shall be substantially in the following form, but may
include other information:



 


You are hereby notified that a hearing will be held before the City of
Williams City Council at on the                 day of          
                , 20        , at the hour                
, upon the notice and order served upon you. You may be present at the
hearing. You may be, but need not be, represented by counsel. You may present
any relevant evidence and will be given full opportunity to cross-examine all
witnesses testifying against you.




 



      (2)   A record of the entire proceedings shall be made by tape
recording or by any other means of permanent recording determined to be
appropriate by the Council. The proceedings at the hearing may also be
reported by a certified court reporter if requested by appellant and paid for
by appellant. If the appellant retains the services of a court reporter, a
copy of the transcript shall be made available to the city, if requested,
upon payment of the court reporter’s fee for a copy of the transcript.



      (3)   The Council shall take testimony from all parties to the
appeal. The City Council has the power to administer oaths and affirmations
and to certify to official acts.



      (4)   Each party shall have these rights, among others:



         (a)   To call and examine witnesses on any matter
relevant to the issues of the hearing;



         (b)   To introduce documentary and physical evidence;



         (c)   To cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter
relevant to the issues of the hearing;



         (d)   To impeach any witness regardless of which party
first called the witness to testify;



         (e)   To rebut the evidence; and



         (f)   To be represented by anyone who is lawfully
permitted to do so in the state.



      (5)   (a)   The City Council may inspect any building or
premises involved in the appeal as part of the hearing; provided that:



            1.   Notice of such inspection shall be given to
the parties before the inspection is made;



            2.   The parties are given an opportunity to be
present during the inspection; and



            3.   The City Council shall state for the record
upon completion of the inspection the material facts observed and the
conclusions drawn therefrom.



         (b)   Each party then shall have a right to rebut or
explain the matters so stated by the City Council.



      (6)   The Council shall prepare a written summary of the
hearing and shall set forth the decision reached. A decision shall be
rendered within 15 days of the hearing, and the findings and decision shall
be mailed to all parties to the appeal.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.21)



   (D)   Abatement variances and time extensions.



      (1)   Any person may request a variance or time extension of a
notice or assessment. Such request shall be made to the City Council.



      (2)   The same time limits for filing, fees and written
requirement that appear in divisions (A) and (B) above on appeal apply to
this subchapter.



      (3)   The procedure shall be the same as set forth in division
(C) above.



      (4)   Where the Council grants a variance, it shall set forth
its reasons for granting the variance and the extent of the variance.



      (5)   The Council may grant a variance only where it is
determined that all of the following apply:



         (a)   Special circumstances or conditions apply to this
appeal application such as hardship;



         (b)   Authorizing of the variance is necessary for the
preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights; and



         (c)   Authorizing of the variance will not be materially
detrimental to persons residing or working in the vicinity, to adjacent
property or adjacent property values, to the neighborhood or to the public
welfare in general.



      (6)   The Council may grant one extension of the time limit
set forth in § 151.41 of this chapter. Such extension shall not exceed 180
days. The extension period granted by the Council starts to run on the day
the Council issues its decision pursuant to this division (D)(6). The Council
may grant an extension only where it is shown that:



         (a)   It would create a hardship to bring the property
into compliance within the 30-day period of § 151.41 of this chapter; and



         (b)   The moving party presents a plan, that is approved
by the Council by which the property will be brought into compliance within
180 days.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.22)



   (E)   Appeal from decision of Council. Any party aggrieved by a
decision of the Council may appeal to the county’s Superior Court in
accordance with the rules of procedure for special actions.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.23)



   (F)   Stay of order during appeal to Council. Except for orders to
vacate or violations presenting an imminent hazard, the timely filing of an
appeal shall stay enforcement of a notice to abate or assessment until the
appeal is finally determined by the Council.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.24)



(Ord. 791, passed - -1999)




NOTICES AND ORDERS OF BUILDING OFFICIAL




§ 151.40  COMMENCEMENT OF PROCEEDINGS TO ORDER REPAIR, DEMOLITION OR
VACATION.



   When the Building Official has inspected or caused to be inspected any
building and has found and determined that such building is a dangerous
building, the Building Official shall commence proceedings to cause the
repair, vacation or demolition of the building.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.10)  (Ord. 791, passed - -1999)



§ 151.41  NOTICE AND ORDER.



   (A)   The Building Official shall issue a notice and order directed
to the owner, owner’s agent, lessee or occupant of the building.



   (B)   The notice and order shall contain:



      (1)   The street address and a legal description of the
premises upon which the building is located;



      (2)   A statement that the Building Official, Fire Chief or
their authorized representatives have found the building to be dangerous with
a brief and concise description of the conditions found to render the
building dangerous under the provisions of § 151.03(B) of this chapter; and



      (3)   A statement of the action required to be taken as
determined by the Building Official:



         (a)   If the Building Official has determined that the
building or structure must be repaired, the order shall require that all
required permits be secured therefor and the work physically commenced within
such time (at least 30 days from the date of the notice and not to exceed 60
days from the date of the order) and completed within such time as the
Building Official shall determine is reasonable under all of the
circumstances;



         (b)   If the Building Official has determined that the
building or structure must be vacated, the order shall require that the
building or structure shall be vacated within a time certain from the date of
the order as determined by the Building Official to be reasonable;



         (c)   If the Building official has determined that the
building or structure must be demolished, the order shall require that the
building be vacated within such time as the Building Official shall determine
is reasonable (at least 30 days from the date of the notice and not to exceed
60 days from the date of the order); that all required permits be secured
therefor within 30 to 60 days from the date of the order; and that the
demolition be completed within such time as the Building Official shall
determine is reasonable;



         (d)   A date and time for re-inspection of the property;



         (e)   Statements advising that if any required repair or
demolition work (without vacation also being required) is not commenced
within the time specified, the Building Official will order the building
vacated and posted to prevent further occupancy until the work is completed
and may proceed to cause the work to be done (abate the problem) and assess
the owner the cost of such abatement and record a lien on the property for
the assessment. If the city reserves the right to abate the dangerous
building, the notice must also comply with the provisions of § 151.24 of
this chapter; and



         (f)   Statements advising:



            1.   Any person having any record title or legal
interest in the building may appeal from the notice and order or any action
of the Building Official to the City Council; provided, the appeal is made in
writing as provided in this chapter and filed with the Building Official
within 15 days from the date of service of such notice and order; and



            2.   Failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of
all right to an administrative hearing and determination of the matter.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.11)  (Ord. 791, passed - -1999)



§ 151.42  SERVICE OF NOTICE AND ORDER; METHOD; PROOF.



   (A)   The notice and order, and any amended or supplemental notice
and order, shall be served upon the record owner and posted on the property;
and one copy thereof shall be served on each of the following, if known, to
the Building Official or disclosed from official public records: the holder
of any mortgage or deed of trust or other lien or encumbrance of record; the
owner or holder of any lease of record; and the holder of any other estate or
legal interest of record in or to the building or the land on which it is
located. The failure of the City Manager, Building Official, Fire Chief or
their authorized representatives to serve any person required herein to be
served shall not invalidate any proceedings hereunder as to any other person
duly served or relieve any such person from any duty or obligation imposed by
the provisions of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.12)



   (B)   (1)   Service of the notice and order shall be made upon
all entitled thereto by either having the Building Official, the City Manager
or the designee of the City Manager personally serve the notice, or by
mailing the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested. In complying
with the obligation to “personally serve” the notice, the Building
Official, City Manager or designee may follow Arizona Rules of Civil
Procedure 4.1 and 4.2. In complying with the obligation to mail notice to the
owner of the property, the Building Official, City Manager or designee can
mail the notice to the last address on the tax bill. If the owner does not
live on the property, the City Manager or designee can also send the notice
to the last known address of the owner.



      (2)   Notice is deemed effective on the date it is hand
delivered, sent or deposited in the United States mail.



      (3)   Nothing herein shall preclude the city from giving
additional oral or written notice at its discretion. If the city does elect
to give any additional notice in any instance, it shall not thereby become
obligated to give such additional notice thereafter in the same or other
situation.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.13)



   (C)   Proof of service of the notice and order shall be certified to
at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of perjury
executed by the persons effecting service, declaring the time, date and
manner in which service was made. The declaration, together with any receipt
card returned in acknowledgment of receipt by certified mail shall be affixed
to the copy of the notice and order retained by the Building Official.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.14)



(Ord. 791, passed - -1999)



§ 151.43  RECORDATION.



   (A)   Any notice issued under this chapter shall run with the land.
If compliance is not had with the order within the time specified therein,
and no appeal has been properly and timely filed, the city may, in its sole
discretion, file in the office of the County Recorder a certificate
describing the property and certifying:



      (1)   The building is a dangerous building; and



      (2)   The owner occupant, and/or lessee, if any, have been so
notified.



   (B)   By recording the notice, the city may thereby cause compliance
by any person or entity thereafter acquiring such property. The failure to
record any notice shall not affect the validity of notice as to any person or
entity receiving actual notice of the city’s notice. Whenever the
corrections ordered shall thereafter have been completed or the building
demolished so that it no longer exists as a dangerous building on the
property described in the certificate, the Building official shall file a new
certificate with the County Recorder certifying that the building has been
demolished or all required corrections have been made so that the building is
no longer dangerous, whichever is appropriate.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.15)  (Ord. 791, passed - -1999)



§ 151.44  REPAIR, VACATION AND DEMOLITION.



   The following standards shall be followed by the Building Official (and
by the City Council if an appeal is taken) in ordering the repair, vacation
or demolition of any dangerous building or structure:



   (A)   Any building declared a dangerous building under this chapter
shall be made to comply with one of the following:



      (1)   The building shall be repaired in accordance with the
current Building Code or other current code applicable to the type of
substandard conditions requiring repair;



      (2)   The building shall be demolished at the option of the
building owner, if the costs of repair exceed the benefit to property; or



      (3)   If the building does not constitute an immediate danger
to the life, limb, property or safety of the public it may be vacated,
secured and maintained against entry.



   (B)   If the building or structure is in such condition as to make
it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of the public
or its occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.16)  (Ord. 791, passed - -1999)



§ 151.45  NOTICE TO VACATE.



   (A)   Posting. Every notice to vacate shall, in addition to being
served as provided in § 151.42(B) of this chapter, be posted at or upon each
exit of the building and shall be in substantially the following form:



 



DO NOT ENTER
UNSAFE TO OCCUPY



It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building, or to remove or deface this
notice. Building Official of                               .


 



 



   (B)   Compliance. Whenever such notice is posted, the City Manager,
Building Official, Fire Chief or their authorized representative shall
include a notification thereof in the notice and order issued under §
151.44(B) of this chapter, reciting the emergency and specifying the
conditions which necessitate the posting. No person shall remain in or enter
any building which has been so posted, except that entry may be made to
repair, demolish or remove such building under permit. No person shall remove
or deface any such notice after it is posted until the required repairs,
demolition or removal have been completed and a certificate of occupancy
issued pursuant to the provisions of the Building Code.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.17)  (Ord. 791, passed - -1999)



§ 151.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   General. After any order of the City Manager, Building
Official, Fire Chief, or their authorized representatives, or the City
Council made pursuant to this chapter shall have become final, no person to
whom any such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey any
such order. Any such person who fails to comply with any such order is guilty
of a Class 1 misdemeanor and shall be sentenced to no more than a fine of
$2,500, six months in jail and three years probation, nor less than a fine of
$500 and be placed on probation for not less than one year. A judge shall not
suspend any or all of the impositions or execution of the sentence required
by this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.25)



   (B)   Failure to obey order. If, after any order of the City
Manager, Building Official, Fire Chief, or their authorized representatives,
or City Council made pursuant to this chapter has become final, the person to
whom such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey such order,
the Building Official may:



      (1)   Cause such person to be prosecuted under division (A)
above and divisions (D) and (N) below; or



      (2)   Abate such building as a public nuisance.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.26)



   (C)   Failure to commence work. Whenever the required repair or
demolition is not commenced within 30 days after any final notice and order
issued under this chapter becomes effective:



      (1)   The Building Official shall cause the building described
in such notice and order to be vacated by posting at each entrance thereto a
notice reading:



 



DANGEROUS BUILDING
DO NOT OCCUPY



It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building, or to remove or deface this
notice. Building Official of                       .





 



      (2)   No person shall occupy any building which has been
posted as specified in this division (C). No person shall remove or deface
any such notice so posted until the repairs, demolition or removal ordered by
the Building official have been completed and a certificate of occupancy
issued pursuant to the provisions of the Building Code.



      (3)   The City Manager, Building Official, Fire Chief or their
authorized representatives may, in addition to any other remedy herein
provided, cause the building to be repaired to the extent necessary to
correct the conditions which render the building dangerous as set forth in
the notice and order; or, if the notice and order required demolition, to
cause the building to be sold and demolished or demolished and the materials,
rubble and debris therefrom removed and the lot cleaned. Any such repair or
demolition work shall be accomplished and the cost thereof paid and recovered
in the manner hereinafter provided in this chapter. Any surplus realized from
the sale of any such building, or from the demolition thereof, over and above
the cost of demolition and of cleaning the lot, shall be paid over to the
person or persons lawfully entitled thereto.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.27)



   (D)   Option to proceed criminally or civilly. In addition to
commencing proceedings to cause the repair, demolition or vacation of a
building, the Building Official may proceed, pursuant to this chapter, by
citation for civil sanctions or by complaint for criminal sanctions.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.28)



   (E)   Civil penalties. Upon a finding of responsibility to a civil
violation of this chapter, the Court shall impose a civil sanction of not
less than $250, nor more than $1,000. No judge shall suspend the imposition
of the $250 sanction unless at the time of sentencing the Court finds by a
preponderance of the evidence that the violation(s) the defendant was found
responsible for has now been completely corrected, and that the defendant is
now in full compliance with the chapter. In that event, the judge may suspend
all or part of the fine.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.29)



   (F)   Criminal penalties.



      (1)   A person who is convicted of a violation of this chapter
is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor and shall be sentenced to no more than a
fine of $2,500, six months in jail and three years’ probation, nor less
than a fine of $500, and be placed on probation for not less than one year. A
judge shall not suspend any or all of the impositions or execution of the
sentence required by this section.



      (2)   Notwithstanding division (F)(1) above, if a judge finds
at the time of sentencing, and by a preponderance of the evidence, that the
violation(s) the defendant was convicted of has been corrected, and that the
defendant is now in compliance with the chapter, the Court may:



         (a)   Sentence the defendant to pay a fine of not less
than $100; and



         (b)   Suspend all or part of the probation.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.30)



   (G)   Restitution. In addition to any sanction or penalty provided
for in this section, such person shall be liable for all costs which may be
associated with the city’s bringing the property into compliance with the
chapter. The Court shall impose restitution as part of its sentence.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.31)



   (H)   Jurisdiction of City Court. Jurisdiction of all proceedings to
enforce the provisions of this chapter shall be in City Court.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.32)



   (I)   Civil violation; commencement of action.



      (1)   A civil violation may be commenced by issuance of a
citation or by complaint.



      (2)   The citation will be issued with a form modeled after
the state’s traffic ticket and complaint and shall direct the defendant to
appear in the City Court within ten days after issuance of the citation.



      (3)   The citation will further notify the defendant that, if
he or she fails to appear on or before the date specified in the complaint, a
judgment by default will be entered against him or her, and the Court may, in
its discretion, impose a civil sanction not to exceed $1,000.



      (4)   Service of the citation may be accomplished and will be
deemed proper and complete by any of the following methods:



         (a)   By having the defendant sign the citation with a
promise to appear in Court within ten days of the issuance of the citation;



         (b)   By hand delivering a copy of the citation to the
defendant;



         (c)   By mailing a copy of the citation to the person
charged by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the
person’s last known address; or



         (d)   In the event service cannot be accomplished as set
forth in divisions (I)(4)(a), (I)(4)(b) or (I)(4)(c) above, the state may
serve the defendant by any means allowed by the state’s Rules of Civil
Procedure for the Superior Court.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.33)



   (J)   Civil citation, authority to issue. The City Manager, Building
Official, Fire Chief or their authorized representatives may issue a civil
citation pursuant to this chapter. The authorized representative shall mean
an individual employed by the city who has been appointed by the City
Manager, in writing, to have the authority to issue civil code violations.
Such authorization shall be filed with the City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.34)



   (K)   Appearance by defendant. The defendant shall, within ten days
of the issuance of the citation, appear in person or through his or her
attorney in the City Court and shall either admit or deny the allegations
contained in the citation. If the defendant admits the allegations, the Court
shall enter judgment against the defendant and impose a civil sanction of the
violation. If the defendant denies the allegations contained in the citation,
the Court shall set the matter for hearing.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.35)



   (L)   Default judgment. If a person served with a complaint fails to
appear on or before the time directed to appear or at the time set for
hearing by the Court, the allegations in the complaint shall be deemed
admitted and the Court shall enter judgment for the city and impose a civil
sanction.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.36)



   (M)   Rules of procedure for civil violations. The state’s Rules
of Procedure for Civil Traffic Violation Cases shall be followed by the City
Court for civil violations of this chapter, except as modified or where
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, local rules of the City
Court or rules of the state’s Supreme Court.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.37)



   (N)   Collection of fines. Any judgment for civil sanctions taken
pursuant to this section may be collected as any other civil judgment,
including, but not limited to, the right to record the civil judgment and
foreclose on the judgment.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.38)



   (O)   Violations not exclusive. Violations of this chapter are in
addition to any other violation enumerated within city ordinances or the city
code and in no way limits the penalties, actions or abatement procedures
which may be taken by the city for any violation of this chapter which is
also a violation of any other ordinance or code provision of the city or
statutes of the state.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.39)



   (P)   Each day separate violation. Each day any violation of any
provision of this chapter is committed or permitted to continue, such
violation shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished as such
hereunder. Each day there is a failure to perform any act or duty required by
this chapter shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished as
such hereunder.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.40)



   (Q)   Interference with inspection, abatement. Any person who
interferes, prevents, or attempts to interfere or prevent an individual
employed by the city or other person contracted for by the city, from
investigating an alleged violation of this chapter, or from correcting or
abating a violation of this chapter is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.41)



   (R)   False information. Any person who knowingly makes a false or
fraudulent statement, or knowingly misrepresents a fact, or misleads an
individual employed by the city or other person contracted for by the city,
when that individual is investigating, correcting or abating a violation of
this chapter, is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 6-7.42)



(Ord. 791, passed - -1999)



CHAPTER 152:  STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY



Section




Use of City Property and Rights-of-Way




   152.01   Definitions



   152.02   City Manager’s responsibilities



   152.03   Use of parks and recreation facilities



   152.04   Use of rights-of-way




Snow Related Functions




   152.15   Definitions



   152.16   Snow and ice removal from sidewalks



   152.17   Snow and ice removal from public transportation



   152.18   Snow and ice removal from roofs



   152.19   Snow and ice deposits restricted



   152.20   Failure to perform



   152.21   Parking regulations during snow removal



   152.22   Removal of vehicles




Sidewalks




   152.35   Definitions



   152.36   Unsafe sidewalks



   152.37   Maintenance



   152.38   Nuisance



   152.39   Notice to remove debris



   152.40   Excavating



   152.41   Service of notice



   152.42   Failure to comply



   152.43   Driving on sidewalks



 



   152.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Trees and Shrubbery, see Ch. 153



   Zoning, see Ch. 158




USE OF CITY PROPERTY AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY




§ 152.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY PROPERTY. Any property owned, leased or used under license or
other authority by the city, but excluding city-owned “right-of-way”.



   PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES. Any property, building or equipment
utilized primarily as a public park or for purposes of recreation or
community services, and officially designated as such by the Mayor and
Council.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY. Real property, owned by the city or for which the city
has a right access or use, upon which transportation facilities and
appurtenances thereto are constructed or maintained, and which lands are
recorded as RIGHT-OF-WAY with the County Recorder.



   RODEO GROUNDS. The city-owned property located at 515 Rodeo Road,
including the rodeo corral, barn, cook shack and all abutting property.



(Prior Code, § 8-1.01)



§ 152.02  CITY MANAGER’S RESPONSIBILITIES.



   The City Manager or his or her representative shall be responsible for
the maintenance and regulation of the use of all city property and shall also
prepare regulations which shall be approved by the City Council, governing
the access to, and use of, city property.



(Prior Code, § 8-1.02)



§ 152.03  USE OF PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES.



   The City Manager or his or her representative shall prepare
regulations, which shall be approved by the City Council, governing access
to, and use of, all parks and recreation facilities. Said regulations may
include a schedule of fees for use of said facilities.



(Prior Code, § 8-1.03)



§ 152.04  USE OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   City rights-of-way may be used only by vehicles licensed by the state
and other vehicles, bicycles or pedestrians as allowed under the provisions
of this subchapter. Use of the rights-of-way shall be contingent upon
following all state and city traffic laws and regulations. The rights-of-way
may not be used for the purpose of conducting any business from a parked
vehicle, except as allowed by a right-of-way use permit.



   (A)   Parade permits. The City Manager or his or her representative
may issue a parade permit allowing use of the right-of-way by vehicles or
persons, and for activities, not otherwise allowed under this subchapter.
This permit shall be issued only for purposes of a parade, and only if the
use of the right-of-way is for a period not to exceed three hours. The City
Manager shall issue a parade permit if the following conditions have been met:



      (1)   The applicant has submitted an application for a parade
permit at least one month prior to the date of the parade;



      (2)   The applicant has provided a parade plan, including
information on the parade route, and plans and procedures for controlling
traffic and crowds;



      (3)   If necessary, the applicant has made arrangements to
have the Marshal and Deputies on duty at the parade and has agreed to pay the
cost of that officer’s time;



      (4)   The Marshal, the Fire Chief and the Streets
Superintendent have reviewed the parade route and plan and have indicated
that the parade will not pose a hazard to the public health and safety;



      (5)   The applicant has provided the city with evidence of an
insurance policy, naming the city as co-insured, in an amount not less than
$500,000 liability; and



      (6)   The applicant has provided a refundable clean-up deposit
in an amount adopted by Council resolution at a duly constituted meeting.



   (B)   Right-of-way use permits. The City Manager or his or her
representative may issue a right-of-way use permit allowing use of the
right-of-way by vehicles or persons, and for activities, not otherwise
allowed under this subchapter. A right-of-way use permit may be issued upon a
finding by the City Manager that a proposed use will not pose a danger to the
public health and safety or an undue inconvenience to city residents. The
Manager shall issue a permit if the following conditions have been met:



      (1)   The applicant has submitted a completed application for
a right-of-way use permit at least one month prior to the date of the use,
the application shall include information on the date, time and nature of the
use, including provisions made for traffic and crowd control;



      (2)   The Marshal, the Fire Chief and the Street
Superintendent have reviewed the application, and have indicated that the
proposed use will not pose a hazard to the public health and safety;



      (3)   The applicant has submitted a petition, signed by not
less than 70% of the residents abutting the property to be used; said
petition stating that the proposed use will not impose an undue inconvenience
on the abutting residents;



      (4)   The applicant has provided the city with evidence of an
insurance policy, naming the city as co-insured, in an amount not less than
$1,000,000 liability; and



      (5)   The applicant has provided a refundable clean-up deposit
for each day the permit will be in force in an amount adopted by Council
resolution at a duly constituted meeting.



   (C)   Miscellaneous rights-of-way permits. No construction,
excavation, cutting of pavement, curbs, glitters or sidewalks shall occur in
the city right-of-way without first obtaining a permit for the same.



   (D)   Sign permits. The City Manager or his or her representative
may issue sign permits allowing the following signs to be located within or
project over rights-of-way subject to the following.



      (1)   Portable sign. For each commercial business not fronting
on Bill Williams Avenue or Railroad Avenue and located within the boundaries
of the CBD, Central Business District, Zoning District only, the City Manager
may issue a maximum of one sign permit for one portable A-frame sign to be
located within the right-of-way subject to the following.



         (a)   The size shall not be larger than four square feet
in area.



         (b)   Said sign shall be set back a minimum of four feet
from any street curb, street cross walk or building doorway.



         (c)   The sign shall be weighted down to avoid movement
by wind.



         (d)   The sign shall be removed from the right-of-way
during the hours the business is closed.



         (e)   The sign permit fee is paid to the city in an
amount adopted by Council resolution at a duly constituted meeting.



         (f)   A certificate of insurance which provides coverage
to the city in the amount of $100,000 for each occurrence and $300,000 in the
aggregate shall be provided to the city.



         (g)   The sign owner shall provide a statement to the
city which shall hold the city harmless in the event of any claims against
the city arising as a result of the use and/or placing of the sign in the
public right-of-way.



      (2)   Projecting sign. For each use located within the
boundaries of the HP, Historic Preservation Overlay, Zoning District only,
the City Manager may issue a maximum of one sign permit for one projecting
sign to project over the public right-of-way subject to the following.



         (a)   Said sign shall meet all applicable rules and
regulations as set forth in the city’s zoning ordinance for projecting
signs.



         (b)   The sign permit shall be issued upon the filing of
a permit fee as set forth in the city’s Building Codes.



         (c)   A certificate of insurance which provides coverage
in the city in the amount of $100,000 for each occurrence and $300,000 in the
aggregate shall be provided to the city.



         (d)   The sign owner shall provide a statement to the
city which shall hold the city harmless in the event of any claims against
the city arising as a result of the use and/or projection of the sign over
the public right-of-way.



(Prior Code, § 8-1.04)  (Ord. 748, passed - -1995)




SNOW RELATED FUNCTIONS




§ 152.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUSINESS DAY. Any day not a Sunday or a national holiday.



   BUSINESS HOURS. The hours between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any
business day.



   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. The Director of Public Works or, in his or
her absence, his or her duly designated and acting representative.



   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, corporation, joint stock company,
syndicate or other entity.



   ROADWAY. The portion, of a street or highway improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder.



   SIDEWALK. The portion of a street between the curb lines, or the
lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the
use of pedestrians.



   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every
way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel.



(Prior Code, § 8-7.01)  (Ord. 766, passed - -1997)



§ 152.16  SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL FROM SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   Every person in charge or control of any building or lot of
land within the city fronting or abutting on a paved sidewalk, whether as
owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall remove and clear away, or
cause to be removed and cleared away, snow and ice from a path or at least 36
inches in width, from so much of said sidewalk as is in front of or abuts on
said building or lot of land.



      (1)   Except as provided in division (B) below, snow and ice
shall be so removed from sidewalks in all business districts within the city
within 24 hours after the cessation of all fall of snow, sleet or freezing
rain.



      (2)   Except as provided in division (B) below, snow and ice
shall be so removed from all other sidewalks within the city on the same day
of the cessation of any fall of snow, sleet or freezing rain within the first
six hours of daylight after the cessation of any such fall, whichever period
is longer.



   (B)   However, in the event snow and ice on a sidewalk has become so
hard that it cannot be removed without the likelihood of damage to the
sidewalk, the person or entity charged with its removal shall, within the
time mentioned in division (A) above, cause enough sand or other abrasive to
be put on the sidewalk to make travel thereon reasonably safe; and shall
then, as soon thereafter as weather permits, cause a path in said sidewalk of
at least 36 inches in width to be thoroughly cleaned.



(Prior Code, § 8-7.02)  (Ord. 766, passed - -1997)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.17  SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL FROM PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION.



   Every person, operating a public transportation system within the city
employing motor buses, trackless trolleys, trains or streetcars, shall remove
and clear away, or cause to be removed and cleared away, snow and ice from
its passenger loading and unloading areas and its tracks, if any. Snow and
ice from said passenger loading and unloading areas shall be removed and
cleared away within the first six hours of daylight after the cessation of
any fall of snow, sleet or freezing rain; except that, if the snow and ice
has become so hard that it cannot be removed without likelihood of damage to
the underlying surface, such operator shall, within the said six-hour period,
cause enough sand or other abrasive to be put on the passenger loading and
unloading area to make walking thereon reasonably safe. He or she shall then,
as soon thereafter as weather permits, cause said area to be thoroughly
cleaned.



(Prior Code, § 8-7.03)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.18  SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL FROM ROOFS.



   Every person, in charge or control of any building or other structure
within the city, whether owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall
remove and clear away, or cause to be removed and cleared away, any
accumulation of snow and ice on said building or other structure which is
liable to fall on any sidewalk, roadway or other public way. Such work shall
be completed within a reasonable time, but no later than the end of the first
eight hours of daylight after the cessation of any fall of snow, sleet or
freezing rain.



(Prior Code, § 8-7.04)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.19  SNOW AND ICE DEPOSITS RESTRICTED.



   No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited, any snow or ice on or
against a fire hydrant or on any sidewalk, street, roadway or loading and
unloading areas of a public transportation system; except that, snow and ice
may be windrowed on public roadways incident to the cleaning thereof, or
windrowed on curbs incident to the cleaning of sidewalks in business
districts.



(Prior Code, § 8-7.05)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.20  FAILURE TO PERFORM.



   (A)   In the event of the failure of any person to clear away any
snow and ice from any sidewalk as hereinbefore provided, or failure to cause
this to be done, the Director of Public Works shall, as soon as practicable
after such failure, cause such work to be done.



   (B)   The Director of Public Works shall ascertain and keep a record
of the exact cost of all work he or she causes to be done due to the act or
omission of each person, and he shall identify these persons or entities with
particularity.



   (C)   Each such person or entity by whose failure makes it necessary
that the Director of Public Works causes work to be done, shall be liable to
the city for the cost of such work, plus a penalty of 10% of such cost.



   (D)   It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works, or other
appropriate official, to sue for these costs and penalties, and it shall be
the duty of the City Attorney to assist in the bringing of these suits.



(Prior Code, § 8-7.06)  (Ord. 766, passed - -1997)



§ 152.21  PARKING REGULATIONS DURING SNOW REMOVAL.



   No person shall park, or permit to be parked, any vehicle on any public
street, boulevard or alley during snow removal.



(Prior Code, § 8-7.07)  (Ord. 766, passed - -1997)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.22  REMOVAL OF VEHICLES.



   If any vehicle is standing or parked in violation of this subchapter,
the Police Department is authorized to remove the vehicle, or cause it to be
removed, to the nearest garage or other place of safety and such removal
shall be at the cost and expense of the person owning or controlling such
vehicle.



(Prior Code, § 8-7.08)  Penalty, see § 152.99




SIDEWALKS




§ 152.35  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PERSON. Extends and is applied to firms, corporations or voluntary
associations, as well as individuals.



   SIDEWALK.



      (1)   Any sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway, adjoining any
public street or alley and abutting or adjoining any private property.



      (2)   The strip of land between the curb line of the street
and the inside property line, whether covered with a cement walk or not.



(Prior Code, § 8-8.01)



§ 152.36  UNSAFE SIDEWALKS.



   No person shall, permit any sidewalk which adjoins property owned by
him or her to fall into a state of disrepair or to be unsafe.



(Prior Code, § 8-8.02)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.37  MAINTENANCE.



   All persons owning or occupying any real property in the city fronting
upon any public street, lane or alley of the city are hereby required to keep
the sidewalks immediately in front of said property free from weeds and all
vegetation growing thereon, except such as may be sown or planted for
purposes of ornamentation and free from dirt, filth, garbage or rubbish,
other than the natural soil of the same, and to keep said sidewalk and said
space free from any hole or holes, or any obstructions dangerous to life or
limb.



(Prior Code, § 8-8.03)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.38  NUISANCE.



   Any such debris, weeds or rubbish on any sidewalk or any sidewalk in a
state of disrepair, or with obstructions dangerous to life and limb are
hereby declared to be a nuisance.



(Prior Code, § 8-8.04)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.39  NOTICE TO REMOVE DEBRIS.



   The Superintendent of Streets shall notify the occupants and owners of
the premises to remove or repair within ten days from the receipt of such
notice, all such weeds, debris, rubbish or obstructions from the sidewalks or
to repair said sidewalks and, upon failure to do so within the said ten days,
the Superintendent of Streets will cause the removal or repair at the expense
of the said owner or occupant.



(Prior Code, § 8-8.05)



§ 152.40  EXCAVATING.



   Nothing herein contained shall prevent excavating through or across any
sidewalk where such excavating is done in accordance with the terms and
provisions of any other ordinance of the city, and in accordance with the
regulations therein contained covering said excavation.



(Prior Code, § 8-8.06)



§ 152.41  SERVICE OF NOTICE.



   Notice shall be given in writing, by serving personally upon the
occupant (if there by any occupant), and upon the owner, each a copy of such
notice, directed to the occupant (if any) and the owner:



   (A)   Non-resident owner. If the owner be a non-resident of the
city, service of the notice shall be given by serving the occupant personally
and by mailing a copy to the owner at his or her last known address as shown
by the last assessment roll of the city; or



   (B)   Vacant premises. If there be no occupant, by posting a copy of
the notice in a conspicuous place upon the premises, and service a copy upon
the owner as hereinbefore provided.



(Prior Code, § 8-8.07)



§ 152.42  FAILURE TO COMPLY.



   If, at the expiration of ten days from the sending or service of the
said notice, the owner or occupant or both have failed or refused to comply
with said notice, the Council shall then order the Superintendent of Streets
to do the said work at the expense of the owner and occupant of the said
property, and the owner and occupant (if any) shall be jointly and severally
liable for all expenses or costs incurred by the city in the removal or
repair. If the claim of expenses or costs are not paid within 30 days from
demand the notice and claim shall be recorded in the office of the County
Recorder and when recorded in such office shall become a lien upon the
property described therein, which lien may be foreclosed by the city in any
manner authorized under the laws of the state. The city shall be authorized
to take other action in addition to or in lieu of the foregoing that may be
authorized by the laws of the state.



(Prior Code, § 8-8.08)



§ 152.43  DRIVING ON SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   Driving over unprotected sidewalk. No person shall drive any
wagon or other vehicle over, along or across any cement or other improved
sidewalk or curb, unless planking is laid thereon in such manner as to
protect such sidewalk or curb.



   (B)   Exception: paved driveway. The provisions of this subchapter
shall not apply to the driving of vehicles over sidewalks or curbs at places
where cement or asphalt crossings are constructed across such sidewalks and
curbs.



(Prior Code, § 8-8.09)  (Ord. 493, passed - -)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Violation of any of the provisions of §§ 152.01 through
152.04 of this chapter shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. Each day that
the violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.



(Prior Code, § 8-1.05)



   (C)   Any person who violates any provision of §§ 152.15 through
152.22 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. Each
day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense and shall be punishable as if each day was a separate
violation.



(Prior Code, § 8-7.09)



CHAPTER 153:  TREES AND SHRUBBERY



Section



   153.01   Trees to be trimmed



   153.02   Hedges and shrubbery



   153.03   Injury to trees or shrubbery



   153.04   Trees outside of property line



 



   153.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Streets, Sidewalks and Public Property, see Ch. 152



§ 153.01  TREES TO BE TRIMMED.



   Any owner or occupant of any real property shall trim all trees on
property owned or occupied by him or her, overhanging any public
thoroughfare, so that the branches thereon will not interfere with
pedestrians or public travel.



(Prior Code, § 8-9.01)  Penalty, see § 153.99



§ 153.02  HEDGES AND SHRUBBERY.



   Any owner or occupant of any real property shall maintain all hedges
and shrubbery adjacent to public sidewalks so that no part of said hedges
and/or shrubbery shall extend over any part of a sidewalk in the municipality.



(Prior Code, § 8-9.02)  Penalty, see § 153.99



§ 153.03  INJURY TO TREES OR SHRUBBERY.



   It is hereby declared unlawful for any person, not the owner thereof or
without lawful authority to do so, willfully to injure, deface, disfigure or
destroy any tree or shrub, or to injure, destroy, cut or pick any flower or
plant, located either on private ground or on any public place or
thoroughfare.



(Prior Code, § 8-9.03)  Penalty, see § 153.99



§ 153.04  TREES OUTSIDE OF PROPERTY LINE.



   The governing body of the municipality is hereby granted full and
complete control over all trees which are outside the property lines of
privately owned real property.



(Prior Code, § 8-9.04)



§ 153.99  PENALTY.



   Violation of this chapter is a Class 3 misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 8-9.05)



CHAPTER 154:  DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURES



Section




General Provisions




   154.001   Definitions




Procedures




   154.015   Conditional use permit, development master plan, minor
subdivision, plot plan Historic District, rezoning, subdivision, site plan
and vacation



   154.016   Development procedures, subdivision or zoning ordinance
amendment



   154.017   Appeal; variance



   154.018   Plot plan and building permit



   154.019   Property line adjustment



   154.020   Subdivision final plat




Application Requirements




   154.035   Water agreement requirement



   154.036   Conditional use permit



   154.037   Development master plan



   154.038   Minor subdivision



   154.039   Rezoning



   154.040   Site plan; final and preliminary



   154.041   Subdivisions; final and preliminary plat



   154.042   Vacation



   154.043   Variance



   154.044   Plot plans




Planning and Zoning Fees




   154.055   Purpose



   154.056   Applicability



   154.057   Fee schedule




Petitions, Certifications and Requirements




   154.070   Rezoning petition



   154.071   Petition to vacate right-of-way



   154.072   Certification blocks for subdivision and site plan



   154.073   Financial security for completion of public improvements



   154.074   Dedications and exactions




Hillside Development Regulations




   154.085   Purpose



   154.086   Development standards



   154.087   Special design standards



   154.088   Grading standards for lots, parcels and planned
development sites



   154.089   Diagrams




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 154.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPEAL. To appeal an administrative decision concerning the Zoning
Ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 10-1.01)



   APPLICANT. The owner, mortgagee or lessee of the property which is the
subject of one of these procedures, or an authorized official acting on
behalf of the city.



(Prior Code, § 10-1.02)



   CONDITIONAL USE. A process to review conditional uses as listed in the
Zoning Ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 10-1.03)



   DEPARTMENTAL REVIEW TEAM.



      (1)   A city staff committee chaired by the Planning and
Zoning Official and consisting of the following standing members: City
Manager; Police Chief; Fire Chief; Water Superintendent; Street
Superintendent; and Sanitation Superintendent.



      (2)   The following ex officio members will also serve as
needed when requested by the Chairperson: Contract Planner; Contract City
Engineer; City Clerk; Parks and Recreation Director; Golf Course
Superintendent; three members of the Historic Preservation Commission; one
representative from the Main Street Design Committee; and the Airport
Advisory Commission Chairperson.



(Prior Code, § 10-1.04)



   DEVELOPMENT MASTER PLAN. To provide for a general plan for development
of a large or complicated tract of land.



(Prior Code, § 10-1.05)



   DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURES, SUBDIVISION OR ZONING ORDINANCE AMENDMENT. To
change the provisions of the development procedures, Subdivision Ordinance or
Zoning Ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 10-1.06)



   MINOR SUBDIVISION. The process required by the city to accomplish a
land split; or the division of land into two or three lots when a new street
is not involved; or the division of land into more than two parts and when
the boundaries of such property have been fixed by a recorded plat.



(Prior Code, § 10-1.07)



   PLOT PLAN REGULAR AND PLOT PLAN HISTORIC DISTRICT. Required for all
building permit requests for a new building or an addition to an existing
building; and/or any construction or modification or demolition of a parking
lot or an existing structure which would affect the exterior appearance of an
existing building or sign within a Historic Preservation Zoning District.



(Prior Code, § 10-1.08)



   PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENT. To move the location of a property line in a
platted subdivision provided the remaining parcels meet all zoning
requirements.



(Prior Code, § 10-1.09)



   REZONING. To change the zoning of a parcel of land.



(Prior Code, § 10-1.10)



   SITE PLAN. Required for any request that involves more than one
principal building on a single lot.



(Prior Code, § 10-1.12)



   SPECIAL USE PERMIT.



      (1)   A process to review special uses.



      (2)   Special uses are those uses that are temporary or do not
require a building permit, and are not specifically prohibited in the zoning
district in which located.



(Prior Code, § 10-1.11)



   SUBDIVISION. To divide a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more
lots, plats, sites or other divisions for the purpose of sale or building
development.



(Prior Code, § 10-1.13)



   VACATION. To rescind easement and right-of-way dedications.



(Prior Code, § 10-1.14)



   VARIANCE. To request a variance from the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 10-1.15)



(Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 895, passed - -2008)




PROCEDURES




§ 154.015  CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT, DEVELOPMENT MASTER PLAN, MINOR
SUBDIVISION, PLOT PLAN HISTORIC DISTRICT, REZONING, SUBDIVISION, SITE PLAN
AND VACATION.



   (A)   The applicant shall submit the necessary application and plans
(§§ 154.035 through 154.044 of this chapter) and fees (§§ 154.055 through
154.057 of this chapter) to the city.



   (B)   The city will review the information to ensure that all
submittal requirements have been met. The applicant will be notified in
writing of any deficiencies within five working days. The application will
not be processed until it includes all submittal requirements.



   (C)   The Planning and Zoning Official shall refer the application
to the Departmental Review Team and shall schedule the completed application
for a Departmental Review Team meeting to be held within 30 days of the
submittal of the completed application.



   (D)   The applicant must be present at the review meeting to present
and explain the application. If the applicant does not attend the meeting,
the application will not be considered.



   (E)   All Departmental Review Team recommendations, practical
concerns and technical requirements shall be in writing and shall be
presented to the applicant at the Departmental Review Team meeting. If any
city department does not present written comments at this meeting, the
Planning and Zoning Official will notify the applicant that the subject
department has no concerns or comments. The subject department will not be
able to develop comments or concerns later in the process without a written
authorization from the City Manager.



   (F)   Plot plan historic district.



      (1)   The applicant meets with the Planning and Zoning
Official to review recommendations of the various departments. Further
consultation with the various reviewing departments may be necessary to reach
agreement on changes in the plot plan. Design and service oriented issues
(not code or ordinance requirements) may be appealed to the Planning and
Zoning Commission for final determination. Requirements dealing with historic
preservation issues may be appealed to the Historic Preservation Commission.
Requirements dealing with Main Street issues may be appealed to the Main
Street Design Committee.



      (2)   The applicant shall make final changes as agreed and
submit four copies of the approved plot plan to the Planning and Zoning
Official.



      (3)   The City Engineer will then prepare a memorandum of
agreement for public improvements setting forth the applicant’s financial
assurance that all required public improvements will be completed to city
standards, requirements and specifications (§ 154.073 of this chapter).
These shall include half- street improvements for any portion of a street
that abuts the property. The memorandum of agreement for public improvements
must be signed by the applicant prior to issuance of the building permit.



      (4)   The applicant is then eligible for a building permit and
submits the following to the Chief Building Official:



         (a)   Building permit application form; and



         (b)   Two sets of building plans.



      (5)   The building plans will then be reviewed by the city
staff or referred to the city’s architecture or engineering consultant.



      (6)   The building permit is issued by the Chief Building
Official upon approval of the application and building plans and payment of
the required fees.



   (G)   Minor subdivisions.



      (1)   For minor subdivisions, a public hearing by the Planning
and Zoning Commission or City Council is not required.



      (2)   The Departmental Review Team shall approve or disapprove
applications for minor subdivisions.



      (3)   The applicant will have the option of amending the
application to satisfy all of the issues raised by the Departmental Review
Team or submitting a letter of appeal to the City Council that will explain
which of the concerns are not being satisfied and why.



      (4)   Upon approval of the minor subdivision, the applicant
shall comply with all engineering plans and financial security agreements as
required by § 154.037 of this chapter.



      (5)   Upon approval of the above, the City Planner shall cause
the original minor subdivision plat to be signed and recorded with the County
Clerk and Recorder.



   (H)   For all other applications, the applicant will have the option
of amending the application to satisfy all of the issues raised by the
Departmental Review Team or submit a letter addressed to the Planning and
Zoning Commission which will explain which of the concerns are not being
satisfied and why.



   (I)   As soon as the Planning and Zoning Official receives an
amended application, if applicable, and/or a letter of explanation, both of
which combined address all of the issues raised by the Departmental Review
Team, the application shall be scheduled for the next available Planning and
Zoning Commission meeting.



   (J)   The Planning and Zoning Official shall send notice of public
hearing to all property owners within the property and within 300 feet of the
request (list of names and addresses and stamped, addressed envelopes to be
provided by the applicant) and shall publish a legal notice of the public
hearing a minimum of 15 days prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission
public hearing. In addition, the Planning and Zoning Official shall place a
public hearing notice on the property a minimum of 15 days prior to the
public hearing.



   (K)   If more than one year elapses between the Departmental Review
Team decision date and the time when all concerns are met or a written
statement is provided, the application must be reviewed again by the
Departmental Review Team to ensure that the prior issues, concerns and
technical requirements are still applicable.



   (L)   The Planning and Zoning Official shall prepare a staff report
for the Planning and Zoning Commission. This report shall be forwarded to the
Planning and Zoning Commission and the applicant a minimum of five days prior
to the Commission meeting. The report shall contain a summary and copy of the
written comments received from the reviewing departments. In addition, the
report at a minimum, shall review the extent to which the application is
consistent with the General Plan, other adopted city regulations, policies
and procedures, and a recommendation for approval or denial, conditions if
applicable and reasons for the recommendation.



   (M)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hear the application
at public hearing and make a recommendation at a regularly scheduled or
special meeting. Any decision by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be
made and recorded by motion.



   (N)   The Planning and Zoning Official shall not forward the
application in final form to the City Council until all concerns of the
Planning and Zoning Commission have been met unless the applicant submits a
detailed written statement to the City Council explaining why the conditions
or concerns are not or cannot be met. Upon compliance, the Planning and
Zoning Official shall schedule the application for the next available City
Council meeting.



   (O)   The City Council shall hear the application at public hearing
and make a decision on the application at a regularly scheduled or special
meeting. The City Council may approve, approve with conditions or deny the
application request. If the City Council decides to approve the application
request, the City Attorney will be directed to prepare an ordinance approving
the application request. In addition, the City Engineer will be directed to
prepare a memorandum of agreement for public improvements (§ 154.073 of this
chapter) setting forth the applicants financial assurance that all required
public improvements will be completed to city standards, requirements, and
specifications. These shall include half-street improvements for any portion
of a street that abuts the property. The memorandum of agreement for public
improvements must be signed by the applicant prior to final decision by the
City Council. City Council approval shall be made and recorded by ordinance.



   (P)   Upon approval, the Planning and Zoning Official shall cause
the original subdivision plat, site plan, vacation or annexation map to be
signed, and recorded with the County Clerk and Recorder.



(Prior Code, § 10-2.01)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 895, passed -
-2008; Ord. 904, passed - -2008)



§ 154.016  DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURES, SUBDIVISION OR ZONING ORDINANCE
AMENDMENT.



   (A)   The applicant shall submit a written request detailing the
requested amendment and fees (§§ 154.055 through 154.057 of this chapter)
to the Planning and Zoning Official.



   (B)   The city will review the information to ensure that all
submittal requirements have been met. The applicant will be notified in
writing of any deficiencies within five working days. The application will
not be processed until it includes all submittal requirements.



   (C)   The Planning and Zoning Official shall refer the application
to the Departmental Review Team and shall schedule the completed application
for a Departmental Review Team meeting to be held within 30 days of the
submittal of the completed application.



   (D)   The applicant must be present at the review meeting to present
and explain the application. If the applicant does not attend the meeting,
the application will not be considered.



   (E)   All Departmental Review Team recommendations, practical
concerns and technical requirements shall be in writing and shall be
presented to the applicant at the Departmental Review Team meeting. If any
city department does not present written comments at this meeting, the
Planning and Zoning Official will notify the applicant that the subject
department has no concerns or comments. The subject department will not be
able to develop comments or concerns later in the process without a written
authorization from the City Manager.



   (F)   The applicant will have the option of amending the application
to satisfy all of the issues raised by the Departmental Review Team or
submitting a letter addressed to the Planning and Zoning Commission that will
explain which of the concerns are not being satisfied and why.



   (G)   As soon as the Planning and Zoning Official receives an
amended application, if applicable, and/or a letter of explanation, both of
which combined address all of the issues raised by the Departmental Review
Team, the application shall be scheduled for the next available Planning and
Zoning Commission meeting.



   (H)   The Planning and Zoning Official shall publish a legal notice
of the public hearing a minimum of 15 days prior to the Planning and Zoning
Commission public hearing. In addition the Planning and Zoning Official shall
place a public hearing notice on the property a minimum of 15 days prior to
the public hearing. In addition, in proceedings involving one or more of the
following proposed changes or related series of changes to the Zoning
Ordinance, notice shall be provided in the manner prescribed in division (I)
below:



      (1)   An increase or reduction of 10% or more in the number of
square feet or units that may be developed;



      (2)   An increase or reduction of 10% or more in the allowable
height of buildings;



      (3)   An increase or reduction in the allowable number of
stories of buildings;



      (4)   An increase or reduction of 10% or more in setback or
open space requirements; and



      (5)   An increase or reduction in permitted uses.



   (I)   In proceedings governed by division (H) above, the Planning
and Zoning Official shall provide notice to real property owners pursuant to
at least one of the following notification procedures:



      (1)   Notice shall be sent by first class mail to each real
property owner, as shown on the last county assessment, whose real property
is directly governed by the changes and those within 300 feet of those
directly affected;



      (2)   Include notice of such changes with utility bills or
other mailings; and



      (3)   The city shall publish such changes prior to the first
hearing on such changes in a newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality. The changes shall be published in a “display ad” covering
not less than one-eighth of a full page.



   (J)   The Planning and Zoning Official shall prepare a staff report
for the Planning and Zoning Commission. This report shall be forwarded to the
Planning and Zoning Commission and the applicant a minimum of five days prior
to the Commission meeting. The report shall contain a summary and copy of the
written comments received from the reviewing departments. In addition, the
report at a minimum, shall review the extent to which the application is
consistent with the General Plan, other adopted city regulations, policies
and procedures, and a recommendation for approval or denial and reasons for
the recommendation.



   (K)   (1)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hear the
application at public hearing and make a recommendation at a regularly
scheduled or special meeting.



      (2)   Any decision by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall
be made and recorded by motion.



   (L)   The Planning and Zoning Official shall schedule the
application for the next available City Council meeting.



   (M)   The City Council shall hear the application at public hearing
and make a decision on the application at a regularly scheduled or special
meeting. The City Council may approve, approve with conditions or deny the
application request. If the City Council decides to approve the application
request, the City Attorney will be directed to prepare an ordinance approving
the application request. City Council approval shall be made and recorded by
ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 10-2.02)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 895, passed -
-2008)



§ 154.017  APPEAL; VARIANCE.



   (A)   The applicant shall submit the required fees (§§ 154.055
through 154.057 of this chapter) and a written request explaining the
appeal/variance to the City Planner.



   (B)   As soon as the Planning and Zoning Official receives a
complete application, the application shall be scheduled for the next
available Board of Adjustment meeting. If the application concerns property
located within the Historic Preservation Zoning District, a copy of the
application shall also be forwarded to the Historic Preservation Commission
and to the Main Street Design Committee for their review and
recommendation(s), if any, which must be provided a minimum of seven days
prior to the Board of Adjustment meeting. This will allow their
recommendation(s) to be included in the required staff report.



   (C)   The Planning and Zoning Official shall send notice of public
hearing to all property owners within the subject property and within 300
feet of the request (list of names and addresses and stamped, addressed
envelopes to be provided by the applicant) and shall publish a legal notice
of the public hearing a minimum of 15 days prior to the Board of Adjustment
public hearing. In addition the Planning and Zoning Official shall place a
public hearing notice on the property a minimum of 15 days prior to the Board
of Adjustment public hearing.



   (D)   The Planning and Zoning Official shall prepare a staff report
for the Board of Adjustment. This report shall be forwarded to the Board of
Adjustment and the applicant a minimum of five days prior to the Board of
Adjustment meeting. The report, at a minimum, shall review the extent to
which the application is consistent with the General Plan, other adopted city
regulations, policies and procedures, including the Board of Adjustment
provisions contained within the Zoning Ordinance, and shall include a
recommendation for approval or denial, conditions if applicable, and reasons
for the recommendation.



   (E)   The Board of Adjustment shall hear the application at public
hearing and make a decision at a regularly scheduled or special meeting. Any
decision by the Board of Adjustment shall be made and recorded by motion and
shall be consistent with the Board of Adjustment section of the Zoning
Ordinance.



   (F)   Appeals from the Board of Adjustment decision shall be
consistent with §§ 158.025 through 158.034 of this code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 10-2.03)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 895, passed -
-2008)



§ 154.018  PLOT PLAN AND BUILDING PERMIT.



   (A)   A plot plan (§ 154.044 of this chapter) along with required
fees (§§ 154.055 through 154.057 of this chapter) shall be submitted to the
City Planner.



   (B)   For work within the Main Street District, including the
Historic Preservation District, copies of the plot plan and supporting
documents shall be forwarded to the Main Street Design Committee for review.



   (C)   The applicant shall consult with the Chief Building Official
for general information regarding requirements for plot plan and building
permit applications and special considerations pertaining to the site. A
sketch plan should be brought in for more complex projects to show the
concept of the site development.



   (D)   Each reviewing city department shall review all plot plan
applications on Monday and/or Tuesday of each week and upon review shall
approve or shall approve subject to specific conditions being met. This
ensures that all applications shall be reviewed by staff within six working
days.



   (E)   Applicant meets with the Chief Building Official to review
recommendations of the various departments. Further consultation with the
various reviewing departments may be necessary to reach agreement on changes
in the plot plan. Design and service oriented issues (not code or ordinance
requirements) may be appealed to the Planning and Zoning Commission for final
determination.



   (F)   The applicant shall make final changes as agreed and submit
four copies of the approved plot plan to the Chief Building Official.



   (G)   The City Engineer will then prepare a memorandum of agreement
for public improvements setting forth the applicant’s financial assurance
that all required public improvements will be completed to city standards,
requirements and specifications (§ 154.073 of this chapter). The memorandum
of agreement for public improvements must be signed by the applicant prior to
issuance of the building permit.



   (H)   The applicant is then eligible for a building permit and
submits the following to the Chief Building Official:



      (1)   Building permit application form; and



      (2)   Two sets of building plans.



   (I)   The building plans will then be reviewed by the city staff or
referred to the city’s architecture or engineering consultant.



   (J)   The building permit is issued by the Chief Building Official
upon approval of the application and building plans and payment of the
required fees.



(Prior Code, § 10-2.04)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 895, passed -
-2008)



§ 154.019  PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENT.



   (A)   A property line in a platted subdivision may be adjusted by
any amount if the following conditions are met:



      (1)   The adjustment will only affect two adjacent lots; and



      (2)   Both adjusted lots will meet all requirements of the
Zoning Code.



   (B)   An improvement survey is filed with the Planning and Zoning
Official showing the original lot lines, the new lot lines, square footage of
each lot, any improvements on either lot, all setback dimensions and other
information that is necessary to ensure that both new lots will conform to
the provisions of the Zoning Code.



   (C)   The Planning and Zoning Official will review the improvement
survey and will approve the property line adjustment if both adjusted lots
meet all requirements of the Zoning Code.



(Prior Code, § 10-2.05)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 895, passed -
-2008)



§ 154.020  SUBDIVISION FINAL PLAT.



   (A)   The applicant shall submit the necessary application and plans
(§§ 154.035 through 154.044 of this chapter) and fees (§§ 154.055 through
154.057 of this chapter) to the city.



   (B)   The city will review the information to ensure that all
submittal requirements have been met. The applicant will be notified in
writing of any deficiencies within five working days. The application will
not be processed until it includes all submittal requirements.



   (C)   The Planning and Zoning Official shall refer the application
to the Departmental Review Team and shall schedule the completed application
for a Departmental Review Team hearing to be held within 30 days of the
submittal of the completed application.



   (D)   The applicant must attend the review meeting to present and
explain the application. If the applicant does not attend the meeting, the
application will not be considered.



   (E)   All Departmental Review Team recommendations, practical
concerns and technical requirements shall be in writing and shall be
presented to the applicant at the Departmental Review Team meeting. If any
city department fails to present written comments at this meeting, the
Planning and Zoning Official will notify the applicant that the subject
department has no concerns or comments. The subject department be able to
develop comments or concerns later in the process only with written
authorization from the City Manager.



   (F)   If more than one year elapses between the Departmental Review
Team decision date and the time when all concerns are met or explained in
writing, the application must be reviewed again by the Departmental Review
Team to ensure that the prior issues, concerns and technical requirements are
still applicable.



   (G)   The Planning and Zoning Official shall not forward the
application in final form to the City Council until all concerns of the
Departmental Review Team have been met unless the applicant submits a
detailed written statement to the City Council explaining why the conditions
or concerns are not or cannot be met. Upon compliance, the Planning and
Zoning Official shall schedule the application for the next available City
Council meeting.



   (H)   The City Council shall hear the application and make a
decision on the application at a regularly scheduled or special meeting. The
City Council may approve, approve with conditions or deny the application
request. If the City Council decides to approve the application request, the
City Attorney will be directed to prepare an ordinance approving the
application request. In addition, the City Engineer will be directed to
prepare a memorandum of agreement for public improvements (§ 154.073 of this
chapter) setting forth the applicant’s financial assurance that all
required public improvements will be completed to city standards,
requirements and specifications. These shall include half-street improvements
for any portion of a street that abuts the property. The memorandum of
agreement for public improvements must be signed by the applicant prior to
final decision by the City Council. City Council approval shall be made and
recorded by ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 10-2.06)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 773, passed -
-1997; Ord. 895, passed - -2008; Ord. 904, passed - -2008)




APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS




§ 154.035  WATER AGREEMENT REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   For conditional use permits, development master plans, minor
subdivisions, rezoning, subdivision (including both preliminary and final
plat), preliminary and final site plans and vacation requests, in addition to
the information required for review as set forth below, there must be a water
agreement between the applicant and the city.



   (B)   Water agreements will be prepared in accordance with policies
established by the City Council, as may be amended from time to time.



(Prior Code, § 10-3.01)



§ 154.036  CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.



   (A)   Information required at the time of application (one copy of
each):



      (1)   Completed application and fees; and



      (2)   Proof of ownership (title policy) and owner’s written
authorization.



   (B)   Information required directly on plans (25 copies of each to
be submitted with application - sheet size shall be no less than eight and
one-half inches by 11 inches and no more than 30 inches by 36 inches):



      (1)   Date, north arrow and engineer’s scale, one inch
equals 200 feet or larger;



      (2)   Name of project;



      (3)   Property address or location;



      (4)   Vicinity map at one-half mile radius;



      (5)   Legal description complete;



      (6)   Registered surveyor’s name and address;



      (7)   Total acreage;



      (8)   Latitude, longitude and elevation of property corners;



      (9)   Zoning on and adjacent to site;



      (10)   Names and dimensions of adjacent streets;



      (11)   Dimensions and square footage of each lot;



      (12)   Lot and block numbers;



      (13)   Proposed street names;



      (14)   Existing/proposed adjacent street improvements showing
pavement widths and intersecting streets;



      (15)   Existing/proposed rights-of-way in and adjacent;



      (16)   Existing/proposed easements in and adjacent;



      (17)   Existing/proposed utility lines (including fire
hydrants) and sizes in and adjacent;



      (18)   Existing/proposed curb cuts in and adjacent;



      (19)   Existing/proposed waterways and ditches in and adjacent;



      (20)   Topography acceptable to the City Engineer;



      (21)   Existing/proposed floodplain lines on and adjacent;



      (22)   Statement on how drainage will be handled;



      (23)   A statement: all, part or none of the property is in
the floodplain;



      (24)   Existing/proposed structures and paved areas on the
site;



      (25)   All public sites to be reserved or dedicated (parks,
streets and the like);



      (26)   Landscape plan;



      (27)   Percentage of land devoted to buildings, parking and
drives, sidewalks and landscaping in table form;



      (28)   Number of employees for non-residential uses and
required parking spaces;



      (29)   Proposed use of site;



      (30)   Gross and net residential densities of each parcel; and



      (31)   Phasing plan.



   (C)   Information required for review to be submitted with
application (one copy of each, except as noted):



      (1)   Capacity and need for water and for sewer;



      (2)   Stamped, addressed envelopes for all property owners
within 300 feet of proposed development;



      (3)   Construction schedule;



      (4)   Traffic impact analysis (three copies);



      (5)   Drainage report (three copies);



      (6)   Soil report sealed by a registered engineer (three
copies); and



      (7)   Water agreement (three copies).



   (D)   Additional information required prior to recording (one copy
of each to be submitted to Planning and Zoning Official after final City
Council approval):



      (1)   Final street plans and profiles stamped by a registered
engineer;



      (2)   Final drainage plan stamped by a registered engineer;



      (3)   Final utility plan stamped by a registered engineer;



      (4)   Final landscaping plan; and



      (5)   Financial security agreements.



(Prior Code, § 10-3.02)



§ 154.037  DEVELOPMENT MASTER PLAN.



   (A)   Information required at the time of application (one copy of
each):



      (1)   Completed application and fees; and



      (2)   Proof of ownership (title policy) and owner’s written
authorization.



   (B)   Information required directly on plans (25 copies of each to
be submitted with application - sheet size shall be no less than eight and
one-half inches by 11 inches and no more than 30 inches by 36 inches):



      (1)   Date, north arrow and engineer’s scale, one inch
equals 200 feet or larger;



      (2)   Name of project;



      (3)   Property address or location;



      (4)   Vicinity map at one-half mile radius;



      (5)   Legal description complete;



      (6)   Total acreage;



      (7)   Requested zoning districts with size of each;



      (8)   Zoning on and adjacent to site;



      (9)   Names and dimensions of adjacent streets;



      (10)   Proposed street names;



      (11)   Existing/proposed adjacent street improvements showing
pavement widths and intersecting streets;



      (12)   Existing/proposed rights-of-way in and adjacent;



      (13)   Existing/proposed easements in and adjacent;



      (14)   Existing/proposed utility lines (including fire
hydrants) and sizes in and adjacent;



      (15)   Existing/proposed waterways and ditches in and adjacent;



      (16)   Topography acceptable to the City Engineer;



      (17)   Statement on how drainage will be handled;



      (18)   Existing/proposed floodplain lines on and adjacent;



      (19)   Existing/proposed structures and paved areas on the
site;



      (20)   All public sites to be reserved or dedicated (parks,
streets and the like);



      (21)   Proposed use of site;



      (22)   Gross and net residential densities of each parcel;



      (23)   Phasing plan; and



      (24)   Land use consistent with or must await amendment of
General Plan.



   (C)   Information required for review-to be submitted with
application (one copy of each, except as noted):



      (1)   Capacity and need for water and for sewer;



      (2)   Stamped, addressed envelopes for all property owners
within 300 feet of proposed development;



      (3)   Construction schedule;



      (4)   Traffic impact analysis (three copies);



      (5)   Drainage report (three copies);



      (6)   Soil report sealed by a registered engineer (three
copies); and



      (7)   Water agreement (three copies).



(Prior Code, § 10-3.03)



§ 154.038  MINOR SUBDIVISION.



   (A)   Information required at the time of application (one copy of
each):



      (1)   Completed application and fees; and



      (2)   Proof of ownership (title policy) and owner’s written
authorization.



   (B)   Information required directly on plans (25 copies of each to
be submitted with application - sheet size shall be no less than eight and
one-half inches by 11 inches and no more than 30 inches by 36 inches):



      (1)   Date, north arrow and engineer’s scale, one inch
equals 200 feet or larger;



      (2)   Name of project;



      (3)   Property address or location;



      (4)   Vicinity map at one-half mile radius;



      (5)   Legal description complete;



      (6)   Registered surveyor’s name and address;



      (7)   Total acreage;



      (8)   Signature blocks (see § 154.072 of this chapter);



      (9)   Zoning on and adjacent to site;



      (10)   Names and dimensions of adjacent streets;



      (11)   Proposed lots and approximate dimensions;



      (12)   Dimensions and square footage of each lot;



      (13)   Lot and block numbers;



      (14)   Proposed street names;



      (15)   Location of survey monuments;



      (16)   Bearing, distances, chords, radii, central angles,
tangent lines and the like for all lots, blocks, perimeter and rights-of-way;



      (17)   Existing/proposed adjacent street improvements showing
pavement widths and intersecting streets;



      (18)   Existing/proposed rights-of-way in and adjacent;



      (19)   Existing/proposed easements in and adjacent;



      (20)   Existing/proposed utility lines (including fire
hydrants) and sizes in and adjacent;



      (21)   Existing/proposed curb cuts in and adjacent;



      (22)   Existing/proposed waterways and ditches in and adjacent;



      (23)   Topography acceptable to the City Engineer;



      (24)   Statement on how drainage will be handled;



      (25)   Existing/proposed floodplain lines on and adjacent;



      (26)   A statement: all, part or none of the property is in
the floodplain;



      (27)   Existing/proposed structures and paved areas on the
site;



      (28)   All public sites to be reserved or dedicated (parks,
streets and the like);



      (29)   Number of employees for non-residential uses;



      (30)   Proposed use of site;



      (31)   Gross and net residential densities of each parcel; and



      (32)   Latitude, longitude and elevation of property corners.



   (C)   Information required for review-to be submitted with
application (one copy of each, except as noted):



      (1)   Capacity and need for water and for sewer;



      (2)   Boundary closure;



      (3)   Traffic impact analysis (three copies);



      (4)   Drainage report (three copies); and



      (5)   Soil report sealed by a registered engineer (three
copies).



   (D)   Additional information required prior to recording (one copy
of each to be submitted to Planning and Zoning Official after final City
Council approval):



      (1)   Final street plans and profiles stamped by a registered
engineer;



      (2)   Final drainage plan stamped by a registered engineer;



      (3)   Final utility plan stamped by a registered engineer;



      (4)   Final landscaping plan; and



      (5)   Financial security agreements.



(Prior Code, § 10-3.04)



§ 154.039  REZONING.



   (A)   Information required at the time of application (one copy of
each):



      (1)   Completed application and fees;



      (2)   Petition (follow format in §§ 154.070 and 154.071 of
this chapter); and



      (3)   Proof of ownership (title policy) and owner’s written
authorization.



   (B)   Information required directly on plans (25 copies of each to
be submitted with application - sheet size shall be no less than eight and
one-half inches by 11 inches and no more than 30 inches by 36 inches):



      (1)   Date, north arrow and engineer’s scale, one inch
equals 200 feet or larger;



      (2)   Name of project;



      (3)   Property address or location;



      (4)   Vicinity map at one-half mile radius;



      (5)   Legal description complete;



      (6)   Registered surveyor’s name and address;



      (7)   Total acreage;



      (8)   Requested zoning districts with size of each;



      (9)   Zoning on and adjacent to site;



      (10)   Names and dimensions of adjacent streets;



      (11)   Proposed lots and approximate dimensions;



      (12)   Dimensions and square footage of each lot;



      (13)   Lot and block numbers;



      (14)   Proposed street names;



      (15)   Location of survey monuments;



      (16)   Bearing, distances, chords, radii, central angles,
tangent lines and the like for all lots, blocks, perimeter and rights-of-way;



      (17)   Existing/proposed adjacent street improvements showing
pavement widths and intersecting streets;



      (18)   Existing/proposed rights-of-way in and adjacent;



      (19)   Existing/proposed easements in and adjacent;



      (20)   Existing/proposed utility lines (including fire
hydrants) and sizes in and adjacent;



      (21)   Existing/proposed curb cuts in and adjacent;



      (22)   Existing/proposed waterways and ditches in and adjacent;



      (23)   Topography acceptable to the City Engineer;



      (24)   Statement on how drainage will be handled;



      (25)   Existing/proposed floodplain lines on and adjacent;



      (26)   A statement: all, part or none of the property is in
the floodplain;



      (27)   Existing/proposed structures and paved areas on the
site;



      (28)   Proposed heights of all structures;



      (29)   All public sites to be reserved or dedicated (parks,
streets and the like); and



      (30)   Land use consistent with or must await amendment of
General Plan.



   (C)   Information required for review-to be submitted with
application (one copy of each, except as noted):



      (1)   Capacity and need for water and for sewer;



      (2)   Boundary closure;



      (3)   Stamped, addressed envelopes for all property owners
within 300 feet of proposed rezoning;



      (4)   Construction schedule;



      (5)   Traffic impact analysis (three copies); and



      (6)   Drainage report (three copies).



(Prior Code, § 10-3.05)



§ 154.040  SITE PLAN; FINAL AND PRELIMINARY.



   (A)   (1)   Information required at the time of application (one
copy of each):



         (a)   Completed application and fees; and



         (b)   Proof of ownership (title policy) and owner’s
written authorization.



      (2)   Information required directly on plans (25 copies of
each to be submitted with application - sheet size shall be no less than
eight and one-half inches by 11 inches and no more than 30 inches by 36
inches):



         (a)   Date, north arrow and engineer’s scale, one inch
equals 200 feet or larger;



         (b)   Name of project;



         (c)   Property address or location;



         (d)   Legal description complete;



         (e)   Registered surveyor’s name and address;



         (f)   Total acreage;



         (g)   Signature blocks (see § 154.072 of this chapter);



         (h)   Zoning on and adjacent to site;



         (i)   Names and dimensions of adjacent streets;



         (j)   Dimensions and square footage of each lot;



         (k)   Lot and block numbers;



         (l)   Proposed street names;



         (m)   Bearing, distances, chords, radii, central angles,
tangent lines and the like for all lots, blocks, perimeter and rights-of-way;



         (n)   Existing/proposed adjacent street improvements
showing pavement widths and intersecting streets;



         (o)   Existing/proposed rights-of-way in and adjacent;



         (p)   Location and widths of sidewalks;



         (q)   Existing/proposed easements in and adjacent;



         (r)   Existing/proposed utility lines (including fire
hydrants) and sizes in and adjacent;



         (s)   Existing/proposed curb cuts in and adjacent;



         (t)   Existing/proposed waterways and ditches in and
adjacent;



         (u)   Existing/proposed floodplain lines on and adjacent;



         (v)   A statement: all, part or none of the property is
in the floodplain;



         (w)   Existing/proposed structures and paved areas on
the site;



         (x)   Proposed heights of all structures;



         (y)   All public sites to be reserved or dedicated
(parks, streets and the like);



         (z)   Landscape plan;



         (aa)   Percentage of land devoted to buildings, parking
and drives, sidewalks and landscaping in table form;



         (bb)   Number of employees for non-residential uses and
required parking spaces; and



         (cc)   Latitude, longitude and elevation on property
corners.



      (3)   Information required for review-to be submitted with
application (one copy of each, except as noted):



         (a)   Boundary closure;



         (b)   Letter from County Treasurer verifying payment of
taxes; and



         (c)   Soil report sealed by a registered engineer (three
copies).



      (4)   Additional information required prior to recording (one
copy of each to be submitted to Planning and Zoning Official after final City
Council approval):



         (a)   Final street plans and profiles stamped by a
registered engineer;



         (b)   Final drainage plan stamped by a registered
engineer;



         (c)   Final utility plan stamped by a registered
engineer;



         (d)   Final landscaping plan; and



         (e)   Financial security agreements.



(Prior Code, § 10-3.06)



   (B)   (1)   Information required at the time of application (one
copy of each):



         (a)   Completed application and fees; and



         (b)   Proof of ownership (title policy) and owner’s
written authorization.



      (2)   Information required directly on plans (25 copies of
each to be submitted with application - sheet size shall be no less than
eight and one-half inches by 11 inches and no more than 30 inches by 36
inches):



         (a)   Date, north arrow and engineer’s scale, one inch
equals 200 feet or larger;



         (b)   Name of project;



         (c)   Property address or location;



         (d)   Vicinity map at one-half mile radius;



         (e)   Legal description complete;



         (f)   Registered surveyor’s name and address;



         (g)   Total acreage;



         (h)   Zoning on and adjacent to site;



         (i)   Names and dimensions of adjacent streets;



         (j)   Lot and block numbers;



         (k)   Proposed street names;



         (l)   Existing/proposed adjacent street improvements
showing pavement widths and intersecting streets;



         (m)   Existing/proposed rights-of-way in and adjacent;



         (n)   Location and widths of sidewalks;



         (o)   Existing/proposed easements in and adjacent;



         (p)   Existing/proposed utility lines (including fire
hydrants) and sizes in and adjacent;



         (q)   Existing/proposed curb cuts in and adjacent;



         (r)   Existing/proposed waterways and ditches in and
adjacent;



         (s)   Topography acceptable to the City Engineer;



         (t)   Statement on how drainage will be handled;



         (u)   Existing/proposed floodplain lines on and adjacent;



         (v)   A statement: all, part or none of the property is
in the floodplain;



         (w)   Existing/proposed structures and paved areas on
the site;



         (x)   Proposed heights of all structures;



         (y)   All public sites to be reserved or dedicated
(parks, streets and the like);



         (z)   Landscape plan;



         (aa)   Percentage of land devoted to buildings, parking
and drives, sidewalks and landscaping in table form;



         (bb)   Number of employees for non-residential uses and
required parking spaces;



         (cc)   Proposed use of site;



         (dd)   Gross and net residential densities of each
parcel;



         (ee)   Latitude, longitude and elevation of property
corners; and



         (ff)   Phasing plan.



      (3)   Information required for review-to be submitted with
application (one copy of each, except as noted):



         (a)   Capacity and need for water and for sewer;



         (b)   Stamped, addressed envelopes for all property
owners within 300 feet of proposed development;



         (c)   Construction schedule;



         (d)   Protective covenants if proposed;



         (e)   Traffic impact analysis (three copies);



         (f)   Drainage report (three copies); and



         (g)   Water agreement (three copies).



(Prior Code, § 10-3.07)



§ 154.041  SUBDIVISIONS; FINAL AND PRELIMINARY PLAT.



   (A)   (1)   Information required at the time of application (one
copy of each):



         (a)   Completed application and fees; and



         (b)   Proof of ownership (title policy) and owner’s
written authorization.



      (2)   Information required directly on plans (25 copies of
each to be submitted with application - sheet size shall be no less than
eight and one-half inches by 11 inches and no more than 30 inches by 36
inches):



         (a)   Date, north arrow and engineer’s scale, one inch
equals 200 feet or larger;



         (b)   Name of project;



         (c)   Property address or location;



         (d)   Legal description complete;



         (e)   Registered surveyor’s name and address;



         (f)   Total acreage;



         (g)   Signature blocks (see § 154.072 of this chapter);



         (h)   Names and dimensions of adjacent streets;



         (i)   Dimensions and square footage of each lot;



         (j)   Lot and block numbers;



         (k)   Proposed street names;



         (l)   Location of survey monuments;



         (m)   Bearing, distances, chords, radii, central angles,
tangent lines and the like for all lots, blocks, perimeter and rights-of-way;



         (n)   Location and widths of sidewalks;



         (o)   A statement: all, part or none of the property is
in the floodplain; and



         (p)   All public sites to be reserved or dedicated
(parks, streets and the like).



      (3)   Information required for review to be submitted with
application (one copy of each, except as noted):



         (a)   Boundary closure;



         (b)   Letter from the County Treasurer verifying payment
of taxes; and



         (c)   Soil report sealed by a registered engineer (three
copies).



      (4)   Additional information required prior to recording (one
copy of each to be submitted to Planning and Zoning Official after final City
Council approval):



         (a)   Final street plans and profiles stamped by a
registered engineer;



         (b)   Final drainage plan stamped by a registered
engineer;



         (c)   Final utility plan stamped by a registered
engineer;



         (d)   Final landscaping plan; and



         (e)   Financial security agreements.



(Prior Code, § 10-3.08)



   (B)   (1)   Information required at the time of application (one
copy of each):



         (a)   Completed application and fees; and



         (b)   Proof of ownership (title policy) and owner’s
written authorization.



      (2)   Information required directly on plans (25 copies of
each to be submitted with application - sheet size shall be no less than
eight and one-half inches by 11 inches and no more than 30 inches by 36
inches):



         (a)   Date, north arrow and engineer’s scale, one inch
equals 200 feet or larger;



         (b)   Name of project;



         (c)   Property address or location;



         (d)   Vicinity map at one-half mile radius;



         (e)   Legal description complete;



         (f)   Registered surveyor’s name and address;



         (g)   Total acreage;



         (h)   Zoning on and adjacent to site;



         (i)   Names and dimensions of adjacent streets;



         (j)   Proposed lots and approximate dimensions and
square footage of each lot;



         (k)   Lot and block numbers;



         (l)   Proposed street names;



         (m)   Existing/proposed adjacent street improvements
showing pavement widths and intersecting streets;



         (n)   Existing/proposed rights-of-way in and adjacent;



         (o)   Location and widths of sidewalks;



         (p)   Existing/proposed easements in and adjacent;



         (q)   Existing/proposed utility lines (including fire
hydrants) and sizes in and adjacent;



         (r)   Existing/proposed curb cuts in and adjacent;



         (s)   Existing/proposed waterways and ditches in and
adjacent;



         (t)   Topography acceptable to the City Engineer;



         (u)   Statement on how drainage will be handled;



         (v)   Existing/proposed floodplain lines on and adjacent;



         (w)   A statement: all, part or none of the property is
in the floodplain;



         (x)   Existing/proposed structures and paved areas on
the site;



         (y)   All public sites to be reserved or dedicated
(parks, streets and the like);



         (z)   Number of employees for non-residential uses and
required parking spaces;



         (aa)   Proposed use of site;



         (bb)   Gross and net residential densities of each
parcel;



         (cc)   Latitude, longitude and elevation on property
corners; and



         (dd)   Phasing plan.



      (3)   Information required for review-to be submitted with
application (one copy of each, except as noted):



         (a)   Capacity and need for water and for sewer;



         (b)   Boundary closure;



         (c)   Stamped, addressed envelopes for all property
owners within 300 feet of proposed development;



         (d)   Construction schedule;



         (e)   Protective covenants if proposed;



         (f)   Traffic impact analysis (three copies);



         (g)   Drainage report (three copies); and



         (h)   Water agreement (three copies).



(Prior Code, § 10-3.09)



§ 154.042  VACATION.



   (A)   Information required at the time of application (one copy of
each):



      (1)   Completed application and fees;



      (2)   Petition (follow format in § 154.071 of this chapter);
and



      (3)   Proof of ownership (title policy) and owner’s written
authorization.



   (B)   Information required directly on plans (25 copies of each to
be submitted with application - sheet size shall be no less than eight and
one-half inches by 11 inches and no more than 30 inches by 36 inches):



      (1)   Date, north arrow and engineer’s scale, one inch
equals 200 feet or larger;



      (2)   Name of project;



      (3)   Vicinity map at one-half mile radius;



      (4)   Legal description complete;



      (5)   Registered surveyor’s name and address;



      (6)   Total acreage;



      (7)   Zoning on and adjacent to site;



      (8)   Names and dimensions of adjacent streets;



      (9)   Dimensions and square footage of each lot;



      (10)   Lot and block numbers;



      (11)   Location of survey monuments;



      (12)   Bearing, distances, chords, radii, central angles,
tangent lines and the like for all lots, blocks, perimeter and rights-of-way;



      (13)   Existing/proposed rights-of-way in and adjacent;



      (14)   Existing/proposed easements in and adjacent;



      (15)   Existing/proposed utility lines (including fire
hydrants) and sizes in and adjacent;



      (16)   Existing/proposed curb cuts in and adjacent;



      (17)   Existing/proposed structures and paved areas on the
site;



      (18)   All public sites to be reserved or dedicated (parks,
streets and the like);



      (19)   Number of employees for non-residential uses and
required parking spaces;



      (20)   Proposed use of site;



      (21)   Latitude, longitude and elevation on property corners;
and



      (22)   Phasing plan.



   (C)   Information required for review-to be submitted with
application (one copy of each, except as noted):



      (1)   Boundary closure;



      (2)   Stamped, addressed envelopes for all property owners
within 300 feet of proposed development;



      (3)   Traffic impact analysis (three copies); and



      (4)   Drainage report (three copies).



(Prior Code, § 10-3.10)



§ 154.043  VARIANCE.



   (A)   Information required at the time of application (one copy of
each):



      (1)   Completed application and fees;



      (2)   Proof of ownership (title policy) and/or owner’s
written authorization;



      (3)   Construction schedule; and



      (4)   Description of the variance request and a statement
explaining how it meets the findings of hardship and burden.



   (B)   Information required directly on plans (ten copies of each to
be submitted with application - sheet size shall be no less than eight and
one-half inches by 11 inches and no more than 30 inches by 36 inches):



      (1)   North arrow, date of plan, date of revision, legend and
engineer scale, one inch equals 200 feet or larger;



      (2)   Name of project;



      (3)   Vicinity map showing one-half mile radius;



      (4)   Address of project;



      (5)   Legal description;



      (6)   Name, address and phone number of owner;



      (7)   Zoning on and adjacent to site;



      (8)   Name, address and phone number of person or firm
responsible for plan;



      (9)   Lot size;



      (10)   Names and dimensions of adjacent streets;



      (11)   Existing/proposed rights-of-way in and adjacent;



      (12)   Existing/proposed easements in and adjacent;



      (13)   Existing/proposed utility lines (including fire
hydrants) and sizes in and adjacent;



      (14)   Existing/proposed curb cuts, paved areas, parking areas
and sidewalks;



      (15)   Existing/proposed waterways and ditches in or adjacent
to site;



      (16)   Topography acceptable to the City Planner;



      (17)   Existing/proposed floodplain lines in and adjacent;



      (18)   A statement: all, part or none of the property is in
the floodplain;



      (19)   Existing/proposed structures and their uses, with
dimensions and distances from platted property lines; and



      (20)   Number of employees for non-residential uses and
required parking spaces.



   (C)   Findings for variance requests:



      (1)   Strict enforcement of the Zoning Code results in
practical difficulty or unnecessary physical hardship inconsistent with the
objective of the code;



      (2)   Circumstances or conditions of the property that do not
apply generally to other parcels in the same zoning district;



      (3)   Strict enforcement of the Zoning Code deprives the
applicant of privileges enjoyed by the owners of other properties in the same
zone;



      (4)   Granting the variance does not constitute special
privilege inconsistent with other properties in the same zone;



      (5)   Granting the variance is not detrimental to the public
health, safety or welfare and is not materially injurious to properties on
the vicinity;



      (6)   In regard to signs, the granting of the variance will
not detract from the attractiveness or orderliness of the surrounding
neighborhood; and



      (7)   In regard to parking, present nor future traffic
generated by uses of sites in the vicinity will not interfere with the free
flow of traffic on the streets.



(Prior Code, § 10-3.11)



§ 154.044  PLOT PLANS.



   (A)   One-family through four-family residential structures.



      (1)   Information required at the time of application (one
copy of each):



         (a)   Completed application and fees; and



         (b)   Proof of ownership (title policy) and/or owner’s
written authorization.



      (2)   Information required directly on plans (ten copies of
each to be submitted with application):



         (a)   North arrow, date of plan, date of revision,
engineer scale, legend;



         (b)   Address of project;



         (c)   Legal description;



         (d)   Name, address and phone number of owner;



         (e)   Name, address and phone number of person or firm
responsible for plan;



         (f)   Lot size;



         (g)   Existing easements and rights-of-way;



         (h)   Proposed curb cuts, paved areas, parking areas and
sidewalks;



         (i)   Landscaping plan including existing vegetation to
remain and new vegetation with common and botanical name, planting size and
mature size;



         (j)   Waterways on or adjacent to site;



         (k)   Lot grading plan;



         (l)   Existing/proposed structures and their uses, with
dimensions and distances from platted property lines; and



         (m)   Location and size of proposed water and sewer
service connections.



(Prior Code, § 10-3.12)



   (B)   New structures or exterior remodeling of structures in the
Historic Preservation Zoning District.



      (1)   Information required at the time of application (one
copy of each):



         (a)   Completed application and fees; and



         (b)   Proof of ownership (title policy) and/or owner’s
written authorization.



      (2)   Information required directly on plans (ten copies of
each to be submitted with application) - sheet size 24 inches by 36 inches:



         (a)   North arrow, date of plan, date of revision,
engineer scale, legend;



         (b)   Name of project;



         (c)   Address of project;



         (d)   Legal description;



         (e)   Name, address and phone number of owner;



         (f)   Name, address and phone number of person or firm
responsible for plan;



         (g)   Lot size;



         (h)   Existing uses adjacent;



         (i)   Existing zoning adjacent;



         (j)   Existing curb cuts on both sides of perimeter
streets;



         (k)   Existing easements and rights-of-way;



         (l)   Proposed easements and rights-of-way;



         (m)   Existing paved areas;



         (n)   Proposed curb cuts, paved areas, parking areas and
sidewalks;



         (o)   Landscaping plan including existing vegetation to
remain and new vegetation with common and botanical name, planting size and
mature size;



         (p)   Landscape installation and material costs if costs
are to be guaranteed;



         (q)   Existing two-foot contours or other topography
acceptable to City Engineer;



         (r)   Proposed two-foot contours or other topography
acceptable to City Engineer;



         (s)   Waterways on or adjacent to site;



         (t)   Drainage plan;



         (u)   Existing/proposed structures and their uses, with
dimensions and distances from platted property lines;



         (v)   Square footages of proposed structures;



         (w)   Proposed use and number of employees;



         (x)   Number of units by type if residential;



         (y)   Location and description of all signs and exterior
lights;



         (z)   Parking lot layout;



         (aa)   Trash disposal areas and enclosures;



         (bb)   Location and size of proposed water and sewer
service connections;



         (cc)   Elevation drawings showing all views of existing
and proposed structures including height, colors and textures;



         (dd)   Graphic information for all exterior materials,
colors, architectural detail including trim and hardware, illumination and
security features;



         (ee)   Detail sign plan showing size, color, letter
style, location and method of attachment; and



         (ff)   Study of capacity and need for water and sewer
services.



(Prior Code, § 10-3.13)



   (C)   Signs.



      (1)   Information required at the time of application (one
copy of each):



         (a)   Completed application and fees; and



         (b)   Proof of ownership (title policy) and/or owner’s
written authorization.



      (2)   Information required directly on plans (ten copies of
each to be submitted with application):



         (a)   North arrow, date of plan, date of revision,
engineer scale, legend;



         (b)   Name of project;



         (c)   Address of project;



         (d)   Name, address and phone number of owner;



         (e)   Name, address and phone number of person or firm
responsible for plan;



         (f)   Lot size;



         (g)   Existing uses adjacent;



         (h)   Existing zoning adjacent;



         (i)   Existing easements and rights-of-way;



         (j)   Proposed easements and rights-of-way;



         (k)   Existing/proposed structures and their uses, with
dimensions and distances from platted property lines;



         (l)   Location and description of all signs and exterior
lights; and



         (m)   Detail sign plan showing size, color, letter
style, location and method of attachment.



(Prior Code, § 10-3.14)



   (D)   Special use permit.



      (1)   Information required at the time of application (one
copy of each):



         (a)   Narrative describing special use;



         (b)   Completed application and fees; and



         (c)   Proof of ownership (title policy) and/or owner’s
written authorization.



      (2)   Information required directly on plans (ten copies of
each to be submitted with application - sheet size shall be no less than
eight and one-half inches by 11 inches and no more than 30 inches by 36
inches):



         (a)   North arrow, date of plan, date of revision,
legend and engineer scale, one inch equals 200 feet or larger;



         (b)   Name of project;



         (c)   Address of project;



         (d)   Name, address and phone number of owner;



         (e)   Name, address and phone number of person or firm
responsible for plan;



         (f)   Lot size;



         (g)   Existing uses on and adjacent to site;



         (h)   Existing zoning on and adjacent to site;



         (i)   Existing curb cuts on both sides of perimeter
streets;



         (j)   Existing/proposed easements and rights-of-way;



         (k)   Existing paved areas;



         (l)   Proposed curb cuts, paved areas, parking areas and
sidewalks;



         (m)   Existing/proposed waterways and ditches on or
adjacent to site;



         (n)   Lot grading plan;



         (o)   Existing/proposed structures and their uses, with
dimensions and distances from platted property lines;



         (p)   Square footages of proposed structures;



         (q)   Proposed use and number of employees (for
non-residential uses);



         (r)   Location and description of all signs and exterior
lights;



         (s)   Parking lot layout;



         (t)   Trash disposal areas and enclosures;



         (u)   Location and size of proposed water and sewer
service connections; and



         (v)   Detail sign plan showing size, color, letter
style, location and method of attachment.



(Prior Code, § 10-3.15)



   (E)   All other requests.



      (1)   Information required at the time of application (one
copy of each):



         (a)   Completed application and fees; and



         (b)   Proof of ownership (title policy) and/or owner’s
written authorization.



      (2)   Information required directly on plans (ten copies of
each to be submitted with application) - sheet size shall be no less than
eight and one-half inches by 11 inches and no more than 30 inches by 36
inches):



         (a)   North arrow, date of plan, date of revision,
engineer scale, legend;



         (b)   Name of project;



         (c)   Address of project;



         (d)   Legal description;



         (e)   Name, address and phone number of owner;



         (f)   Name, address and phone number of person or firm
responsible for plan;



         (g)   Lot size;



         (h)   Existing uses adjacent;



         (i)   Existing zoning adjacent;



         (j)   Existing curb cuts on both sides of perimeter
streets;



         (k)   Existing easements and rights-of-way;



         (l)   Proposed easements and rights-of-way;



         (m)   Existing paved areas;



         (n)   Proposed curb cuts, paved areas, parking areas and
sidewalks;



         (o)   Landscaping plan including existing vegetation to
remain and new vegetation with common and botanical name, planting size and
mature size;



         (p)   Landscape installation and material costs if costs
are to be guaranteed;



         (q)   Existing two-foot contours or other topography
acceptable to City Engineer;



         (r)   Proposed two-foot contours or other topography
acceptable to City Engineer;



         (s)   Waterways on or adjacent to site;



         (t)   Drainage plan;



         (u)   Existing/proposed structures and their uses, with
dimensions and distances from platted property lines;



         (v)   Square footages of proposed structures;



         (w)   Proposed use and number of employees;



         (x)   Number of units by type if residential;



         (y)   Location and description of all signs and exterior
lights;



         (z)   Parking lot layout;



         (aa)   Trash disposal areas and enclosures;



         (bb)   Location and size of proposed water and sewer
service connections;



         (cc)   Elevation drawings showing all views of existing
and proposed structures including height, colors and textures;



         (dd)   Detail sign plan showing size, color, letter
style, location and method of attachment; and



         (ee)   Study of capacity and need for water and sewer
services.



(Prior Code, § 10-3.16)



(Ord. 895, passed - -2008)




PLANNING AND ZONING FEES




§ 154.055  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to set forth the schedule of fees
charged by the city’s Planning and Zoning Department for providing various
planning and zoning services.



(Prior Code, § 10-4.01)



§ 154.056  APPLICABILITY.



   The new and/or increased fees set forth in this subchapter shall apply
to any project making its initial planning and zoning application on or after
the effective date. Any project having submitted an application and having
paid fees prior to the effective date under the then current fee schedule
shall continue its public reviews for any subsequent, related application
under that schedule.



(Prior Code, § 10-4.02)



§ 154.057  FEE SCHEDULE.



   A fee schedule for planning and zoning fees shall be adopted by Council
resolution at a duly constituted meeting.




PETITIONS, CERTIFICATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS




§ 154.070  REZONING PETITION.



 


(I, We)                                              
                    the undersigned, being the landowners of the
property described as:                                    
                                                   
                  hereby request a change of zoning from        
        to               and do herewith pay the required rezoning
fee.


                                                  
                                                   
                                                  
               
Date            Owner’s
Signature            Property Description

 



 



(Prior Code, § 10-5.01)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 154.071  PETITION TO VACATE RIGHT-OF-WAY.



 


(I, We)                                              
                  the undersigned, being the landowners of the
property, described as:                                    
                                               
hereby request that the City of Williams vacate the R.O.W. located and known
as                                         for the
following reasons: ______________
______________                                         
                                                   
                                                   
 
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                  .


                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                   


Date         Signature      Address         Property
Description


 

                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                   

 

We, being property owners adjacent to the above mentioned property or
adjacent to a part of the R.O.W. not to be vacated, are NOT opposed to the
above described R.O.W. being vacated.

 

                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                   


Date         Signature      Address         Property
Description


 



(Prior Code, § 10-5.02)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 154.072  CERTIFICATION BLOCKS FOR SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN.



 


(LEGAL NAME OF SUBDIVISION OR SITE PLAN)                        
                                                   
 

                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
         

Description:                                          
                                                   
                                                   
 
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
         
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
         
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
         

A plat/site plan of a parcel of land in the City of Williams, Arizona located
in the                 1/4                 1/4, Section   
          T             N, R             E of the      
                                                 
P.M. and more particularly described as follows:

 


Beginning at the.......(LEGAL DESCRIPTION)........containing ________ acres.


 

Dedication:

Know all men by these presents, that we (names of all the landowners) being
the sole owners of the land described herein, have caused said land to be
laid out and platted/site planned under the name of and do hereby dedicate to
the public forever all streets, alleys and utility easements as indicated
hereon.

 

In witness whereof, we have hereunto set our hands and seals this        
    day of                               , 20        .

 

                                                   
                                                   
                                                 


John Doe                              Mary Doe


 



 



 


Notarial Certificate:

 


STATE OF ARIZONA      )


COUNTY OF                                             )

 

The foregoing instrument was acknowledged before me by              
                                    , this          
        day of                             , 20       
            . Witness my hand and seal.

 

My commission expires                                    
      ,                     .

 



 



 


Surveyor’s Certificate:

 

I certify this plat/site plan accurately represents the results of a survey
made by me or under my direct supervision and done in accord with applicable
State of Arizona requirements.

 

                                                   
              Arizona Reg. No                          
                   

 



 



 


Easement Approval: Utility easements are adequate as shown and are hereby
approved.

 



 



 


City Engineer’s Approval:

 

Approved this the                   day of                
                    , 20                .

 

                                                   
                           

City Engineer

 



 



 


Planning and Zoning Commission Approval:

 

Approved this the                         day of          
                        , 20                  .

 

                                                   
                             

Chairperson, Williams Planning and Zoning Commission

 



 



 


Mayor’s Certificate:

 

This is to certify that a plat/site plan of the above described property was
approved by Ordinance No. ____________ of the City of Williams, passed and
adopted on the day of                               A.D. 20 
        , and that the Mayor of the City of Williams, as authorized by
said ordinance, on behalf of the City, hereby acknowledges and adopts the
said plat/site plan upon which this certificate is endorsed for all purposes
indicated thereon.

 

                                             
                                           


Mayor               Attest


 

Seal

 



 



 


Clerk and Recorder’s Certificate:

 


STATE OF ARIZONA      )



COUNTY OF COCONINO      )


 

I hereby certify that this instrument was filed in my office at        
          o’clock         M this the                    
    day of A.D. 20              , and is recorded in plat book No.
            , page no.               , reception no.        
          .

 

                                                  
                                                   
                                    


Deputy            Recorder               Fees


 



 



(Prior Code, § 10-6.01)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 154.073  FINANCIAL SECURITY FOR COMPLETION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Applicability. Any person requesting approval of a
subdivision, site plan, rezoning or building permit application within the
city shall give the city full 100% financial assurance that all public
improvements including utilities, streets, walks, curbs and gutters, drainage
facilities, paths, open space, sprinkling systems and landscaping, as may be
required, shall be completed to city requirements, standard and
specifications. These shall include half-street improvements for any portion
of a street that abuts the property.



(Prior Code, § 10-7.01)



   (B)   Acceptable forms of financial security. Such financial
security shall be in the sum as the city staff may estimate to be adequate
for the completion of the required improvements. Such financial security
shall be in the form of:



      (1)   Cash deposit with the city;



      (2)   Guarantee from a lender based upon a cash deposit, in a
form acceptable to the City Attorney; or



      (3)   Irrevocable letter of credit in a form acceptable to the
City Attorney.



(Prior Code, § 10-7.02)



   (C)   Procedure.



      (1)   Development plans which require approval by City Council:



         (a)   Any person subdividing or developing lands within
the city shall enter into a contract with the city, which contract shall give
the city full assurance that all improvements shall be completed by the
developer to city standards;



         (b)   Any subdivision plat, site plan or rezoning which
requires approval by City Council may be divided into phases, each phase
providing all necessary improvements. No building permit shall be issued at
any segment of development until all utilities, storm drainage facilities,
curbs and gutters, sidewalks, and aggregate base material have been installed
per the approved engineering plans on file with the Engineer office of the
city, unless specifically approved by the City Council;



         (c)   Up to 90% of said funds shall be released to the
developer as improvements are completed as determined by the city staff, and
authorized by the Director of Finance. The city shall reserve a deposit of
10% of the total estimated cost of public improvements for any one
development or phase, and in no event shall any portion of the 10% be
released until after all the improvements as installed have been finally
accepted by the City Council, by formal resolution or motion, which
acceptance shall not be given until at least one year after a written
statement of construction acceptance in accord with city standards has been
given the developer; and



         (d)   It shall be the duty of the developer to request
both construction and final inspections, in writing, and the city shall be
under no obligation to release any funds until said inspections are made and
the improvements found to comply with city standards. Any repairs required to
be made at time of final inspection will be made by the developer within 90
days of notice to repair or the cost thereof shall be withheld from the
financial security and the city will contract to have the repairs made. In
the event that the cost of required repairs exceeds the financial security,
the developer shall be liable for such costs.



      (2)   Development plans which do not require approval by City
Council:



         (a)   Such financial security shall be in the sum as the
city staff may estimate to be adequate for the completion of the required
improvements. Such financial security shall be in the form of cash deposit
with the city or guarantee from a lender based upon a cash deposit, in a form
acceptable to the City Attorney; or irrevocable letter of credit in a form
acceptable to the City Attorney; and



         (b)   Upon completion of all necessary public
improvements found to be in compliance with city standards, financial
security may be released in whole or in part upon written request by the
developer to the City Engineer, who is authorized to release same.



(Prior Code, § 10-7.03)



(Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 904, passed - -2008)



§ 154.074  DEDICATIONS AND EXACTIONS.



   (A)   Right of appeal.



      (1)   Notwithstanding anything in this chapter, or any city
ordinance, to the contrary, the city shall not take, exact or require the
dedication of any property without complying with the requirements of A.R.S.
§§ 9-500.12 et seq.



      (2)   In the event any person believes that a dedication or
exaction of property is being required by the city to use, develop or improve
land, in violation of A.R.S. §§ 9-500.12 et seq., such person shall have a
right to appeal the decision made by any official or agency of the city to
the Board of Adjustment. The appeal procedure will be in conformity with
A.R.S. §§ 9-500.12 et seq.



      (3)   In order to provide notice of this chapter and the
appeal rights provided herein to all property owners who apply to the city to
use, improve or develop their property, the policy provisions of division (B)
below will be provided to all property owners who apply to the city for any
use, improvement or development of their property.



(Prior Code, § 10-8.01)



   (B)   City policy concerning appeals from required dedications or
exactions. In addition to other rights granted by the U.S. and Arizona
Constitution, federal and state law and city ordinances or regulations, one
is notified of his or her right to appeal any dedication or exaction which is
required of him or her by an administrative agency or official of the city as
a condition of granting approval of the request to use, improve or develop
the property.



(Prior Code, § 10-8.02)



   (C)   Appeal procedure.



      (1)   The appeal must be in writing and filed with or mailed
to the Board of Adjustment, (c/o City Clerk, 113 South First Street,
Williams, Arizona 86046) within 30 days of the administrative agency or other
official determination requiring the dedication or exaction.



      (2)   No fee will be charged for the filing.



      (3)   The hearing will be scheduled within 30 days of receipt
of the request. The city will bear the burden of proving that the dedications
or exactions to be imposed on the property bear an essential nexus between
the requirement and a legitimate governmental interest and that the proposed
dedication or exaction is roughly proportional to the impact of the use,
improvement or development proposed by the person.



      (4)   Ten days’ notice will be given to him or her of the
date, time and place of the hearing.



      (5)   The Board of Adjustment must render its decision in a
public meeting either at the first hearing or no later than their next
regular meeting, but in no event longer than 30 days from the first hearing
date.



      (6)   The Board of Adjustment can affirm the dedication or
exaction, modify it or delete the requirement.



      (7)   If a person is dissatisfied with the decision of the
Board of Adjustment, he or she may file a complaint for a trial de novo with
the Superior Court within 30 days of the Board of Adjustment decision.



(Prior Code, § 10-8.03)



(Ord. 747, passed - -1995)




HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS




§ 154.085  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to:



   (A)   Protect the public from the natural hazards of erosion,
rockslides, and storm water runoff;



   (B)   Ensure that the built form adapts to the natural mountainside
topography, thereby reducing visually prominent scarring produced by streets,
driveways, building pads and associated infrastructure servicing the
development; and



   (C)   Provide development and construction practices and methods to
ensure greater fire protection in hillside areas.



(Prior Code, § 10-10.01)  (Ord. 862, passed - -2006)



§ 154.086  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   (A)   Preliminary plat. In addition to the information normally
required for submittal of a preliminary plat, the following information shall
also be provided:



      (1)   A topographic map and slope analysis in 10% intervals
(e.g. 0%-10%, +10%-20%, +20%-30%, +30%...) of existing terrain, showing, in
addition to contours, features on the site that require special design
considerations as may be identified by the applicant, the Planner and/or the
City Engineer;



      (2)   Where necessary to determine that lots will be usable,
the Commission may recommend and the Council may require that a disturbance
envelope be shown for each lot, demonstrating conformance with the grading
and drainage regulations required by the city and showing the natural
topography of the total parcel to be platted, the location and size of all
proposed building sites and access, the finished grade at all improvement
locations and the depth and extent of all cuts and fills; and



      (3)   Soil, geotechnical and/or geological reports as required
to identify soil-bearing capabilities or geological hazards specific to the
subject property. Geotechnical analysis must include the native soils’
stable slope conditions for cuts and fills.



   (B)   Final plat. In addition to the information normally required
for submittal of a final plat the following information shall also be
provided: a disturbance envelope shall be shown for each lot including a
driveway alignment, based on the preliminary roadway grades, which conforms
to the grading and drainage requirements and all other applicable provisions
of this code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 10-10.02)  (Ord. 862, passed - -2006)



§ 154.087  SPECIAL DESIGN STANDARDS.



   (A)   Street grades shall conform as closely as possible to natural
topography, but shall not exceed 10%. (See § 154.089(A) of this chapter.)



   (B)   Street grades exceeding 8% (see § 154.089(A) of this chapter)
shall have a maximum length of 600 feet.



   (C)   Private access-way grades shall conform as closely as possible
to natural topography, any portion that exceeds 16% (see § 154.089(A) of
this chapter) shall be heated.



   (D)   Where pedestrian trails or pathways are proposed, acceptable
surface treatments include stabilized decomposed granite, asphalt or
concrete. Sidewalks may be replaced by the trails or pathways only upon
approval of a variance request by the City Council. Minimum width of
pedestrian trails or pathways is six feet.



   (E)   Vertical curbs shall be required on the downhill sides of
streets having grades of 6% or greater. Concrete “u” or “V” gutters
may be considered in place of conventional rolled or vertical curbs upon
submittal of a supporting drainage report acceptable to the City Engineer.



   (F)   On a corner lot, no grading shall be allowed which results in
the ground level being raised to obstruct the vision at a height of more than
three feet above the grade of either street within an area formed by the lot
lines on the street sides of said lot and a line joining points on said lot
lines located a distance of 33 feet from the point of their intersection.
Sight distance triangles shall be shown on the final plat and shall be based
on the horizontal and vertical roadway geometry.



   (G)   Transverse street cross sections with the gutter on the uphill
side may be used where approved by the City Engineer. All cut and fill slopes
shall be within the roadway rights-of-way or roadway easements or dedicated
slope easements. Slope maintenance easements for roadway cuts and fills may
be required by the City Engineer and be shown on the final plat.



   (H)   “Panhandle” double frontage and other unusually configured
lots, including lots which have a width to depth ratio greater that one to
three (1:3), shall be permitted if it can be adequately demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the Commission that their design will eliminate excessive
cuts and will not adversely affect any other lot so configured.



   (I)   Each private access way serving more than one lot shall have a
minimum paved surface of 20 feet in width or as may be required by city
standards and specifications. Where needed, additional easements for drainage
or utilities shall be provided.



   (J)   Cut and fill slopes shall be set back from site boundaries a
horizontal distance measured perpendicular to the site boundary. The top of
cut slopes shall not be made nearer to the boundary than one-fifth of the cut
height with a minimum three-foot setback. The toe of the fill slope shall not
be made nearer the boundary than one-half the height of the slope with a
minimum three-foot setback.



(Prior Code, § 10-10.03)  (Ord. 862, passed - -2006)



§ 154.088  GRADING STANDARDS FOR LOTS, PARCELS AND PLANNED DEVELOPMENT
SITES.



   (A)   Not more than 5% of a lot, parcel or planned development site
shall be left with a cross slope steeper than the natural grade of the ground
or steeper that 25% whichever is greater.



   (B)   The total area of all cuts and fills, not including the
enclosed floor area of the dwelling, shall not exceed 15% of the lot, parcel
or planned development site area.



   (C)   Maximum height of structure must conform to the zoning for its
district and is determined by measuring vertically from the natural grade at
the lowest point adjacent to the structure to the highest point of the
structure. (See § 154.089(B) of this chapter.)



   (D)   The highest point of the structure must not extend above a
20-degree angle of declination from the nearest ridgeline, rock outcropping
or other prominent visible feature. (See § 154.089(B).)



   (E)   Cut or fill slopes shall be entirely contained within the lot
disturbance envelope during construction and when final grading is complete.



   (F)   All excavated materials which are to be retained on site in
accordance with an approved grading plan shall be suitably landscaped,
contained behind retaining walls or placed so that the slopes of any exposed
fill material will not exceed 25% and will not exceed four feet in height.



   (G)   (1)   Engineered grading plans are required where cut or
fill exceeds four feet in height and walls are required for slope
stabilization/containment.



      (2)   No retaining wall shall exceed eight feet in height and
100 linear feet in length.



   (H)   Retaining walls including their footings must be engineered.



   (I)   Cut and fill slopes shall be provided with subsurface drainage
as necessary for stability.



(Prior Code, § 10-10.04)  (Ord. 862, passed - -2006)



§ 154.089  DIAGRAMS.



   (A)







 



   (B)   







 



(Prior Code, § 10-10.05)  (Ord. 862, passed - -2006)



CHAPTER 155:  FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION



Section




General Provisions




   155.01   Statutory authorization



   155.02   Findings of fact



   155.03   Statement of purpose



   155.04   Methods of reducing flood losses



   155.05   Definitions



   155.06   Application



   155.07   Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard



   155.08   Compliance



   155.09   Abrogation and greater restrictions



   155.10   Interpretation



   155.11   Disclaimer of liability



   155.12   Statutory exceptions



   155.13   Unlawful acts



   155.14   Declaration of public nuisance



   155.15   Abatement of violations



   155.16   Severability




Administration and Enforcement




   155.30   Floodplain Administrator



   155.31   Development permit



   155.32   Variances




Flood Hazard Reduction




   155.45   Construction standards



   155.46   Storage of materials and equipment



   155.47   Utility standards



   155.48   Development standards; subdivisions



   155.49   Manufactured home standards



   155.50   Recreational vehicle standards



   155.51   Floodways




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 155.01  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.



   In A.R.S. § 48-3610, the state’s Legislature enabled the city to
adopt regulations in conformance with A.R.S. § 48-3603 designed to promote
the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.



(Prior Code, §§ 7-2.01, 8-12.01)  (Ord. 858, passed - -2006; Ord. 863,
passed - -2006)



§ 155.02  FINDINGS OF FACT.



   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic
inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief and impairment of the tax
base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare.



   (B)   These flood losses may be caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights
and velocities and, when inadequately anchored, cause damage in other areas.
Uses that are inadequately flood proofed, elevated or otherwise protected
from flood damage, also contribute to the flood loss.



(Prior Code, §§ 7-2.02, 8-12.01)  (Ord. 858, passed - -2006; Ord. 863,
passed - -2006)



§ 155.03  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:



   (A)   Protect human life and health;



   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;



   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated
with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;



   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;



   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as
water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and
bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;



   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use
and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize blight
areas caused by flooding;



   (G)   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in
an area of special flood hazard;



   (H)   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions; and



   (I)   Maintain eligibility for disaster relief.



(Prior Code, §§ 7-2.02, 8-12.01)  (Ord. 858, passed - -2006; Ord. 863,
passed - -2006)



§ 155.04  METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.



   (A)   These regulations lake precedence over any less restrictive
conflicting local laws, ordinances and codes.



   (B)   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes
methods and provisions to:



      (1)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health,
safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities;



      (2)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including
facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the
time of initial construction;



      (3)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream,
channels and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
flood waters;



      (4)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development
which may increase flood damage; and



      (5)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers
which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which flay increase flood
hazards in other areas.



(Prior Code, §§ 7-2.03, 8-12.01)  (Ord. 858, passed - -2006; Ord. 863,
passed - -2006)



§ 155.05  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   A ZONE. See SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA.



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE, LOW-COST AND SMALL. A structure that is:



      (1)   Solely fir the parking of no more than two cars or
limited storage (small, low cost sheds); and



      (2)   Any structure under 120 square feet.



   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.



   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or A-1 Zone on a
community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1% or greater annual
chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly
defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable
and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by
ponding or sheet flow.



   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
These areas are designated as Zone A, A11, AO, AH and A1-30 on the FIRM and
other areas determined by the criteria adopted by the Director of the
state’s Department of Water Resources. See SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA.)



   BASE FLOOD. A flood which has a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year. (Also called the 100-YEAR FLOOD.)



   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map for Zones A1, AE, A1-30, VE and N1-V30 that indicates the water
surface elevation resulting from it flood that has a 1% or greater chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year.



   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (i.e.,
below ground level) on all sides.



   BUILDING. See STRUCTURE.



   COMMUNITY. Any state, area or political subdivision thereof, or any
Indian tribe or authorized tribal organization or authorized native
organization, which has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management
regulations for the areas within its jurisdiction.



   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, tilling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.



   ENCROACHMENT. The advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, till,
excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain,
which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.



   EROSION. The process of the gradual wearing away of landmasses. This
peril is not, per se, covered under the program.



   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: the overflow of flood
waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source; and/or the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a
lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by
waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly
caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as
flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and
unforeseeable event which results in FLOODING, as defined in this definition.



   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency Floodplain Management Ordinance (FEMA) or
Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) has delineated both the areas of
special flood hazards and the floodway.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). The official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA)
has delineated, both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community.



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, Flood
Insurance Rate Maps, Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps and the water surface
elevation of the base flood.



   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source. See FLOOD or FLOODING.



   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The community official designated by title to
administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.



   FLOODPLAIN BOARD. The Board of Directors of the Flood Control District
of Coconino County, or the City Council of The City of Williams, at such
times as they are engaged in the enforcement of this ordinance. (Floodplain
Board as defined in A.R.S. § 48-3601 for counties.)



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving
and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain,
including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control
works, floodplain management regulations and open space plans.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. The ordinance and other zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other
application of police power which control development in flood-prone areas.
This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination
thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and
damage.



   FLOOD-PROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.



   FLOOD-RELATED EROSION. The collapse or subsidence of land along the
shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining caused by
waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly
caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such
as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and
unforeseeable event which results in flooding.



   FLOODWAY. The area of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated
height. Also referred to as REGULATORY FLOODWAY.



   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use which cannot perform its intended
purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The
term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for
the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship
repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related
manufacturing facilities.



   GOVERNING BODY. The local governing unit (i.e., county or municipality)
that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the
public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.



   HARDSHIP. As related to § 155.32 of this chapter, meaning the
exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested
variance. The City Council requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual
and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship
alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical
handicaps, personal preferences or the disapproval of one’s neighbors
likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an EXCEPTIONAL HARDSHIP. All of these
problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance,
even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to
build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.



   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.



   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:



      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;



      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary
of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;



      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic
places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved
by the Secretary of Interior; or



      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic
places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:



         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior; or



         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in
states without approved programs. Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the
lowest enclosed area, including the basement. See “Basement.” An
unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is
not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided that, such enclosure is
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable
non-elevation design requirements of this subchapter.



   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without
a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels)
of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.



   MARKET VALUE. Defined in the substantial damage and substantial
improvement procedures.



   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program,
the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929. North American Vertical
Datum (NAYD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on
a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For the purposes of determining insurance rates,
structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after
the effective date of an initial Flood Insurance Rate Map or after
12-31-1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures. For floodplain management purposes, NEW CONSTRUCTION means
structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after
the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.



   OBSTRUCTION. Including, but not limited to, any dart, wall, wharf;
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation,
channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence rock, gravel,
refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or
projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the
direction and or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its
propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water or its
likelihood of being carried downstream.



   ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD or 100-YEAR FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance
of being equaled or exceeded in an given year. See BASE FLOOD.



   PERSON. An individual or the individual’s agent, a firm, partnership,
association or corporation, or an agent of the aforementioned groups, or the
state or its agencies or political subdivisions.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:



      (1)   Built on a single chassis:



      (2)   400 square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;



      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light-duly truck; and



      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling
but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.



   REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION (RFE). An elevation one foot above the base
flood elevation for a watercourse for which the base flood elevation has been
determined and shall be determined by the criteria developed by the Director
of the state’s Department of Water Resources for all other watercourses.



   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height,



   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook and the like.



   SHEET FLOW AREA. See AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING.



   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). An area in the floodplain subject to
a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on a Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map as Zone A, AO, A1-A30,
AE, A99 or AH.



   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days
from the date of the permit. The actual START means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include
land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include
the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation
for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary
forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not
part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual START
OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.



   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building that is principally above
ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition
or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50%
of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction”
of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
“substantial damage”, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
term does not, however, include either:



      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct
existing violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living
conditions; or



      (2)   Any alteration of it “historic structure”; provided
that, the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued
designation as a “historic structure”.



   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this subchapter
which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by
this subchapter.



   VIOLATION.



      (1)   The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations.



      (2)   A structure or other development without the elevation
certificate, other certifications or other evidence of compliance required in
this chapter is presumed to be in VIOLATION until such time as that
documentation is provided.



   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD)
of 1988, or other datum, of hoods of various magnitudes and frequencies in
the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.



   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream., wash, arroyo, channel or
other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.



(Prior Code, §§ 7-2.04, 8-12.02)  (Ord. 858, passed - -2006; Ord. 863,
passed - -2006)



§ 155.06  APPLICATION.



   This subchapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards
within the corporate limits of the city.



(Prior Code, §§ 7-2.05, 8-12.03)  (Ord. 858, passed - -2006; Ord. 863,
passed - -2006)



§ 155.07  BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.



   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled “The
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Coconino County”, dated 9-29-2006, with
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated 9-29-2006, and all
subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the
minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by
studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which
are recommended to the Floodplain Board by the Floodplain Administrator. The
Floodplain Board, within its area of jurisdiction, shall delineate (or may,
by rule, require developers of land to delineate) for areas where development
is ongoing or imminent, and thereafter as development becomes imminent,
floodplains consistent with the criteria developed by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and the Director of the state’s Department of Water
Resources. The FIS and FIRM panels are on file at Williams City Hall, 113 S.
1st Street, Williams, AZ 86046 in the office of the Building Inspector.



(Prior Code, §§ 7-2.05, 8-12.03)  (Ord. 858, passed - -2006; Ord. 863,
passed - -2006)



§ 155.08  COMPLIANCE.



   All development of land, construction of residential, commercial or
industrial structures or future development within delineated floodplain
areas is subject to the terms of this chapter and other applicable
regulations.



(Prior Code, §§ 7-2.05, 8-12.03)  (Ord. 858, passed - -2006; Ord. 863,
passed - -2006)



§ 155.09  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this
chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction
conflict or overlap whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall
prevail.



(Prior Code,  §§ 7-2.05, 8-12.03)  (Ord. 858, passed - -2006; Ord. 863,
passed - -2006)



§ 155.10  INTERPRETATION.



   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions
shall be:



   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;



   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and



   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under state statutes.



(Prior Code, §§ 7-2.05, 8-12.03)  (Ord. 858, passed - -2006; Ord. 863,
passed - -2006)



§ 155.11  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. This chapter does
not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This
chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City Council, any
officer or employee thereof, the state or the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or
any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.



(Prior Code, §§ 7-2.05, 8-12.03)  (Ord. 858, passed - -2006; Ord. 863,
passed - -2006)



§ 155.12  STATUTORY EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   In accordance with A.R.S. § 48-3609(11), unless expressly
provided, this and any regulation adopted pursuant to this subchapter do not
affect:



      (1)   Existing legal uses of property or the right to
continuation of such legal use. However, if a non-conforming use of land or a
building or structure is discontinued for 12 months, or destroyed to the
extent of 50% of its value as determined by a competent appraiser, any
further use shall comply with this subchapter and regulations of the City
Council;



      (2)   Reasonable repair or alteration of property for the
purposes for which the property was legally used on 8-3-1984, or any
regulations affecting such property takes effect; except that, any
alteration, addition or repair to a non-conforming building or structure
which would result in increasing its flood damage potential by 50% or more
shall be either flood-proofed or elevated to or above the regulatory flood
elevation;



      (3)   Reasonable repair of structures constructed with the
written authorization required by A.R.S. § 48-361 3; and



      (4)   Facilities constructed or installed pursuant to a
certificate of environmental compatibility issued pursuant to A.R.S. Title
40, Ch. 2, Art. 6.2.



   (B)   Before any authorized construction begins for the exceptions
listed below, the responsible person must submit plans for the construction
to the Floodplain Board for review and comment in accordance with A.R.S. §
48-3613. Written authorization shall not be required, nor shall the
Floodplain Board prohibit:



      (1)   The construction of bridges, culverts, dikes and other
structures necessary to the construction, of public highways, roads and
streets intersecting or crossing a watercourse;



      (2)   The construction of storage dams for watering livestock
or wildlife, structures on banks of a watercourse to prevent erosion of or
damage to adjoining land if the structure will not divert, retard or obstruct
the natural channel of the watercourse or dams for the conservation of flood
waters as permitted by A.R.S. Title 45, Ch. 6;



      (3)   Construction of tailing dams and waste disposal areas
for use in connection with mining and metallurgical operations. This division
(B)(3) does not exempt those sand and gravel operations that will divert,
retard or obstruct the flow of waters in any watercourse from complying with
and acquiring authorization from the Floodplain Board pursuant to regulations
adopted by the Floodplain Board under this subchapter;



      (4)   Other construction upon determination by the Floodplain
Board that written authorization is unnecessary;



      (5)   Any flood control district, county, city, town or other
political subdivision from exercising powers granted to it under A.R.S. Title
48, Ch. 21, Art. 1;



      (6)   The construction of streams, waterways, lakes and other
auxiliary facilities in conjunction with development of public parks and
recreation facilities by a public agency or political subdivision; and



      (7)   The construction and erection of poles, towers,
foundations, support structures, guy wires and other facilities related to
power transmission as constructed by any utility whether a public service
corporation or a political subdivision.



   (C)   In addition to other penalties or remedies otherwise provided
by law, the state, a political subdivision or a person who may be damaged or
has been damaged as a result of the unauthorized diversion, retardation or
obstruction of a watercourse has the right to commence, maintain and
prosecute any appropriate action or pursue any remedy to enjoin, abate or
otherwise prevent any person from violating or continuing to violate this
section or regulations adopted pursuant to this subchapter. If a person is
found to be in violation of this section, the Court shall require the
violator to either comply with this section if authorized by the Floodplain
Board or remove the obstruction and restore the watercourse to its original
state. The Court may also award such monetary damages as are appropriate to
the injured parties resulting from the violation including reasonable costs
and attorney fees.



(Prior Code, §§ 7-2.05, 8-12.03)  (Ord. 858, passed - -2006; Ord. 863,
passed - -2006)



§ 155.13  UNLAWFUL ACTS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for a person to engage in any development or to
divert, retard or obstruct the flow of waters in a watercourse if it creates
a hazard to life or property without securing the written authorization
required by A.R.S. § 48-3613. Where the watercourse is a delineated
floodplain, it is unlawful to engage in any development affecting the flow of
waters without securing written authorization required by A.R.S. § 48-3613.



   (B)   Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day that a violation continues
shall be a separate offense punishable as hereinabove described.



(Prior Code, §§ 7-2.05, 8-12.03)  (Ord. 858, passed - -2006; Ord. 863,
passed - -2006)



§ 155.14  DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   All development located or maintained within any area of special flood
hazard after 8-8-1973, in violation of this chapter, is a public nuisance per
se and may be abated, prevented or restrained by action of this political
subdivision.



(Prior Code, §§ 7-2.05, 8-12.03)  (Ord. 858, passed - -2006; Ord. 863,
passed - -2006)



§ 155.15  ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Within 30 days of discovery of a violation of this chapter,
the Floodplain Administrator shall submit a report to the Floodplain Board
which shall include all information available to the Floodplain Administrator
which is pertinent to said violation.



   (B)   Within 30 days of receipt of this report, the Floodplain Board
shall either:



      (1)   Take any necessary action to effect the abatement of
such violation;



      (2)   Issue it variance to this chapter in accordance with the
provisions of § 155.32 of this chapter;



      (3)   Order the owner of the property upon which the violation
exists to provide whatever additional information may be required for their
determination. Such information must be provided to the Floodplain
Administrator within 30 days of such order and the Floodplain Administrator
shall submit an amended report to the Floodplain Board within 20 days. At the
next regularly scheduled public meeting, the Floodplain Board shall either
order the abatement of said violation or it shall grant a variance in
accordance with the provisions of § 155.32 of this chapter; or



      (4)   Submit to the Federal Emergency Management Agency a
declaration for denial of insurance, stating that the property is in
violation of it cited state or local law, regulation or ordinance, pursuant
to § 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 as amended.



(Prior Code, §§ 7-2.05, 8-12.03)  (Ord. 858, passed - -2006; Ord. 863,
passed - -2006)



§ 155.16  SEVERABILITY.



   This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be
severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of
the ordinance as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so
declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.



(Prior Code, § 8-12.03)  (Ord. 858, passed - -2006; Ord. 863, passed -
-2006)




ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT




§ 155.30  FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. The Building
Inspector is hereby appointed to administer, implement and enforce this
chapter by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its
provisions.



   (B)   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.
Duties of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to:



      (1)   Permit review. Review all development permits to
determine that:



         (a)   The permit requirements of this chapter have been
satisfied;



         (b)   All other required state and federal permits have
been obtained;



         (c)   The site is reasonable safe from flooding; and



         (d)   The proposed development does not adversely affect
the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been
determined, but a floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this
chapter, ADVERSELY AFFECT means that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point.



      (2)   Substantial improvement and substantial damage
procedures.



         (a)   Develop detailed procedures for identifying and
administering requirements for substantial improvement and substantial
damage, to include defining “market value”; and



         (b)   Assure procedures are coordinated with other
departments and divisions and implemented by community staff.



      (3)   Use of other base flood data. When base flood elevation
data has not been provided in accordance with § 155.07 of this chapter, the
Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base
flood elevation data available from a federal, state or other source, in
order to administer §§ 155.45 through 155.51 of this chapter. Any such
information shall be consistent with the requirements of the Federal
Emergency Management Agency and the Director of the state’s Department of
Water Resources and shall be submitted to the Floodplain Board for adoption.



      (4)   Obtain and maintain for public inspection.



         (a)   The certified regulatory flood elevation required
in § 155.31(C) of this chapter;



         (b)   The flood-proofing certification required in §
155.31(B) of this chapter;



         (c)   The flood vent certification required in §
155.31(C) of this chapter;



         (d)   The elevation certification required for
additional development standards, including subdivisions, in division (B)(3)
above;



         (e)   The floodway encroachment certification required
in § 155.31(G) of this chapter;



         (f)   Maintain a record of all variance actions,
including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued
in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency;
and



         (g)   Obtain and maintain improvement calculations.



      (5)   Notification of other entities.



         (a)   Whenever a watercourse is to be altered or
relocated:



            1.   Notify adjacent communities and the state’s
Department of Water Resources prior to such alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency through appropriate notification means; and



            2.   Assure that the flood carrying capacity of
the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse be maintained.



         (b)   Base flood elevation and rate of flow due to
physical alterations.



            1.   Base flood elevations may increase or
decrease resulting from physical changes affecting flooding conditions. As
soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the date such
information becomes available, the Floodplain Administrator shall notify the
Federal Emergency Management Agency of the changes by submitting technical or
scientific data in accordance with 44 C.F.R. § 65.3. Such a submission is
necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting
flooding conditions, risk, premium rates and floodplain management
requirements will be based upon current data.



            2.   Within 120 days after completion of
construction of any flood control protective works which changes the rate of
flow during the flood or the configuration of the floodplain upstream or
downstream from or adjacent to the project, the person or agency responsible
for installation of the project shall provide to the governing bodies of all
jurisdictions affected by the project a new delineation of all floodplains
affected by the project. The new delineation shall be done according to the
criteria adopted by the Director of the state’s Department of Water
Resources.



         (c)   Corporate boundary changes: notify the Federal
Emergency Management Agency and the state’s Department of Water Resources
of acquisition by means of annexation, incorporation or otherwise, of
additional areas of jurisdiction.



      (6)   Map determinations. Make interpretations, where needed,
as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood
hazards (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary
and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the
boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation
as provided in § 155.32 of this chapter.



      (7)   Remedial actions. Take actions on violations of this
chapter as required in § 155.15 of this chapter.



      (8)   Biennial report. Complete and submit a biennial report
to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.



(Prior Code, §§ 7-2.07, 8-12.04)  (Ord. 858, passed - -2006; Ord. 863,
passed - -2006)



§ 155.31  DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   (A)   A development permit shall be obtained before construction or
development begins, including placement of manufactured homes, within any
area of special flood hazard established in § 155.07 of this chapter.
Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the
Floodplain Administrator and may include, but not be limited to, plans in
duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and
elevation of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location of the foregoing.



   (B)   Specifically, the following information is required:



      (1)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level of the
lowest floor (including basement) of all structures. In Zone AO, elevation of
existing highest adjacent natural grade and proposed elevation of lowest
floor of all structures;



      (2)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to
which any non-residential structure will be flood-proofed;



      (3)   Certification by a registered professional engineer or
architect that the flood proofing methods for any non-residential structure
meet the flood-proofing criteria in § 155.45 of this chapter;



      (4)   Base flood elevation data for subdivision proposals or
other development greater than 50 lots or five acres; and



      (5)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will
be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.



(Prior Code, §§ 7-2.06, 8-12.04)  (Ord. 858, passed - -2006; Ord. 863,
passed - -2006)



§ 155.32  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Nature of variances.



      (1)   (a)   The variance criteria set forth in this section
are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a
piece of property and are not personal in nature.



         (b)   A variance may be granted for a parcel of property
with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements
of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the
surrounding property owners.



         (c)   The characteristics must be unique to the property
and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain
to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants or the property
owners.



      (2)   It is the duty of the City Council to help protect its
citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of
the cost of insuring a structure built below the regulatory flood elevation
are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other
requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. The long-term goal of
preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances
are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this
chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met
before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to
screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are
more appropriate.



   (B)   Appeal Board.



      (1)   The Floodplain Board of the City Council shall hear and
decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this
chapter.



      (2)   The Floodplain Board shall hear and decide appeals when
it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination
made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.



      (3)   In passing upon such applications, the Floodplain Board
shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter; and:



         (a)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other
lands to the injury of others;



         (b)   The danger of life and property due to flooding or
erosion damage;



         (c)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and
its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;



         (d)   The importance of the services provided by the
proposed facility to the community;



         (e)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront
location, where applicable;



         (f)   The availability of alternative locations for the
proposed use, which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;



         (g)   The compatibility of the proposed use with
existing and anticipated development;



         (h)   The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;



         (i)   The safety of access to the property in time of
flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;



         (j)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of
rise and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and



         (k)   The costs of providing governmental services
during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, water system and
streets and bridges.



      (4)   Upon consideration of the factors of division (B)(3)
above and the purposes of this chapter, the Floodplain Board may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purposes of this chapter.



      (5)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be
given written notice over the signature of a community official that:



         (a)   The issuance of a variance to construct a
structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance
coverage;



         (b)   Such construction below the base flood level
increases risks to life and property; and



         (c)   The land upon which the variance is granted shall
be ineligible for exchange of state land pursuant to the flood relocation and
land exchange program provided by A.R.S. Title 26, Ch. 2, Art. 2. A copy of
the notice shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder and shall
be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the
affected parcel of land.



      (6)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of
all variance actions, including justification for their issuance and report
such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to Federal Emergency
Management Agency.



   (C)   Conditions for variances.



      (1)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction
and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood elevation, provided the procedures of §§
155.31 and 155.45 through 155.51 of this chapter have been fully considered.
As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.



      (2)   Variances may be issued for the repair, rehabilitation
or restoration of structures listed in the National Register of Historic
Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, upon a determination that
the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structures
continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.



      (3)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated
floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge
would result.



      (4)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that
the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to
afford relief.



      (5)   Variances shall only be issued upon a:



         (a)   Showing of good and sufficient cause;



         (b)   Determination that failure to grant the variance
would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant;



         (c)   Showing that the use cannot perform its intended
purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. This
includes only facilities defined in § 155.05 of this chapter in the
definition of “functionally dependent use”; and



         (d)   Determination that the granting of a variance will
not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.



(Prior Code, §§ 7-2.10, 7-2.11, 8-12.06)  (Ord. 858, passed - -2006; Ord.
863, passed - -2006)




FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION




§ 155.45  CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.



   In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are
required.



   (A)   Anchoring.



      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the
structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the
effects of buoyancy.



      (2)   All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring
standards of § 155.49 of this chapter.



   (B)   Construction materials and methods.



      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.



      (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.



      (3)   All new construction, substantial improvement and other
proposed new development shall be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service
facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from
entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.



      (4)   Within Zones AF1 or AO, adequate drainage paths shall be
constructed around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away
from proposed structures.



   (C)   Elevation and flood-proofing.



      (1)   Residential construction.



         (a)   Residential construction, new or substantial
improvement, shall have the lowest floor, including basement:



            1.   In an AO Zone, elevated to or above the
regulatory flood elevation, or elevated at least two feet above the highest
adjacent grade if no depth number is specified;



            2.   In an A Zone where a BFE has not been
determined, elevated to or above the regulatory flood elevation or be
elevated in accordance with the criteria developed by the Director of the
state’s Department of Water Resources; and



            3.   In Zones AF, AH and A1-30, elevated to or
above the regulatory flood elevation.



         (b)   Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of
the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered
professional engineer or surveyor and verified by the community’s Building
Inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall
be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.



      (2)   Non-residential construction. Non-residential
construction, new or substantial improvement, shall either be elevated to
conform with division (C)(1) above or together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities:



         (a)   Be flood-proofed below the elevation recommended
under division (C)(1) above so that the structure is water-tight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water;



         (b)   Have structural components capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and



         (c)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect that the standards of this section are satisfied. Such
certification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.



      (3)   Flood openings. All new construction and substantial
improvement with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding
basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing
for the entry and exit of flood water. Designs for meeting this requirement
must meet or exceed the following criteria:



         (a)   Have a minimum of two openings, on different sides
of each enclosed area, having a total net area of not less than one square
inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom
of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be
equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided
that they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood water; or



         (b)   If it is not feasible or desirable to meet the
openings criteria stated above, a registered engineer or architect may design
and certify the openings.



      (4)   Manufactured homes. Manufactured homes shall also meet
the standards in § 155.49 of this chapter.



      (5)   Garages and low cost accessory structures.



         (a)   Attached garages.



            1.   A garage attached to a residential structure;
constructed with the garage floor slab below the regulatory flood elevation,
must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of flood waters. See
division (C)(3) above. Areas of the garage below the regulatory flood
elevation must be constructed with flood resistant materials.



            2.   A garage attached to a non-residential
structure must meet the above requirements or be dry flood-proofed.



         (b)   Detached garages and accessory structures.



            1.   “Accessory structure” used solely for
parking (two-car detached garages or smaller) or limited storage (small,
low-cost sheds), as defined in § 155.05 of this chapter, may be constructed
such that its floor is below the regulatory flood elevation; provided, the
structure is designed and constructed in accordance with the following
requirements:



               a.   Use of the accessory structure must be
limited to parking or limited storage;



               b.   The portions of the accessory structure
located below the regulatory flood elevation must be built using
flood-resistant materials;



               c.   The accessory structure must be
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement;



               d.   Any mechanical and utility equipment in
the accessory structure must be elevated or flood-proofed to or above the
regulatory flood elevation;



               e.   The accessory structure must comply
with floodplain encroachment provisions in this section; and



               f.   The accessory structure must be
designed to allow for the automatic entry of flood waters in accordance with
division (C)(3) above.



            2.   Detached garages and accessory structures not
meeting the above standards must be constructed in accordance with all
applicable standards in § 155.46 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, §§ 7-2.08, 8-12.05)  (Ord. 858, passed - -2006; Ord. 863,
passed - -2006)



§ 155.46  STORAGE OF MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   The storage or processing of materials that could be injurious
to human, animal or plant life if released due to damage from flooding is
prohibited in special flood hazard areas.



   (B)   Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not
subject to damage by floods and if firmly anchored to prevent flotation, or
if readily removable from the area within the time available after flood
warning.



(Prior Code, § 8-12.05)  (Ord. 858, passed - -2006; Ord. 863, passed -
-2006)



§ 155.47  UTILITY STANDARDS.



   (A)   All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewage
systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood
waters into the system and discharge from systems into flood waters.



   (B)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.



   (C)   Waste disposal systems shall not be installed wholly or
partially in a regulatory floodway.



(Prior Code, § 8-12.05)  (Ord. 858, passed - -2006; Ord. 863, passed -
-2006)



§ 155.48  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS; SUBDIVISIONS.



   (A)   All new subdivision proposals and other proposed development
(including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions), greater
than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, shall:



      (1)   Identify the area of the special flood hazard area and
the elevation of the base flood; and



      (2)   Identify on the final plans the elevation(s) of the
proposed structure(s) and pads. If the site is filled above the base flood
elevation, the final lowest floor and grade elevations shall be certified by
a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the Floodplain
Administrator.



   (B)   All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall
be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.



   (C)   All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall
have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.



   (D)   All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall
provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards.



(Prior Code, § 8-12.05)  (Ord. 858, passed - -2006; Ord. 863, passed -
-2006)



§ 155.49  MANUFACTURED HOME STANDARDS.



   All manufactured homes that are placed on site or substantially
improved shall:



   (A)   Be elevated so that the bottom of the structural frame or the
lowest point of any attached appliances, whichever is lower, is at or above
the regulatory flood elevation; and



   (B)   Be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or
frame lies to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable
state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.



(Prior Code, § 8-12.05)  (Ord. 858, passed - -2006; Ord. 863, passed -
-2006)



§ 155.50  RECREATIONAL VEHICLE STANDARDS.



   All recreational vehicles placed on site shall:



   (A)   Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;



   (B)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational
vehicle is reads for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is
attached to the site only by quick, disconnect type utilities and security
devices and has no permanently attached additions; or



   (C)   Meet the permit requirements of § 155.31 of this chapter and
the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in § 155.49
of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 8-12.05)  (Ord. 858, passed - -2006; Ord. 863, passed -
-2006)



§ 155.51  FLOODWAYS.



   (A)   Located within areas of special flood hazard established in §
155.07 of this chapter are areas designated as floodways.



   (B)   Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the
velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and
erosion potential, the following provisions apply:



      (1)   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements and other development, unless
certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided
demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood
levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge; and



      (2)   If this is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of §§ 155.45 through 155.51 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, §§ 7-2.09, 8-12.05)  (Ord. 858, passed - -2006; Ord. 863,
passed - -2006)



CHAPTER 156:  AIRPORT



Section



   156.01   Definitions



   156.02   General rules and regulations



   156.03   Aircraft operations



   156.04   Aircraft accident procedures



   156.05   Motor vehicle regulations



   156.06   Taxicabs



   156.07   Rules of conduct



   156.08   Commercial photography



   156.09   Use of roads and walks



   156.10   Use-of-gate positions



   156.11   Fire hazards and fueling operations



   156.12   Obligations of tenants



   156.13   Commercial operations



   156.14   Rates and charges



   156.15   Violations



 



   156.99   Penalty



§ 156.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AIRPORT. The Williams Municipal Airport.



   COMMITTEE. The Committee or Commission appointed by the City Council to
conduct airport planning, to advise the Council on matters pertaining to the
Airport, and to administer this chapter.



   DIRECTOR. The individual appointed by the City Council to perform the
duties of Director as specified in this chapter.



   FIELD AREA. The area used for aircraft taxiing, run-up, take-off,
landing, tie-downs, loading and unloading of passengers and baggage. It shall
also mean all areas used by vehicles or pedestrians to gain access to any of
the above, and any area designated as such by the Director.



   PUBLIC AREA. All other airport areas unless designated by a tenant or
the Director as a non-public area. The Director shall have the power to
overrule a designation by a tenant and declare an area to be PUBLIC.



(Prior Code, § 8-5.01)



§ 156.02  GENERAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The Committee may recommend such rules, regulations, orders
and instructions as are necessary in the administration of this chapter. It
may recommend that the Council authorize the Director to post signs at the
Airport in conformity with such rules, regulations, orders or instructions.
Each person on the Airport shall comply with these orders, regulations and
signs.



   (B)   The Airport shall be conducted as a public air facility for
the promotion and accommodation of civil aviation associated activities.



   (C)   The Airport shall be open for public use at such hours and
subject to such restrictions as may be determined by the Council.



(Prior Code, § 8-5.02)



§ 156.03  AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS.



   (A)   No person shall conduct any aircraft operation to, on, from or
over the Airport, except in conformity with all Federal Aviation
Administration regulations, the applicable provisions of A.R.S. Title 28, Ch.
25, this city code and the rules and regulations established by the Committee.



   (B)   No person shall take off or land an airplane on the Airport,
except on hard surface area, unless otherwise authorized by the Director.



   (C)   All airplane traffic shall conform to the established traffic
pattern as approved by the Committee and posted at the Airport. Based
helicopter operators will submit traffic pattern to the Committee for
approval.



   (D)   No person shall park an aircraft on any runway or taxiway at
the Airport.



   (E)   No person shall park or store an aircraft at the Airport,
except in areas designated by the Committee.



   (F)   Preventive maintenance work, as defined in 14 C.F.R. part 43,
app. A(e), may be performed at the Airport tie-down areas by the owner or
operator of the aircraft. Aircraft owners who possess current mechanic
ratings such as A&P and A&I may do additional work in the tie-down areas
subject to the approval of the Director. All other aircraft maintenance,
rebuilding and alterations shall be performed only in areas designated by
Committee recommendation.



   (G)   No person shall conduct experimental flight or ground
demonstrations on the Airport without prior permission of the Director and
FAA approval.



   (H)   No person shall take any aircraft from the landing area or
hangars or operate such aircraft while under the influence of intoxicating
liquor or a dangerous drug.



   (I)   No person shall board or disembark from any airplane on a
runway or in the take-off or landing area except in an emergency, without
prior approval of the Director.



   (J)   Persons parking transient aircraft in terminal transient areas
shall register their aircraft with the Director or his or her representative
as soon as possible after landing at the airport.



   (K)   All owners and operators who desire to base their aircraft at
the Airport shall register their aircraft with the Director or his or her
representative prior to beginning operations. Any change in ownership of the
aircraft shall be reported immediately.



   (L)   No person shall leave an aircraft unattended unless it is
property tied-down or placed in a hangar.



   (M)   No engine in an aircraft shall be started or run without a
competent person at the engine controls, and unless blocks have been placed
in front of the wheels or the aircraft has adequate parking brakes. No
aircraft engine shall be operated in such manner as to endanger life or
property.



   (N)   No aircraft shall be operated in, or taxied into or out of, a
hangar.



   (O)   If the Director believes the conditions at the Airport, or any
portion thereof, are unfavorable for aircraft operations, he or she may close
the Airport, or such portions thereof, using applicable FAA procedures, as
appropriate.



   (P)   No airplane capable of movement on the ground shall be
operated on the Airport unless it is equipped with wheels and wheel brakes,
except with permission of the Director.



   (Q)   No aircraft shall be permitted to remain on any part of the
landing or take-off areas for the purpose of repairs.



   (R)   All aircraft shall be taxied at slow and reasonable speeds and
shall not be taxied onto a runway without first stopping and waiting for any
approaching aircraft preparing to land.



   (S)   No person shall, without the owner’s permission, interfere
or tamper with an aircraft parked or stored at the Airport.



   (T)   No persons shall move an aircraft on the Airport in a
negligent or reckless manner.



   (U)   No person shall start or taxi any aircraft on the Airport in a
place where the air or exhaust blasts is likely to cause injuries to persons
or property. If the aircraft cannot be taxied without violating this division
(U), the operator must have it towed to the desirable destination.



(Prior Code, § 8-5.03)  Penalty, see § 156.99



§ 156.04  AIRCRAFT ACCIDENT PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Persons involved in aircraft accidents occurring at the
Airport shall make a full report thereof to the Director or his or her
representative within 24 hours after such accident.



   (B)   Any person damaging property at the Airport by means of
contact with aircraft shall report such damage to the Director immediately
and shall be fully responsible to the city for costs of repairs.



   (C)   Every pilot and aircraft owner shall be responsible for the
prompt removal of this disabled aircraft or parts thereof, as directed by the
Director or his or her representative, subject to accident investigation
requirements.



(Prior Code, § 8-5.04)



§ 156.05  MOTOR VEHICLE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   No motor vehicle shall be operated on the Airport if it is so
constructed, equipped or loaded as to endanger persons or property.



   (B)   (1)   Each operator of a motor vehicle involved in an
accident between that vehicle and an aircraft, or in any other motor vehicle
accident on the Airport that results in personal injury or in total property
damage of more than $50 shall make a full report thereof to the Director as
soon as possible after the accident.



      (2)   The report must include name and address of the person
reporting.



   (C)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle on the Airport in
violation of this chapter or rules promulgated and posted by the Committee or
the laws of the state.



   (D)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle on the Airport in a
negligent or reckless manner or in excess of posted speed limits.



   (E)   No motor vehicle shall be permitted on taxiways, runways or
operational areas, except authorized maintenance or service vehicles, without
prior permission of the Director.



   (F)   No person shall operate a vehicle on, to or across a runway,
except when authorized by the Director or his or her representative.



   (G)   Operators of motor vehicles on the field area shall yield the
right-of-way to taxiing aircraft.



   (H)   All motor vehicles on the field area shall pass to the rear of
aircraft whose engines are running.



   (I)   (1)   When backing gasoline tenders, the driver shall
remain in the vehicle and shall not stand on the running board or fender.



      (2)   Gasoline tenders shall at no time be so positioned as to
prevent their rapid removal.



   (J)   Except as authorized by the Director, no person shall clean or
make any repairs to motor vehicles anywhere on the Airport other than
designated shop areas, except those minor repairs necessary to remove such
motor vehicle to a proper location.



   (K)   (1)   No person shall park or stand a motor vehicle on the
Airport, except in an area specifically designated therefor.



      (2)   No person shall park a motor vehicle in any posted area
on the Airport for a period longer than that prescribed by the city.



      (3)   No person shall park a vehicle in a restricted or
reserved area on the Airport unless he or she displays, in the manner
prescribed by the Director, a parking permit issued by the Director for that
area.



      (4)   No person shall double park a motor vehicle on any road
at the Airport.



      (5)   No person shall abandon a motor vehicle on the Airport.



      (6)   No person shall park or stand a motor vehicle at any
place on the Airport in violation of any sign posted upon the recommendation
of the Committee, approved by the Council.



      (7)   No person shall park or stand a motor vehicle within 15
feet of a fire hydrant on the Airport, or park in such a manner as to block
any fire gate or entrance.



      (8)   No person shall park a motor vehicle in any marked space
in such a manner as to occupy more than one space.



      (9)   No person shall park a motor vehicle in individual
storage hangars or aircraft shelters unless permitted by the owner or lessee
of said structure.



      (10)   The Director, or his or her representative, may remove,
at the owner’s expense, any motor vehicle which is parked on the Airport in
violation of this chapter. The vehicle shall be subject to a lien for the
cost of removal.



(Prior Code, § 8-5.05)  Penalty, see § 156.99



§ 156.06  TAXICABS.



   (A)   No person shall operate a vehicle that is carrying passengers
for hire from the Airport unless he or she is the holder of a contract
authorizing same by the Council.



   (B)   Except for discharging passengers, no person shall park on the
Airport, a vehicle used for the purpose of carrying passengers for hire
unless he or she is the holder of a contract authorizing same by the Council.



   (C)   No person shall, on the Airport, solicit or invite any person
to ride in a vehicle used for the purpose of carrying passengers for hire,
either by driving slow past a loading entrance to an airport building or by
any other act or utterance calculated to induce that person to engage the
vehicle, unless said taxicab operator is the holder of a contract authorizing
same by the Council.



(Prior Code, § 8-5.06)  Penalty, see § 156.99



§ 156.07  RULES OF CONDUCT.



   (A)   No person shall commit any act or nuisance on the Airport.



   (B)   No person shall dispose of garbage, papers, refuse or other
material on the Airport, except in receptacles provided for that purpose.



   (C)   No person shall destroy, injure, deface or disturb any
building, sign, equipment, marker or other structure, tree, flower, lawn or
other public property on the Airport.



   (D)   No person shall alter, make additions to, or erect any
building or sign or make any excavations on the Airport without the
permission of the Council upon recommendation of the Committee, subject to
lease provisions.



   (E)   No person shall willfully abandon any personal property on the
Airport.



   (F)   No person may ride horseback on the Airport without permission
of the Director.



   (G)   No person, shall hunt, pursue, trap, catch, injure or kill any
bird or animal on the Airport without authorization of the Director.



   (H)   No person shall solicit fares, alms or funds for any purpose
on the Airport without permission of the Director.



   (I)   No person shall post, distribute or display signs,
advertisements, circulars or other printed or written matter in the public
area of the Airport without permission of the Director.



   (J)   No person may enter the Airport with a dog or other domestic
animal, unless the animal is kept restrained by a leash or is confined so as
to be completely under control.



   (K)   No person shall remain on any part of the Airport more than
the time reasonably necessary to complete Airport related business.



   (L)   No unauthorized person shall enter any restricted area posted
as being closed to the public.



   (M)   No person, shall use a restroom other than in a clean and
sanitary manner.



   (N)   No person shall drink alcoholic beverages in the terminal
building lobby.



(Prior Code, § 8-5.07)  Penalty, see § 156.99



§ 156.08  COMMERCIAL PHOTOGRAPHY.



   (A)   No person shall take a still, motion or sound picture on the
Airport for commercial purposes without the permission of the Director.



   (B)   The Director may allow the following:



      (1)   Professional photographers and motion picture cameramen
photographing events on the Airport as representatives of news concerns or
bona-fide news publications;



      (2)   Professional photographers and motion picture cameramen
photographing events at the Airport, for non-profit exhibit, to stimulate
interest in air commerce or travel or for non-profit educational purposes; and



      (3)   Professional photographers photographing scenes on the
Airport for general artistic purposes.



(Prior Code, § 8-5.08)  Penalty, see § 156.99



§ 156.09  USE OF ROADS AND WALKS.



   (A)   No person shall travel on the Airport, except on a road, walk
or other place provided for the kind of travel he or she is doing.



   (B)   No person shall occupy or place an object on a road or walk on
the Airport in a manner that hinders or obstructs its proper use.



   (C)   No person shall walk in a picket line as a picket, or take
part in a labor or other public demonstration on any part of the Airport,
except in a place specifically assigned by the Director for picket lines or
other public demonstrations.



(Prior Code, § 8-5.09)  Penalty, see § 156.99



§ 156.10  USE-OF-GATE POSITIONS.



   (A)   No person shall use an aircraft gate position on the Airport
unless he or she has been authorized to use it.



   (B)   Except in an emergency, no person shall emplane or deplane
passengers on the Airport in an area that has not been established for that
purpose by the Council upon recommendation of the Committee.



   (C)   No person shall park an aircraft which is carrying explosives
or flammable materials, nor shall he or she load or unload such items on or
from such aircraft, other than in areas designated by the Council upon
recommendation by the Committee.



   (D)   No person may repair an aircraft while it is parked at the
gate position, except for minor adjustments.



(Prior Code, § 8-5.10)  Penalty, see § 156.99



§ 156.11  FIRE HAZARDS AND FUELING OPERATIONS.



   (A)   No person shall use a flammable volatile liquid having a flash
point of less than 100°F to clean an aircraft, aircraft engine, propeller or
appliance in an aircraft hangar or similar type building, nor within 50 feet
of another aircraft, building or hangar.



   (B)   No open flame, flame-producing device or other source of
ignition shall be permitted in any hangar or similar type of building except
by locations approved by the Council upon recommendation by the Committee.



   (C)   No person shall smoke on any apron or ramp, in any hangar or
shop, in any aircraft or in any other place on the Airport where smoking is
specifically prohibited by the Council upon recommendation of the Committee.



   (D)   No person shall store or stock material or equipment on the
Airport in a manner that constitutes a fire hazard. No person shall store any
combustible materials, flammable liquids or other hazardous materials in an
aircraft hangar or other building on the Airport, except in locations and
containers approved by the city’s Fire Department.



   (E)   Each person to whom space on the Airport is leased, assigned
or made available for use shall keep the space free and clear of oil, grease
or other foreign materials that could cause a fire hazard or a slippery or
otherwise unsafe condition.



   (F)   No person shall conduct a doping process on the Airport,
except in a properly designed fire resistive and ventilated room or building
in which all lights, wiring, heating, ventilating equipment, switches,
outlets and fixtures are approved for use in such a hazardous areas, and in
which all exit facilities are approved and maintained for such use, or except
in an open area as designated by the Council upon recommendation of the
Committee. No person shall enter or work in a dope room while doping
processes are being conducted unless he or she is wearing spark-proof shoes.



   (G)   No person shall fuel or defuel an aircraft on the Airport
while its engine is running or is being warmed by applying external heat, or
while passengers are in the aircraft unless a passenger loading ramp is in
place at the cabin door, the door is open, and a cabin attendant is at or
near the door and a “No Smoking” sign is displayed in the cabin and the
rule is enforced.



   (H)   No person shall knowingly start the engine of an aircraft on
the Airport if there is any gasoline or other volatile flammable liquid on
the ground beneath it of sufficient quantity to constitute a hazard.



   (I)   No person shall operate a radio transmitter or receiver, or
switch electrical appliances on or off, in an aircraft on the Airport while
it is being fueled or defueled.



   (J)   During the fueling of an aircraft on the Airport, the
dispensing apparatus and the aircraft shall both be grounded in accordance
with orders and instructions of the Committee.



   (K)   Each person engaged in fueling or defueling on the Airport
shall exercise care to prevent the overflow of fuel, and shall have readily
accessible and adequate fire extinguishers. Each truck, hose, funnel or
appurtenance used in fueling or defueling an aircraft on the Airport shall be
maintained in safe, sound and not leaking condition and must be properly
grounded to prevent ignition of volatile liquids.



   (L)   During the fueling or defueling of an aircraft on the Airport,
no person shall, within 50 feet of that aircraft, smoke or use any material
that is likely to cause a spark or be a source of ignition.



   (M)   All persons shall comply with the provisions of the Williams
Fire Code.



   (N)   The City Fire Chief or his or her duly authorized
representative shall inspect monthly, or as often as may be necessary, all
buildings and premises for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be
corrected any conditions which would reasonably lend to cause fire or
contribute to its spread or endanger life or property from fire. All orders,
notices or recommendations of the city’s Fire Chief shall be complied with
by all persons without delay.



(Prior Code, § 8-5.11)  Penalty, see § 156.99



§ 156.12  OBLIGATIONS OF TENANTS.



   (A)   Property to be used or occupied for any purpose prohibited by
this chapter.



   (B)   No tenant, lessee, concessionaire or agent of any of them,
doing business on the Airport, shall keep uncovered trash containers on a
sidewalk or road or in a public area of the Airport, or operate an uncovered
vehicle to haul trash on the Airport.



   (C)   No person shall operate a vehicle for hauling trash, dirt or
any other material on the Airport, unless it is built to prevent its contents
from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping.



   (D)   No tenant or lessee of a hangar, shop facility or other
operational area shall store or stack equipment or material in a manner to be
a hazard to persons or property.



   (E)   Each tenant or lessee of a hangar, shop facility or other
operational area shall supply and maintain adequate and readily accessible
fire extinguishers, which comply with the standards established by the
Uniform Fire Prevention Code for the hazard involved.



   (F)   The Director, or an authorized representative, shall have the
right at all reasonable times to inspect all areas under lease to or occupied
by tenants.



(Prior Code, § 8-5.12)  Penalty, see § 156.99



§ 156.13  COMMERCIAL OPERATIONS.



   As the operator and proprietor of the Airport, on behalf of the
citizens of the city, it is the policy and intent of the City Council:



   (A)   To operate the Airport in a businesslike manner with as little
cost as possible to the taxpayer through the imposition of fair and
reasonable rentals, fees and charges;



   (B)   To provide for both private and commercial aviation at the
Airport to the extent practicable within physical, economical and
environmental constraints;



   (C)   To provide for the range of on-base aeronautical support
through private enterprise consistent with the need for the service and the
availability of space and physical facilities;



   (D)   To protect Airport patrons and users from unsafe and
inadequate aeronautical service and to maintain and preserve all Airport
facilities in a safe, secure and orderly condition;



   (E)   To promote fair competition, and not to expose those who have
lawfully undertaken to provide commodities and services at the Airport to
irresponsible, unethical or unauthorized competition;



   (F)   To permit and provide adequate facilities for owners of
general aviation aircraft to work on and service their own aircraft within
such limits as may be imposed by this chapter or air regulation for purposes
of safety, preservation of airport facilities, and protection of the public
interest;



   (G)   To promote the utility, educational, and recreational aspects
of general aviation;



   (H)   No person shall engage in any business or commercial activity
on the Airport, without a business license approved by the City Council. This
prohibition shall apply to persons who use the Airport as a base for
conducting their activity, but whose office or other place of business is not
situated on the Airport. This prohibition does not apply to:



      (1)   Terminates elsewhere and the Airport is utilized as a
temporary stopping place for such purposes as landing, refueling or other
aeronautical service, or the embarking or debarking of passengers, except in
the case of charter or air taxi airlines;



      (2)   Company or corporate-owned aircraft where personnel or
products are transported free of charge; the trip being merely incidental to
the company’s principal business and not, in itself, a major enterprise for
profit; and



      (3)   Casual or isolated transactions such as sales by the
owner.



   (I)   For purposes of this chapter, a BUSINESS OR COMMERCIAL
ACTIVITY includes the following types of activities when done for hire,
compensation or reward:



      (1)   Retail sales of any goods, wares, merchandise or
services;



      (2)   Pilot training and flight instruction;



      (3)   Sale, rental or charter of aircraft;



      (4)   Air carrier and air taxi operations;



      (5)   Sale of aviation petroleum products;



      (6)   Sale or service of aircraft parts, avionics, instruments
or other aircraft equipment;



      (7)   Repair, maintenance, rebuilding, alteration or exchange
of aircraft and aircraft engines, components or other parts; and



      (8)   Flying clubs.



(Prior Code, § 8-5.13)  Penalty, see § 156.99



§ 156.14  RATES AND CHARGES.



   (A)   A schedule of rates and charges for use of the Airport and its
facilities shall be established by the City Council and each person or
organization subject to said rates and charges shall promptly pay the amounts
due.



   (B)   A copy of such schedule shall be kept in the office of the
City Clerk and copies furnished upon request.



(Prior Code, § 8-5.14)



§ 156.15  VIOLATIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed incorporated in every
lease and violations of its provisions or of any rule, regulation, order or
instruction issued by the Council upon recommendation of the Committee or by
the Director may result in withdrawal of permission by the Council to use the
Airport.



(Prior Code, § 8-5.15)



§ 156.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 8-5.16)



CHAPTER 157:  SUBDIVISIONS



Section




General Provisions




   157.01   Adoption



   157.02   Purpose



   157.03   Applicability



   157.04   Enforcement



   157.05   Severability



   157.06   Repeals



   157.07   Effective date



   157.08   Amendments



   157.09   Rules of construction



   157.10   Definitions



   157.11   Resubdivisions



   157.12   Variances



   157.13   Appeals




Development Master Plans




   157.25   Required plans



   157.26   Requirements



   157.27   Procedure




Plats




   157.40   Preliminary plat



   157.41   Final plat




Design Standards




   157.55   General requirements



   157.56   Lot design



   157.57   Street design



   157.58   Alley and easement design



   157.59   Block design



   157.60   Subdivision improvements



 



   157.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 157.01  ADOPTION.



   The City Council adopts this chapter and ordains that this chapter
shall be known and referred to as the “Subdivision Ordinance of Williams,
Arizona”.



(Prior Code, § 11-1.01)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 157.02  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety and
general welfare of the residents of the city to promote the efficient and
orderly growth of the city, to establish adequate and accurate records of
land subdivision, to provide for adequate, safe and efficient public
utilities and improvements and to provide for other general community
facilities and land for public places.



(Prior Code, § 11-1.02)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 157.03  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   Pursuant to A.R.S. Title 9, Ch. 4, Art. 6.2, “Municipal
Subdivision Regulations”, this chapter shall apply to all land in the city
limits.



   (B)   No person or agent of a person shall subdivide any parcel of
land into four or more parcels, or, if a new street is involved, two or more
lots, or, complete minor subdivisions, except in compliance with this
chapter. No person shall offer for recording, in the office of the County
Recorder, any deed conveying a parcel of land, or interest therein, unless
such a parcel of land has been subdivided or otherwise created, in compliance
with the rules set forth in this chapter.



   (C)   No lot within a subdivision created prior to the effective
date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or approved by the City
Council under the provisions of this chapter shall be further divided,
rearranged or reduced in area, nor shall the perimeter boundaries of any
subdivision, or any lot within a subdivision, be altered in any manner
without the approval of the City Council as provided for in this chapter.



   (D)   All officials and employees of the city who are vested with
the authority to issue permits, shall not issue permits, record documents,
conduct inspections or otherwise perform any duties or administrative actions
that are not in conformance with the provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 11-1.03)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 157.04  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Planning and Zoning Official for the city shall enforce this
chapter.



(Prior Code, § 11-1.04)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 905, passed -
-2008)



§ 157.05  SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, division, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is
held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 11-1.06)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 157.06  REPEALS.



   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with or inconsistent
with the provisions of this chapter are repealed.



(Prior Code, § 11-1.07)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 157.07  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be in effect 30 days from
the date of adoption by the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 11-1.08)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 157.08  AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   Requests. Amendments to this chapter may be requested by any
person or agent of any person by filing an application with the Planning and
Zoning Official. Amendments to this chapter may also be initiated by the City
Council or the Planning and Zoning Commission.



(Prior Code, § 11-2.01)



   (B)   Procedure. The procedure for amending this chapter shall be in
accordance with the city’s development procedures ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 11-2.02)



(Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 905, passed - -2008)



§ 157.09  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   Certain words used in this chapter shall be interpreted as follows in
§ 157.10 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 11-3.01)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 157.10  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BLOCK. A segment of a platted subdivision usually containing one or
more lots.



   COUNCIL. The Mayor and Council of the City of Williams, Arizona.



   COMMISSION. The City of Williams Planning and Zoning Commission.



   CUL-DE-SAC. A short minor street having one end open for motor traffic,
the other being permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround.



   DEDICATION. The conveyance of land or a use of the land only (easement)
to a public agency or to one or more persons for a general or specific
purpose.



   DEVELOPMENT MASTER PLAN.



      (1)   A comprehensive preliminary master plan for the
development of a large or complicated land area, the platting of which may be
expected in progressive steps.



      (2)   The area encompassed by a DEVELOPMENT MASTER PLAN may
include properties not owned by the applicant.



   EASEMENT. The right-to-use that a person or public entity may have on
the land of another.



   ENGINEERING PLANS or PLANS. The plans, profiles, cross-sections and
other required details for the construction of public improvements and
private lots (prepared by a civil engineer registered in the state) in
accordance with the approved preliminary plat and in compliance with
standards of design as determined by the city.



   FLOODPLAIN. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by flood
waters from any source.



   FLOODPLAIN DATA. Information that defines the boundary of a floodplain,
either mapped or given in elevations.



   IMPROVEMENTS. The required installations, pursuant to this chapter,
including grading, drainage, sewer and water utilities, streets, easements,
street lighting and traffic-control devices, for which the final approved
design of which is a prerequisite to the approval and acceptance of the final
plat thereof.



   LOT. A parcel or unit of land with a separate and distinct number or
other designation shown on a plat recorded in the office of the County
Recorder and held or intended to be held in a separate lease or ownership and
having frontage on at least one street unless otherwise allowed by the Zoning
Code.



   LOT DEPTH. The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines, measured along the median between the side lot lines.



   LOT FRONTAGE. The part of a front lot line that abuts a street.



   LOT LINE, FRONT. The lot boundary line which abuts a street, or in the
case of a corner lot, that boundary line which abuts the narrowest street
frontage of a lot and which the front of the building faces or will face.



   LOT WIDTH. The width of a lot as measured at the minimum required front
setback line.



   MINOR SUBDIVISION. One or all of the following:



      (1)   A land split which is the division of improved or
unimproved land whose area is two and one-half acres or less into two or
three tracts or parcels of land for the purpose of sale or lease;



      (2)   The division of improved or unimproved land or lands for
the purpose of financing, sale or lease, whether immediate or future, into
two or three lots, tracts or parcels of land, and when a new street is not
involved; and



      (3)   The division of improved or unimproved land or lands for
the purpose of financing, sale or lease, whether immediate or future, into
more than two parts, and when the boundaries of such property have been fixed
by a recorded plat.



   PARCEL OF RECORD. Any lot, tract, parcel or other piece of land that
was recorded by the Recorder of the appropriate county prior to the adoption
of this chapter.



   PERIMETER BOUNDARY. A line around any piece of property such as a lot,
block or subdivision which encloses and separates that piece from adjacent
pieces.



   PLAT. A document which includes a map of certain described land
together with certain certifications, notes, development data and other
information which has been prepared in accordance with this chapter and which
serves as an instrument for subdivision approval.



   PLAT, FINAL. The official plat which is approved by the City Council
and recorded with the County Recorder.



   PLAT, PRELIMINARY. The map or maps of a proposed subdivision and
specified supporting materials prepared in sufficient detail to permit the
evaluation of the subdivision prior to final engineering design and survey.



   PROOF OF OWNERSHIP. A deed, title company certification or some other
document acceptable to the Planning and Zoning Official.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A right of road and/or utility access across or through
one property to reach another property.



   SIGHT DISTANCE TRIANGLE. The area at the intersection of two streets or
roads or where a driveway enters a street or road that is intended to allow a
clear line of sight of oncoming vehicles.



   SUBDIVIDER. Any person or agent of a person who causes land to be
subdivided.



   SUBDIVISION.



      (1)   Improved or unimproved land or lands divided for the
purpose of financing, sale or lease, whether immediate or future, into four
or more lots, tracts or parcels of land, or, if a new street is involved, any
such property which is divided into two or more lots, tracts or parcels of
land; or, any such property, the boundaries of which have been fixed by a
recorded plat, which is divided into more than two parts. SUBDIVISION also
includes any condominium, cooperative, community apartment, townhouse or
similar project containing four or more parcels, in which an undivided
interest in the land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of any
unit located thereon. Plats of such condominium projects will show the
location and dimensions of both vertical and horizontal boundaries of each
unit and each unit’s identifying number, said boundaries to be referenced
to established benchmark and datum.



      (2)   SUBDIVISION does not include the following:



         (a)   The sale or exchange of parcels of land to or
between adjoining property owners if such sale or exchange does not create
additional lots;



         (b)   The partitioning of land in accordance with the
statutes regulating the partitioning of land held in common ownership; or



         (c)   The leasing of apartments, offices, stores or
similar space within a building or trailer park, nor to mineral, oil or gas
leases.



   SUBDIVISION DESIGN. The street alignment, grades and widths, alignments
and widths of easements and rights-of-way for drainage and sanitary sewers,
and the dimensions, arrangement and orientation of lots and streets.



   TRACT. A designated parcel of land that is part of a large parcel.
Sometimes used in lieu of LOT.



   WATERWAY or WATERCOURSE. A defined landform that carries water.



(Prior Code, § 11-3.02)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 905, passed -
-2008)



§ 157.11  RESUBDIVISIONS.



   Amending an approved preliminary or final plat is considered a
resubdivision and must follow the same procedures as an original preliminary
or final plat approval request.



(Prior Code, § 11-9.01)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 157.12  VARIANCES.



   (A)   (1)   A variance from specific requirements of this chapter
may be recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the
City Council upon finding that due to unusual circumstances relating to the
physical characteristics of the property or land adjacent to the property,
conformance with the specific requirement would create an undue hardship on
the property owner and that the public health, safety and welfare would not
be adversely affected by the granting of the variance.



      (2)   Variances shall not be granted on the basis of the
financial status of the property owner or subdivider.



   (B)   A request for a variance from one or more of the requirements
of this chapter shall be made in writing along with other material as
appropriate, to the Planning and Zoning Official who shall schedule the
variance request for consideration and recommendation by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and decision by the City Council after holding a public
hearing.



   (C)   The preliminary or final plat application which includes or is
the subject of a variance request shall not be heard by the City Council
until all variance requests have been either approved or denied.



(Prior Code, § 11-9.02)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 905, passed -
-2008)



§ 157.13  APPEALS.



   (A)   A subdivider/applicant or other citizen aggrieved by the
interpretation of the provisions of this chapter may appeal any decision of
the Planning and Zoning Official.



   (B)   A request for an appeal shall be made in writing along with
other material as appropriate, to the Planning and Zoning Official who shall
schedule the appeal request for consideration and recommendation by the
Planning and Zoning Commission after a public hearing and decision by the
City Council after holding a public hearing.



   (C)   The preliminary or final plat application which includes or is
the subject of an appeal request shall not be heard by the City Council until
all appeal requests have been either approved or denied.



(Prior Code, § 11-9.03)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 905, passed -
-2008)




DEVELOPMENT MASTER PLANS




§ 157.25  REQUIRED PLANS.



   A Development Master Plan may be required as a condition precedent to
the review and approval of a preliminary plat when:



   (A)   The tract proposed for development comprises an entire
neighborhood;



   (B)   The tract proposed for development is only a portion of a
larger contiguous landholding of the subdivider, or when a tract proposed for
development creates undesirable land splits or exceptions; or



   (C)   The tract proposed for development is part of a larger tract
or land area which is complicated by unusual topographic features, land use,
land ownership or other conditions. The entire land area may or may not be
under the subdivider’s control.



(Prior Code, § 11-4.01)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 157.26  REQUIREMENTS.



   An application for Development Master Plan approval shall include those
items in accordance with Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 11-4.02)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 157.27  PROCEDURE.



   The Development Master Plan shall be processed in accordance with Ch.
154 of this code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 11-4.03)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)




PLATS




§ 157.40  PRELIMINARY PLAT.



   (A)   Intent. The preliminary plat is the first stage in the
subdivision approval process. At this stage, the subdivider is responsible
for completing the necessary background studies and research to enable the
delineation of a subdivision that meets all requirements of the city. All
existing and proposed physical aspects of the property and adjacent
properties are analyzed at this stage in the process. In addition, the need
for and the availability of utility, services and facilities will also be
analyzed and projected, it is the intent of the city that all subdivisions
are planned and designed to blend harmoniously into the existing development
surrounding them. In addition, each subdivision should be carefully planned
to ensure compatibility with existing utilities, streets and other needed
support infrastructure.



(Prior Code, § 11-5.01)



   (B)   Requirements. An application for preliminary plat approval
shall include those items in accordance with Ch. 154 of this code of
ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 11-5.02)



   (C)   Procedure. The preliminary plat shall be processed in
accordance with the city’s development procedures ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 11-5.03)



(Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 905, passed - -2008)



§ 157.41  FINAL PLAT.



   (A)   Intent. The final plat is the last stage in the subdivision
approval process. At this stage, the subdivider is responsible for
delineation and dedication of all public rights-of-way and easements,
dedication of other public lands, if required, and final lot and block
configuration. In addition, all public improvements associated with the
subdivision are identified and quantified, and the subdivider is required to
enter into an agreement with the city which guarantees that the appropriate
improvement costs are borne by the subdivider. These costs shall include the
estimated cost of half-street improvements for any portion of a street that
abuts the subdivision.



(Prior Code, § 11-6.01)



   (B)   Preliminary plat usually required first.



      (1)   Except where a combined preliminary and final plat has
been accepted, no request for final plat approval shall be considered until
the preliminary plat has been approved and all conditions of approval of the
preliminary plat have been satisfied.



      (2)   The final plat approval process shall not be used to
amend or revise the approved preliminary plat or the conditions of approval
of the preliminary plat. Except for minor revisions any amendments to the
preliminary plat, or to the conditions, must be approved by an amendment to
the preliminary plat prior to proceeding to the final plat.



(Prior Code, § 11-6.02)



   (C)   Requirements.



      (1)   The final plat shall conform in all respects to the
approved preliminary plat and with all amendments to the preliminary plat.



      (2)   An application for final plat approval shall include
those items in accordance with Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances along with:



         (a)   A copy of the approved preliminary plat which has
been signed by the Planning and Zoning Commission Chairperson; and



         (b)   A certification of the County Treasurer that all
taxes on the property are paid.



(Prior Code, § 11-6.03)



   (D)   Procedure.



      (1)   The Planning and Zoning Official shall review the
application to determine whether it is consistent with the approved
preliminary plat.



      (2)   If the Planning and Zoning Official determines that the
final plat application is not in compliance with the approved preliminary
plat, a list of the deficiencies will be given to the subdivider.



      (3)   Upon determination that the application is complete and
consistent with the approved preliminary plat, the final plat shall be
processed in accordance with Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 11-6.04)



(Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 905, passed - -2008)




DESIGN STANDARDS




§ 157.55  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Lots shall meet the width, depth, frontage, lot size and all
other requirements of the specific zoning district in which the subdivision
is located.



   (B)   All streets or other rights-of-way designated for use, and all
water, sewer and other public improvements shall be designed and constructed
in accordance with the standards of the city in effect at the time the plat
is submitted. In the absence of a specific ordinance, the City Engineer shall
determine the appropriate design standards in accordance with good
engineering practices.



   (C)   All lots created shall abut a dedicated public street and
shall connect to the public street system unless otherwise allowed by Ch. 158
of this code of ordinances. Private streets are not permitted unless
specifically approved by the City Council.



   (D)   Insofar as possible, the natural terrain, existing topography
and natural vegetation shall be preserved.



   (E)   Where the property to be subdivided is subject to natural or
human-made hazards such as flooding, rock and mud slides, open quarries or
abandoned mines, or where there exists shallow water table conditions or
polluted water sources, such hazards or conditions shall be identified and
the subdivider shall provide documentation as to how the hazards or
conditions have been eliminated, or will be eliminated, through the design
and construction of the subdivision.



   (F)   No single lot shall be divided by a municipal or county
boundary line, a public road or street, or a private road or street which can
legally be used by property owners other than the owner of the lot.



   (G)   Each lot in the subdivision shall be served with the city
sanitary sewer system unless otherwise allowed by Ch. 158 of this code of
ordinances.



   (H)   Each lot in the subdivision shall be served with the city
public water system unless otherwise allowed by Ch. 158 of this code of
ordinances.



   (I)   At the time of the application for preliminary plat, the
subdivider shall provide a drainage system design which covers the entire
subdivision. The design shall accommodate runoff from the entire subdivision
and the historical runoff from areas adjacent to and “upstream” of the
subdivision. The design shall ensure that runoff from the developed
subdivision shall not exceed the historical volumes and velocities discharged
onto adjacent property. At the time of the final plat, the subdivider shall
include final drainage design for the phase of the subdivision included in
the final plat. The final drainage design shall show how the drainage is
consistent with the overall drainage system design.



(Prior Code, § 11-7.01)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)  Penalty, see § 157.99



§ 157.56  LOT DESIGN.



   (A)   The depth to width ratio shall not be greater than three to
one.



   (B)   Side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines and
should be straight unless otherwise dictated by topography or other physical
reasons. Rear lot lines should avoid acute angles with side lot lines and
should normally be straight.



   (C)   No remnants of property shall be left in the subdivision which
do not conform to Ch. 158 of this code of ordinances. This includes lots to
be uses for private or public utilities.



   (D)   Residential corner lots should be platted wider than interior
lots in order to permit conformance to required side yard setbacks.



   (E)   Lots adjoining the interstate, railroad, other arterial or
collector road should be deeper to provide appropriate protection from noise,
air pollution and visual impacts of traffic.



   (F)   All lots, except for those reserved for open space, shall be
capable of being built upon. Any lands which are unsuitable due to size or
shape, steepness of terrain, location of water courses, problems with
sewerage or driveway grades or other natural severe physical conditions
should be preserved as natural open space.



(Prior Code, § 11-7.02)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 905, passed -
-2008)  Penalty, see § 157.99



§ 157.57  STREET DESIGN.



   (A)   The minimum required street right-of-way widths for all
streets shall be as required by the city and in accordance with any
guidelines approved by the City Council for site development and
infrastructure construction.



   (B)   Cul-de-sacs shall be no longer than 400 feet and should
terminate in a 45-foot back-of-curb radius turnaround at the closed end.



   (C)   Temporary dead-end streets may be approved by the city where
necessary to give access to or permit a satisfactory subdivision of adjoining
land. Streets shall extend to the boundary of the property and the resulting
dead-end street may be approved with a temporary turnaround having a minimum
pavement radius of 45 feet measured to the edge of pavement.



   (D)   Street jogs shall have a minimum centerline offset of 150 feet
for local streets, 400 feet for collector streets and 500 feet on arterials.



   (E)   Street intersections should be carefully designed to eliminate
dangerous traffic movements. The angle of the intersection shall not vary
from 90 degrees by more than 15 degrees. Streets intersecting an arterial
street shall do so at a 90-degree angle.



   (F)   Street grades, curves and sight distances shall be subject to
approval by the city to ensure proper drainage and safety for vehicles and
pedestrians.



   (G)   Utility locations shall be as required by the city.



   (H)   Local streets shall be designed to minimize through traffic.



   (I)   Names of streets shall be consistent with the natural
alignments and extensions of existing streets. New street names shall not
duplicate in whole or in part, or be confusing with existing names. Street
names must be approved by the county’s Addressing Specialist, the city’s
Postmaster and the city’s Police Department before inclusion in the final
plat.



   (J)   Local circulation systems and land development patterns shall
be designed so that there will be no detraction from the efficiency of
bordering roadways.



   (K)   Proposed streets, as designated by the city, shall be extended
to the tract boundary to provide future connection with adjoining unplatted
lands.



   (L)   Half streets shall be avoided, except where essential to
development of the subdivision and where the dedication of the other half is
impractical, and then only if specifically approved by the City Council after
reviewing a recommendation front the Planning and Zoning Commission.



   (M)   The functional classifications of streets shall be assigned by
the City and as included in the general plan.



(Prior Code, § 11-7.03)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 905, passed -
-2008)  Penalty, see § 157.99



§ 157.58  ALLEY AND EASEMENT DESIGN.



   (A)   Easements shall be provided and dedicated where deemed
necessary for specific purposes for use by the general public, utility
companies or the city.



   (B)   An easement prohibiting vehicular access from the arterial
street side of double frontage lots is required. The minimum width for this
easement is one foot.



   (C)   The subdivision shall dedicate a right-of-way or easement for
storm drainage conforming substantially with the line of any watercourse that
traverses the land.



(Prior Code, § 11-7.04)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)  Penalty, see § 157.99



§ 157.59  BLOCK DESIGN.



   (A)   Blocks shall normally have sufficient width for an ultimate
layer of two tiers of lots of the size required by the provisions of Ch. 158
of this code of ordinances.



   (B)   Blocks shall not normally be less than 300 feet in length
(measured from the property lines), except where it is necessary due to
unusual conditions of the property being subdivided and not merely
convenience.



(Prior Code, § 11-7.05)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)  Penalty, see § 157.99



§ 157.60  SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Improvements required.



      (1)   It shall be the responsibility and the duty of the
subdivider to improve or agree to improve all public improvements and all
other subdivision improvements as specified herein, in the subdivision and
adjacent thereto required to serve the subdivision. These shall include
half-street improvements for any portion of a street that abuts the
subdivision. No permanent improvement work shall be commenced until
improvement plans and profiles have been approved by the city. Improvements
shall be installed to the permanent line and grade and to the satisfaction of
the City Engineer, and in accordance with guidelines approved by the city for
site development and infrastructure construction.



      (2)   Cost of all inspections shall be paid by the subdivider.
Improvements include the following:



         (a)   Grading, curbs and gutters, paving, drainage and
drainage structures necessary for the proper use and drainage of streets,
alleys and pedestrian ways;



         (b)   Site grading and drainage, taking into
consideration the drainage pattern of adjacent improved and unimproved
property and treating upstream areas, where appropriate, as though fully
improved;



         (c)   All streets, alleys and pedestrian ways shall be
constructed to widths and grades shown on the improvement plans and profiles.
The subdivider shall improve the extension of all subdivision streets and
pedestrian ways to any intercepting or intersecting streets. Access to and
within subdivisions shall be provided by paved streets improved to city
standards;



         (d)   Sidewalks shall be installed as shown on the
improvement plans and profiles in accordance with city policy;



         (e)   Sanitary sewer facilities connecting with the
existing city sewer system shall be installed to serve the subdivision with a
separate private lateral for each lot and to grades and sizes shown on the
plans;



         (f)   Storm water drains and retention facilities shall
be installed as shown on the plans;



         (g)   All irrigation, facilities to remain within the
boundaries of the subdivisions or in an abutting one-half street or alley
right-of-way shall be tiled in accordance with the standards of the owning
agency and or relocated as may be directed by the city and owning agency
requirements;



         (h)   Water mains and fire hydrants connecting to the
water system shall be installed per city standards and as per approved plans.
Mains and individual lot services shall be of sufficient size to furnish
adequate water supply for each lot or parcel in the subdivision and to
provide adequate fire protection;



         (i)   Street name signs and other traffic-control
devices shall be installed by and at the sole expense of the subdivider;



         (j)   Landscaping and irrigation systems shall be
installed and approved by the city;



         (k)   Permanent monuments, barricades and traffic safety
devices shall be placed as required by the City Engineer;



         (l)   Street lighting facilities shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements of the city;



         (m)   All existing and proposed telephone, electric
power, cable television, or other wires or cables either within the
development or within public rights-of-way immediately adjacent to the
development shall be placed underground. Equipment appurtenant to the
underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal
cabinets and concealed ducts may be above ground provided acceptable visual
screening is provided. The developer shall make necessary arrangements with
the parent utility companies for both the installation of new underground
facilities and conversion of existing overhead facilities to underground
facilities. Application for waiver of the underground utility conversion
requirements may only be made for electrical facilities with line voltage of
69,000 volts or higher, and only at the time of the subdivision plat approval
process. Each such application for waiver shall be considered individually
and acted upon by the City Council in conjunction with the subdivision
approval process;



         (n)   Provisions shall be made for any railroad
crossings necessary to provide access to or circulation within the proposed
subdivision, including grade crossing projections as may be required by the
state’s Corporation Commission;



         (o)   A wall with decorative blocks and irregular
alignment, or other screening materials, to be approved by the city, shall be
required adjacent to arterial streets;



         (p)   Streets, sewer and water utilities and all other
improvements shall comply with the requirements of the city; and



         (q)   All underground installations shall be constructed
prior to surfacing the street. Service stubs to platted lots within the
subdivision for underground utilities shall be placed to such length as not
to necessitate disturbance of street improvements when service connections
are made.



(Prior Code, § 11-8.01)



   (B)   Engineering plans.



      (1)   The subdivider shall be responsible for the preparation
of complete engineering plans, prepared by an Arizona registered civil
engineer, satisfactory to the City Engineer for construction of required
improvements. The plans shall be based on the approved preliminary plat and
be prepared in conjunction with the final plat.



      (2)   The final plat shall not be presented to Council until
all engineering plans for water, sanitary sewer, grading, street
construction, street lighting, landscaping and all other required
improvements have been approved by the City Engineer.



(Prior Code, § 11-8.02)



(Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 905, passed - -2008)  Penalty, see § 157.99



§ 157.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Anyone violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of a Class 1 misdemeanor punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both.



   (B)   Conviction shall be punished by a fine of not more than $300
or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both fine and
imprisonment.



   (C)   It is a separate offense for each and every day the violation
is committed, continued or permitted.



   (D)   The owner, lessee, tenant, and/or other person in possession
of the property or use in violation are all and equally responsible for the
violation(s).



   (E)   In addition, the city may bring civil proceeding in a court of
competent jurisdiction to enforce compliance with this chapter including the
prevention, restraining and/or abatement of the violation(s).



   (F)   In addition, any violation is declared to be a public nuisance
and the city may enjoin or restrain said violation like any other nuisance
under authority of any applicable city and state law.



(Prior Code, § 11-1.05)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



CHAPTER 158:  ZONING



Section




General Provisions




   158.001   Title



   158.002   Authority



   158.003   Purpose



   158.004   Jurisdiction



   158.005   Severability



   158.006   Conflict with other rules or regulations



   158.007   Relationship to General Plan



   158.008   Compliance



   158.009   Enforcement



   158.010   Rules of construction



   158.011   Definitions




Board of Adjustment




   158.025   Mayor, Council members serve as Board of Adjustment



   158.026   Compensation



   158.027   Organization, meetings, rules and regulations



   158.028   Assistance from city departments



   158.029   Appeals, notices and hearings



   158.030   Powers, duties and limitations of the Board



   158.031   Prohibited actions of Board



   158.032   Conditions of approval



   158.033   Appeals From the Board



   158.034   Fees




Zone Changes or Amendments




   158.045   General



   158.046   Petitions for amendments



   158.047   Procedure



   158.048   Public notice required



   158.049   Written protest




Conditional Use Permits




   158.060   General purpose and intent



   158.061   General regulations



   158.062   Conditional use permit application



   158.063   Action, procedure and fees




Zoning Districts, Zoning Map and District Boundaries




   158.075   Zoning districts



   158.076   Zoning map



   158.077   Interpretation of district boundaries



   158.078   Annexation



   158.079   Uses permitted in each zoning district



   158.080   Density schedule




Historic Preservation Zone




   158.095   Purpose



   158.096   Definitions



   158.097   Historic Preservation Commission



   158.098   Initiation or amendment of districts



   158.099   Criteria for establishing a district



   158.100   Permitted uses



   158.101   Signs



   158.102   Historic District development review



   158.103   Development plan requirements



   158.104   Compliance



   158.105   Appeal



   158.106   Criteria for the alteration of existing structures or the
construction of new structures



   158.107   Demolition of structures or landmarks



   158.108   Post-demolition requirements



   158.109   Maintenance



   158.110   Applicability




Supplemental Regulations




   158.125   Interpretation



   158.126   Building permit and plot plan required



   158.127   Uses allowed in the various zoning districts



   158.128   Principal uses and buildings limited to one per lot
without city approved site plan



   158.129   Accessory uses and buildings



   158.130   Temporary construction buildings



   158.131   Dumping or disposal



   158.132   Joint use prohibited



   158.133   Exterior lighting



   158.134   Structures near airplane runway or landing strip



   158.135   Street and utility requirements



   158.136   Site unsuitability



   158.137   Moving of buildings



   158.138   Projections into required yards



   158.139   Mobile homes



   158.140   Trash enclosures



   158.141   Grading and stripping



   158.142   Automobile service station pump



   158.143   Storing an unoccupied mobile home



   158.144   Storing a recreation trailer



   158.145   Yard sales, swap meets and rummage sales




Mobile Home Parks




   158.160   Procedure for approval



   158.161   Standards



   158.162   Parking



   158.163   Screening



   158.164   Recreation area



   158.165   Private streets



   158.166   Mobile home space



   158.167   Accessory uses




Recreational Vehicle Parks




   158.180   Procedure or approval



   158.181   Standards




Signs




   158.195   Purpose



   158.196   Definitions



   158.197   Signs permitted in each zoning district



   158.198   Additional requirements and clarifications



   158.199   General provisions



   158.200   Exempt signs



   158.201   Prohibited signs



   158.202   Nonconforming signs




Parking Requirements




   158.215   Parking requirements by use



   158.216   Purpose



   158.217   General regulations



   158.218   Screen wall required



   158.219   Landscaping required




Non-Conforming Buildings, Structures, Uses and Lots




   158.230   General



   158.231   Non-conforming buildings, structures and uses



   158.232   Non-conforming lots



   158.233   Development standards




Landscaping and Buffering




   158.245   Minimum on-site landscaping required



   158.246   Location of required landscaping



   158.247   Landscape buffer required



   158.248   Required landscape materials




Mural Regulations




   158.260   Purpose



   158.261   General regulations and guidelines



   158.262   Regulation of murals



   158.263   Additional regulation for the Historic Preservation
District



 



   158.999   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 158.001  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as “The Zoning Ordinance
of the City of Williams, Arizona”.



(Prior Code, § 12-1.01)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 158.002  AUTHORITY.



   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in A.R.S.
§§ 9-462.01 et seq. in order to conserve and promote the public health,
safety and general welfare.



(Prior Code, § 12-1.02)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 158.003  PURPOSE.



   (A)   To conserve and promote the public health, safety and general
welfare by regulating the use of buildings, structures and land and the
intensity of land use for agriculture, residence, business, industry and
other purposes; and



   (B)   To support and implement the adopted general plan.



(Prior Code, § 12-1.03)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 158.004  JURISDICTION.



   This chapter shall be effective within the incorporated boundaries of
the city.



(Prior Code, § 12-1.04)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 158.005  SEVERABILITY.



   If any part of “The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Williams,
Arizona,” is found to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court, such
action shall not apply to the ordinance as a whole and it is intended and
declared that all parts of said “Zoning Ordinance of the City of Williams,
Arizona”, not expressly declared to be invalid or unconstitutional shall
continue in full force and effect.



(Prior Code, § 12-1.05)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 158.006  CONFLICT WITH OTHER RULES OR REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter are minimum requirements,
except when stated otherwise.



   (B)   This chapter is not intended to interfere with any existing
ordinance of the city, except when this chapter imposes greater restrictions
or regulations than are imposed or required by an existing ordinance, deed
restriction, covenant, easement or agreement between parties, this chapter
shall control.



(Prior Code, § 12-1.06)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 158.007  RELATIONSHIP TO GENERAL PLAN.



   (A)   This chapter is intended to implement the planning policies
adopted by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council as reflected
in the General Plan.



   (B)   This chapter and any amendments thereto will be in conformity
with the adopted general plan.



(Prior Code, § 12-1.07)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 158.008  COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   Any existing or future building or structure that is erected,
constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained and
any existing or future use of land shall be in compliance to this chapter,



   (B)   No building permit may be lawfully issued until all
requirements of this chapter have been met.



   (C)   A certificate of zoning compliance is required with the
issuance of any building permit or use of any land.



(Prior Code, § 12-2.01)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)  Penalty, see §
158.999



§ 158.009  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   A Zoning Administrator shall be appointed by the City Manager.



   (B)   The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for the
enforcement of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 12-2.02)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 158.010  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   Words in this chapter shall be interpreted as follows.



   (A)   Words used in the present tense include the future tense;
words used in the futures tense include the present tense; the singular
includes the plural; the plural includes the singular.



   (B)   The word “may” is permissive, the words “shall” and
“will” are mandatory.



   (C)   The word “person” includes an individual, or any other
group of individuals acting as an entity.



   (D)   The following words can be used interchangeably:



      (1)   Lot, plot, parcel or premises;



      (2)   “Uses” or “occupied”; and



      (3)   “Dwelling”, “residence”; “building” or
“structure”.



   (E)   The term “city” shall mean the City of Williams.



   (F)   “Council” shall mean the City Council.



   (G)   “Commission” shall mean the Planning and Zoning Commission.



   (H)   “Board” shall mean the Board of Adjustment.



(Prior Code, § 12-3.01)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 892, passed -
-2008)



§ 158.011  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCESSORY. A use, building, structure, part of a building, or part of a
structure that is subordinate to, and the use of which is customarily
incidental to, that of the main building, structure, or use on the same lot
and that does not alter the character of the principal use or adversely
affect other properties within the district.



   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT or ADU. A subordinate living unit added to,
created within, or detached from a single-family dwelling that provides basic
requirements for independent living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.



   ACT, THE. The National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety
Standards Act of 1974 and Title VI of the Housing and Community Development
Act of 1974 (Pub. Laws 93-383, as amended by Pub. Law No. 95-128, 95-557,
96-153 and 96-339).



   AMENDMENT. A change in the wording, context or substance of this
ordinance, or an addition or deletion or a change in the zone district
boundaries or classifications of the zoning map.



   AREA MEDIAN INCOME. A number set by the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development based on a variety of factors and representing
wages and earnings in the community. AREA MEDIAN INCOME is relative to family
size and community dynamics.



   A.R.S. The Arizona Revised Statutes.



   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR GARAGE. A structure or part thereof, other than a
private garage, where motor vehicles are repaired or painted.



   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. A facility for the servicing of motor
vehicles, including tire repairs, battery charging and changing, storage of
merchandise and supplies related to the servicing of motor vehicles, pumps
and storage tanks for the sale and dispensing of gasoline into motor
vehicles, sale of lubricants, automobile washing and grease racks, minor
engine repair but excluding body and fender works, engine overhauling or
other similar activities.



   AUTOMOBILE, TRUCK AND TRAILER SALES LOT. An open area used for the
display, sales, and/or rental of new or used automobiles, and trailer
coaches, but where no repair, repainting or remodeling is performed.



   BED AND BREAKFAST. A dwelling in which three or more sleeping rooms are
provided for daily rental, usually including one or more meals, and not
serving as a primary residence.



   BOARDING HOUSE. A dwelling in which three, four or five sleeping rooms
are provided and that serves as the principal residence of the occupants. A
common dining room may be provided for the residents.



   BUILDING. A permanent structure having a roof supported by columns or
walls.



   BUILDING, ACCESSORY. A detached building the use of which is
customarily accessory and incidental to the main use of the principal
building or premises.



   BUILDING CODE. The currently adopted Building Code as amended by the
city.



   BUILDING, FACTORY-BUILT. A residential or non-residential building
including a dwelling unit or habitable room thereof which is either wholly or
in substantial part manufactured at an off-site location to be assembled
on-site, except that it does not include a manufactured home, recreational
vehicle or mobile home as defined in this section. (See A.R.S. §§ 40-4001
et seq.)



   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the finished grade
level to the highest level of the building.



   BUILDING PERMIT. A permit required for the erection, construction,
modification, addition to or moving of any building, structure or use in the
incorporated area of the city.



   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building that houses the principal use of the
lot.



   BUILDING SETBACK. The distance required between a property line and the
closest point of any building or structure.



   CABANA. A structure that is constructed as an independent building
adjacent to and not supported by a mobile home for the purpose of additional
living or storage space to the permitted use.



   CAMPGROUND. A lot developed or used for occupancy by tents and/or
recreational vehicles for transient dwelling purposes.



   CARPORT. A permanent roofed structure with not more than two enclosed
sides used or intended to be used for automobile shelter and storage.



   CEMETERY. The land used or intended to be used for the burial of the
dead, and dedicated for such purposes, including columbiums, crematoriums,
mausoleums and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the
boundaries of such premises.



   CHURCH. A permanently located building together with its accessory
buildings and uses commonly used for religious worship fully enclosed with
walls (including windows and doors) and having a structurally solid roof. A
CHURCH is not a “public building”.



   CLINIC. A building or part thereof in which ambulatory patients are
provided diagnostic, therapeutic, or preventative medical, surgical, dental
or optical treatment by a group of doctors acting conjointly, but not
providing for overnight residence of patients.



   CLUB. An association of persons (whether or not incorporated),
religious or otherwise, for social purpose, but not including groups that are
organized primarily to render a service carried on as a business for profit.



   CLUBHOUSE. A structure and related facilities for conducting or
continuing the social purposes for which the club was organized.



   COMMON PROPERTY. One or more parcels of land, together with the
improvements thereon, the maintenance, use and enjoyment of which are shared
by the owners and occupants of the development.



   CONDITIONAL USE. A use that requires a special degree of control to
make such uses consistent and compatible with other existing or permissible
uses in the same district.



   CONDOMINIUM. An individual ownership of a dwelling unit in a multi-unit
structure and/or development, including an undivided interest in the common
areas associated therewith. A CONDOMINIUM may include separately owned
single-story and/or multi-story dwelling units.



   CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION. An existing apartment building, apartment
complex, motel or hotel that is converted to condominium ownership; provided
that, such building shall have been constructed in accordance with or shall
have been upgraded to conform to all applicable Building Code regulations and
zoning requirements.



   CONGREGATE CARE FACILITY. A long-term residential facility for elderly
persons within which are provided living and sleeping rooms, a common dining
room, laundry services and room cleaning. Such FACILITIES may also provide
other services such as transportation for routine social and medical
appointments.



   CONTRACTOR’S YARD. An operation where building materials and
construction equipment are stocked while waiting to be used for various
projects.



   COVENANTS, CONDITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS or CC&Rs. A legal declaration
recorded for a platted subdivision or other property and imposing certain
covenants, conditions and restrictions, as well as easements and/or other
requirements, upon said property.



   DAY CARE CENTER. A facility in which child care is regularly provided
for five or more children under the age of 16, not related to the provider or
his or her employees for all or any part of a 24-hour day. The facility must
meet all federal and state licensing requirements. This definition shall not
include public or private schools operating in accordance with the laws of
the state.



   DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT. An enterprise, activity or use of land
consisting primarily of sales or services rendered to patrons who normally
receive the products or utilize the services while in motor vehicles upon the
premises, including, but not limited to, gas service stations, drive-in
laundry and dry cleaning pick-up stations.



   DWELLING. A building or portion thereof designated for or occupied
exclusively for residential purposes, including one-family and multiple
dwellings, but not including hotels or motels.



      (1)   MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A building, or portion
thereof, containing three or more dwelling units.



      (2)   SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLING. An attached building
containing multiple dwelling units; such as townhouses or condominiums.



      (3)   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A detached building containing
only one dwelling unit.



      (4)   TWO-FAMILY DWELLING. A detached building containing two
dwelling units (duplex).



   EASEMENT. The right-to-use that a person or public entity may have on
the land of another.



   EDIBLE FOOD PRODUCT. A substance, beverage or ingredient used or
intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human consumption.



   FLOODPLAIN. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by flood
waters from any source.



   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The City Manager or designee.



   FLOODPLAIN BOARD. The city’s governing body as regulated by the
state’s Department of Water Resources and by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.



   FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS. Codes, ordinances and other regulations
relating to the use of land and construction within the channel, floodway and
floodplain areas, including zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations,
building codes, housing codes, setback requirements, open area regulations
and similar methods of control affecting the use and development of the areas.



   GENERAL PLAN. The plan developed and adopted by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and City Council as a guide for future growth and development
within the city.



   GRADE. The highest elevation of the finished ground surface adjacent to
the exterior walls of a building or base of a structure; except that, in the
case of fences or freestanding walls, the GRADE shall be the finished ground
surface along the base of the fence or wall and nearest the point of
measurement.



   GROSS FLOOR AREA. The area contained inside the building or structure
as measured along the exterior walls of the building or structure.



   GROUP HOME. A long term residential care service functioning as a
single housekeeping unit providing meals, supervision, and other support
services for six to ten elderly, physically, emotionally, and/or mentally
disabled individuals not related to the owner/manager of the group home.
Typical uses include adult care homes, homes for the developmentally
disabled, group foster homes and homes for the chronically mentally ill. A
GROUP HOME does not include nursing homes, shelter facilities or community
correctional facilities.



   HOSPITAL. A building, or portion thereof or group of buildings, in
which sick or injured persons are given medical or surgical treatment,
examination or care, including overnight residence, together with related
facilities (e.g., laboratories, training facilities, staff residences,
outpatient department and similar facilities) that are an integral part of
the principal use (e.g., alcoholic sanitariums, institutions for the care of
chronic drug addicts and residential treatment facilities for mental
patients).



   HOTEL. A building other than a boarding house as defined herein, in
which there are five or more rooms where lodging with or without meals is
provided for compensation, usually on a transient basis.



   INDUSTRY, LIGHT. Uses that do not result in extensive open yard area,
storage of extensive raw materials, nor otherwise result in noise, odors,
dust, lights, vibration, waste products or adversely affect the surrounding
properties.



   INFUSION or INFUSE. The act or process of mixing, blending, combining
or otherwise mixing medical marijuana or the active ingredients of medical
marijuana into an edible food product.



   INFUSION FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. A food processing or other food
establishment of any type or size, not operated by a medical marijuana
dispensary and not located at a medical marijuana facility or a medical
marijuana cultivation site, but which is or may be permitted by state law to
contract with and does provide to a medical marijuana dispensary edible food
products infused with medical marijuana.



   JUNK YARD. An open area where waste, used or secondhand materials are
bought and sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, processed or
handled; including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, paper,
rags, rubber tires and bottles.



   KENNEL. An establishment housing more than five dogs, cats or other
household pets and where grooming, breeding, training, raising, caring for or
selling of animals is conducted as a business or pleasure and whether or not
for profit.



   LAUNDRY, SELF-HELP. A building in which washing machines and/or dryers
are provided on a rental basis for use by individuals doing their laundry.



   LODGE. An order or society of persons organized for some common
non-profit purpose, but not including groups organized primarily to render a
service that is customarily carried on as a business.



   LOT. A parcel or unit of land with a separate and distinct number or
other designation shown on a plat recorded in the office of the County
Recorder and held or intended to be held in a separate lease or ownership,
and having frontage on at least one street unless otherwise allowed by this
chapter.



   LOT AREA. The total area of a lot within the lot lines as measured on a
horizontal plane.



   LOT COVERAGE. The part or percentage of a lot that is occupied by
principal and/or accessory buildings.



   LOT DEPTH. The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines, measured along the median between the side lot lines.



   LOT LINE, FRONT. The lot boundary line which abuts a street, or in the
case of a corner lot, that boundary line which abuts the narrowest street
frontage of a lot and which the front of the building faces or will face.



   LOT LINE, INTERIOR. A lot line separating two adjacent lots.



   LOT LINE, REAR. The lot line that is opposite and most distant from the
front lot line and in the case of an irregular shaped lot, the line within
the lot parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line, having
a length of not less than ten feet.



   LOT LINE, SIDE. A lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot
line.



   LOT WIDTH. The width of a lot as measured at the minimum required front
setback line.



   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure built in accordance with the Act.



   MEANINGFUL OPEN SPACE. Space that can be enjoyed by people.



   MEDICAL MARIJUANA. All parts of any plant of the genus cannabis whether
growing or not, and any seeds of such plant, used to treat or alleviate a
debilitating medical condition or the symptoms associated with a debilitating
condition of a person who is registered with and identified by the state’s
Department of Health Services as a registered qualified patient.



   MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY. A not-for-profit entity registered with
and approved to operate by the state’s Department of Health Services that
acquires, possesses, cultivates, manufactures, delivers transfers, transports
supplies, sells or dispenses medical marijuana or related supplies and
educational materials as that term is defined in A.R.S. § 36-2801.



   MEDICAL MARIJUANA FACILITY. The physical location from which a medical
marijuana dispensary operates to acquire, possess, supply, sell or dispense
in any matter or form medical marijuana or related supplies and educational
materials to cardholders, as that term is defined in A.R.S. § 36-2801.



   MEDICAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION SITE. The physical location from which a
medical marijuana dispensary operates to grow, cultivate, manufacture, infuse
or store medical marijuana, or from which it delivers, transfers, transports
or supplies medical marijuana to another medical marijuana facility or
cultivation site.



   MICROBREWERY. A business licensed under A.R.S. § 4-205.08 to produce
more than 5,000 gallons of beer per calendar year of operation and not to
exceed 1,240,000 gallons of beer production in a calendar year. It must serve
its beers for sampling on the premises, and may also have wholesale and
resale privileges for sales of beer produced on the premises subject to
limits and conditions stated in said A.R.S. Title 4.



   MIXED USE. The development of a single building containing more than
one type of land use or a single development of more than one building and
use, including, but not limited to, residential, office, retail, recreation,
public or entertainment, where the different land use types are in close
proximity, are planned as a unified complementary whole, and have shared
pedestrian and vehicular access and parking areas that are functionally
integrated.



   MOBILE HOME or MOBILE HOUSING. A movable or portable dwelling over 40
feet in length or over eight feet wide, constructed to be towed on its own
chassis and designed so as to be installed with or without a permanent
foundation for human occupancy as a residence and that may include one or
more components that can be retracted for towing purposes and subsequently
expanded for additional capacity, or two or more units separately towable,
but designed to be joined into one integral unit, as well as a portable
dwelling composed of a single unit, but not including mobile homes that were
constructed prior to 6-15-1976 which are prohibited from being placed within
the city limits after the effective date of this chapter.



   MOBILE HOME PARK. A lot, parcel, or tract of land having as its
principal use the rental of space for occupancy by two or more mobile homes,
including any accessory buildings, structures or uses customarily incidental
thereto and comprising five or more acres.



   MODULAR HOME. A prefabricated or factory built dwelling intended to be
assembled at and permanently affixed to a site and used for human occupancy
as a residence. (See also BUILDING, FACTORY BUILT.)



   MOTEL. A building or group of buildings containing guest rooms or
apartments, each of which maintains a separate outside entrance, used
primarily for the accommodation of automobile travelers, and providing
automobile parking space on the premises.



   NET LOT AREA. The area of a lot, not including any area in a public
right-of-way.



   NON-CONFORMING BUILDING. A building or portion thereof lawfully
existing at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter became effective
and which was designed, erected or structurally altered for a use that does
not conform to the use of the zone in which it is located, or that does not
comply with all the height and area regulations of the district in which it
is located.



   NON-CONFORMING USE. A use of a building or land, existing at the time
of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, which does not
conform to the regulations for the zone in which it is located, as set forth
in this chapter.



   NURSERIES. Commercial operations for the growth and sale of plants.



   NURSERY SCHOOL. An institution for the care of children.



   NURSING HOME. A structure operated as a lodging house in which nursing,
dietary and other personal services are rendered to convalescents, not
including persons suffering from contagious diseases, and in which surgery is
not performed and primary treatment, such as customarily is given in
hospitals and sanitariums, is not provided.



   OFFICE. One or more rooms and accessory facilities for managing or
conducting a business.



   OFF-STREET LOADING FACILITY. A site or portion of a site provided for
the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading
merchandise or materials, situated on the same lot with a building and
entirely outside the right-of-way of any public street or alley, including
loading berth, aisles, access drives and landscaped areas.



   OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITY. A site or a portion of a site devoted to
the off-street parking of motor vehicles including parking spaces, aisles,
access drives and landscaped areas.



   OUTDOOR ADVERTISING.



      (1)   A sign of any type or character whatsoever and of any
material whatsoever, placed for outdoor advertising purposes on the ground or
on any structure or thing whatsoever; and



      (2)   The term “placed”, as used herein, shall include
erecting, constructing, posting, painting, printing, tacking, nailing,
gluing, sticking, carving or otherwise fastening, affixing or making visible
in any manner.



   PARK. A public or private parcel of land developed and used for passive
or active recreation.



   PARKING AREA, PUBLIC. An open area other than a street or alley that is
used for the temporary parking of more than four automobiles and that is
available for public use whether free, for compensation or as an
accommodation for clients or customers.



   PARKING SPACE. A fully accessible space adequate for the temporary
parking of vehicles, situated entirely outside the right-of-way of any public
street or alley.



   PUBLIC BUILDING. A facility for conducting public business. Includes
all federal, state, county and city offices and buildings.



   PUBLIC UTILITY. Any person, firm corporation, municipality or municipal
board duly authorized under state or municipal regulations, to furnish to the
public electricity, gas, steam, communications, water, drainage, flood
control, irrigation, garbage, or trash disposal, or sewage disposal.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicular type unit primarily designed as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, that
either has its own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK. Facilities for the temporary storage,
parking and maneuvering of recreational vehicles (motor homes, travel
trailer, campers and the like) with roads and sites, including sanitary and
water facilities.



   RELATED SUPPLIES. Any equipment, product or material of any kind that
is primarily intended or designed for the purpose of assisting a person who
is registered with and identified by the state’s department of health
services as a registered qualifying patient in smoking or otherwise consuming
medical marijuana.



   REPAIR GARAGE. An establishment where the following services, in
addition to the normal activities of a gas service station, may be provided:
general repair; engine rebuilding; rebuilding or reconditioning of motor
vehicles; collision services such as body, frame or fender straightening and
repair; general painting and under-coating of automobiles; highspeed washing;
auto, boat or trailer rental; and general sales of auto parts or accessories.



   RESTAURANT. An establishment that serves food or beverages.



   REST HOME. See NURSING HOME.



   RETAIL STORE. A commercial business for selling goods, services, wares
or merchandise directly to customers.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A right of road and/or utility access across or through
one property to reach another property.



   ROOMING HOUSE. A building with not more than five guest rooms where,
for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods of time, lodging
is provided.



   RUMMAGE SALE. A residential use in which donated personal property of
one or more individuals or organizations is offered for sale by a church,
civic, fraternal or other association for charitable or non-profit purposes.



   SCHOOL, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE. A building, or a group of buildings, used
for purposes of primary or secondary education, meeting all requirements of
the compulsory education laws of the state.



   SCHOOL, TRADE. A school offering instruction in the technical,
commercial or trade skills, such as real estate schools, business colleges,
electronic schools, automotive and aircraft technicians schools and similar
commercial establishments operated by a non-governmental organization.



   SCREEN WALL. A masonry wall so constructed as to obscure the view of
enclosed activities or uses from outside the wall.



   SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance between a lot line and the
nearest point of a building, structure or use, as the context indicates,
located on a lot.



   SHELTER CARE. A short-term residential care service that provides
temporary lodging, meals and counseling to individuals and groups such as the
homeless, pregnant teenagers, victims of domestic violence, neglected
children and runaways. Short-term residential care is typically less than 30
days.



   SHOPPING CENTER. A cluster or grouping of stores organized in a
balanced arrangement for retail trade with adequate provisions for on-site
parking.



   SIGN. See OUTDOOR ADVERTISING.



   STORAGE CONTAINER. Any storage box, portable warehouse or similar
moveable roofed enclosure placed on a lot for the purpose of storing
equipment or other goods and having a gross coverage exceeding 50 square feet.



   STORAGE TRAILER. The trailer portion of any tractor-trailer or any
similar towable roofed enclosure placed on a lot for the purpose of storing
equipment or other goods and having a gross coverage exceeding 50 square feet.



   STREET. A public thoroughfare or right-of-way other than an alley,
dedicated, deeded or condemned for use as such, that affords the principal
access to abutting property, including those designated as avenue, place,
way, drive, lane, boulevard, highway, road or by any other suffix.



   STREET LINE. A right-of-way line of a street that abuts a lot line.



   STRUCTURE. Any constructed or erected material or combination of
materials the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to
something located on the ground, including buildings, stadiums, radio towers,
sheds, storage bins, fences and signs.



   SWAP MEET. A commercial use in which personal property of two or more
individuals is offered for sale to the public.



   SWIMMING POOL. A constructed pool, used for swimming, bathing or
wading, whether above or below the ground surface and regardless of depth or
water surface area.



   TOWNHOUSE.



      (1)   A single-family attached residence in which the owner
owns their unit and the ground it sits on.



      (2)   The community association maintains the building’s
exterior and common areas.



   TRAILER, TRAVEL. A vehicle without motive power, or other portable
structure with wheels built on a chassis, designed as a temporary dwelling
for travel recreation and vacation purposes, having a body width not
exceeding eight feet and a body length not exceeding 40 feet.



   TRAILER, UTILITY. A vehicle without motive power, designed and
constructed to travel on the public thoroughfares in accordance with the
provisions of the state’s Vehicle Code, and to be used only for carrying
property.



   TRUCK STOP or TRAVEL CENTER. A business establishment providing goods
and services to travelers, especially long-haul truck drivers, including, but
not limited to, accessories, fueling, overnight accommodations, parts,
repair, restrooms, restaurant, self-help laundry, showers and the like.



   USE. The purpose for which a site or structure is arranged, designed,
intended, constructed, moved, erected, altered or enlarged or for which
either a site or structure is or may be occupied and maintained.



   VARIANCE. A modification of the literal provisions of this chapter
granted by the Board of Adjustment upon a finding that strict enforcement of
this chapter would cause undue hardship owning to circumstances unique to the
individual property for which the VARIANCE is granted.



   WATERWAY or WATERCOURSE. A defined landform that carries water.



   WORKFORCE HOUSING. Housing that is affordable to residents, or
potential residents, who earn up to 150% of the area median income for their
family size, when they are spending no more than 35% of their gross income on
housing.



   WRECKING YARD. A junk yard.



   YARD. A required space unobstructed from the ground upward and measured
as the minimum horizontal distance from a building or structure to the
property line.



      (1)   FRONT. A yard extending across the full width of the
lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front
lot line and the front line of the main building.



      (2)   REAR. A yard extending across the full width of the lot
between the main building and the rear lot line; the depth of the REAR YARD
shall be the minimum horizontal distance from the nearest part of the rear
lot line to the main building.



      (3)   SIDE. A yard between the main building and the side lot
line; the width of the SIDE YARD shall be the minimum horizontal distance
from the nearest part of the side lot line to the main building.



   YARD SALE/GARAGE SALE. A sale of personal property (commonly household
goods), of one family, held on the premises, said sale lasting no longer than
48 hours at a time and held no more frequently than four times in any
12-month period.



   ZONE. Any area shown on the zoning map of the city for which there are
uniform regulations governing the use of buildings and land and the height
and area of buildings.



   ZONING MAP. The map entitled “The Zoning Map of the City of Williams,
Arizona” and maintained in the office of the City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 12-3.02)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 833, passed -
-2006; Ord. 892, passed - -2008; Ord. 906, passed - -2008; Ord. 916, passed
4-28-2011; Ord. 937, passed 12-12-2013)




BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT




§ 158.025  MAYOR, COUNCIL MEMBERS SERVE AS BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.



   A Board of Adjustment is established which shall consist of the Mayor
and City Council members of the city.



(Prior Code, § 12-9.01)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 158.026  COMPENSATION.



   (A)   All members shall serve without pay.



   (B)   However, members may be reimbursed for actual expenses
incurred in connection with their duties upon authorization or ratification
by the Board and approval of such expenditures by the Council.



(Prior Code, § 12-9.02)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 158.027  ORGANIZATION, MEETINGS, RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The Board shall elect the Mayor and Vice-Mayor as Chairperson
and Vice-Chairperson respectfully.



   (B)   The Vice-Chairperson shall perform the duties of the
Chairperson in the absence or disability of the Chairperson.



   (C)   The Board shall adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of
its own business, hearings and procedures.



   (D)   The Board shall meet regularly at such times and at such place
as shall be prescribed by its rules, but not less frequently than once every
three months unless there is no business to conduct.



   (E)   All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public.



   (F)   No change shall be made in regular meeting times or place
without a published seven-day notice.



   (G)   In addition, any four members of the Board may make written
request to the Chairperson for a special meeting and, if such meeting is not
called, such members may call a special meeting in such manner as may be
provided in the Board rules.



   (H)   The Council shall appoint a Secretary who shall keep minutes
of the Board’s proceedings, showing the action of the Board and the vote of
each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating
such fact, and shall keep records of its official actions, all of which shall
be immediately filed in the office of the City Clerk and shall then be a
public record.



   (I)   The presence of four members shall constitute a quorum.



   (J)   The Board shall act by motion.



   (K)   The affirmative vote of four members shall be required for
passage of any matter before the Board.



   (L)   A member may abstain from voting only upon a declaration that
he or she has a conflict of interest, in which case such member shall not
take part in the deliberations on the matter in question.



(Prior Code, § 12-9.03)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 158.028  ASSISTANCE FROM CITY DEPARTMENTS.



   The Board may call on the city departments for assistance in the
performance of its duties, and it shall be the duty of such departments to
render assistance to the Board as may be reasonably required.



(Prior Code, § 12-9.04)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 158.029  APPEALS, NOTICES AND HEARINGS.



   (A)   Appeals to the Board concerning interpretation or
administration of this chapter may be taken by any person aggrieved by or an
officer or department of the city affected by any decision of the Zoning
Administrator.



   (B)   An aggrieved person shall be construed to be one having a
direct interest in the property affected, such as the owner, mortgagee or
lessee.



   (C)   Applications for any matter to be considered by the Board
shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on forms furnished for the
purpose within 30 days after the action appealed from and shall specify the
grounds thereof.



   (D)   The Zoning Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Board
all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from is
taken.



   (E)   (1)   The appeal stays all proceedings in the matter
appealed from, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board that,
by reason of the facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his or her
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property.



      (2)   In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed, except by
a restraining order granted by the Board, or by a court of record on
application and notice to the Zoning Administrator.



   (F)   The Board shall fix a reasonable time for hearing the appeal,
and shall give notice of hearing by both publication in a newspaper of
general circulation in accordance with and posting the notice in conspicuous
places on the property affected.



      (1)   It shall not be the responsibility of the city to
maintain the posting once erected.



      (2)   The applicant, the Zoning Administrator and the parties
in interest shall receive notice of hearing.



   (G)   Any party may appear at the hearing in person or by agent or
attorney.



   (H)   Parties in interest shall have the right to present their case
by oral or documentary evidence, to submit rebuttal evidence, and to conduct
such cross-examination of witnesses as may be required for a full and true
disclosure of the facts; provided that, the submission of documentary
evidence shall not, by reason of its written form, prejudice the interest of
any party.



   (I)   The Board shall, as a matter of policy, provide for the
exclusion of irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence, and in
furtherance of this policy, may limit cross-examination.



   (J)   A petition to the Board signed by persons not parties in
interest to an appeal, as defined herein, shall not be considered documentary
evidence and shall have no bearing on the Board’s decision, nor shall any
person presenting such petition be considered the agent of its signers.



(Prior Code, § 12-9.05)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 158.030  POWERS, DUTIES AND LIMITATIONS OF THE BOARD.



   (A)   Hear and decide appeals in which it is alleged there is an
error in an order, requirement or decision made by the Zoning Administrator
in the enforcement of this chapter;



   (B)   Hear and decide appeals for variances from the terms of the
zoning ordinance only if, because of special circumstances applicable to the
property, including its size, shape, topography, location or surroundings,
the strict application of this chapter will deprive such property of
privileges enjoyed by other property of same classification in the same
zoning district;



   (C)   Any variance granted is subject to such conditions as will
assure that the adjustment authorized shall not constitute a grant of special
privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the
vicinity and zone in which such property is located; and



   (D)   Reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order,
requirement or decision of the Zoning Administrator appealed from and make
such order, requirement, decision or determination as necessary.



(Prior Code, § 12-9.06)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 158.031  PROHIBITED ACTIONS OF BOARD.



   The Board shall not:



   (A)   Make any changes in the uses permitted in any zoning district,
or make any changes in the terms of this chapter; provided, the restriction
in this division (A) shall not affect the authority to grant variances
pursuant to this chapter;



   (B)   Grant a variance if the special circumstances applicable to
the property are self-imposed by the property owner;



   (C)   A variance shall not be granted by the Board unless and until:



      (1)   A written application for variance has been submitted
demonstrating that special conditions and circumstances exist which are
peculiar to the land, structure or building involved, and which are not
applicable to other lands, structures or buildings in the same zoning
district;



      (2)   Literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter
would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in
the same zoning district under the terms of the chapter;



      (3)   The alleged hardship caused by literal interpretation of
the provisions of this chapter includes more than personal inconvenience and
financial hardship and is not the result of actions by the applicant;



      (4)   Granting the variance will not confer upon the appellant
any special privilege that is denied by this chapter to other land,
structures or buildings in the same zoning district;



      (5)   Granting the variance will not interfere with or
substantially or permanently injure the appropriate use of adjacent
conforming properties in the same zoning district;



      (6)   A hearing has been held in accordance with requirements
of this section;



      (7)   The Board finds that the reasons set forth in the appeal
justify the granting of the variance, and that the variance is the minimum
variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building or
structure; and



      (8)   The Board finds that granting of the variance will be in
harmony with the general purpose of intent of this chapter, and will not be
injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare.



(Prior Code, § 12-9.07)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 158.032  CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.



   (A)   In granting a variance, the Board may impose such conditions
and safeguards as are appropriate to ensure that the purpose of intent of
this chapter will be fulfilled.



   (B)   Failure to comply with such conditions and safeguards, when
made a part of the terms under which a variance is granted shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter.



   (C)   No violations of this chapter by neighboring lands, structures
or buildings, in the same zoning district, and no permitted use of lands,
structures or buildings in other zoning districts, shall be considered
grounds for granting a variance.



   (D)   Every variance granted shall be personal to the appellant
therefore and shall be transferable and shall run with the land only after
completion of any authorized structure or structures.



   (E)   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to empower the
Board to change the terms of this chapter, to authorize uses which violate
any other city ordinance, to affect changes in the zoning map or to add to
the uses permitted in any zoning district.



   (F)   Every decision of the Board shall be based upon finding of
fact and every finding of fact shall be supported in the record of its
proceedings.



   (G)   The conditions required by this chapter to exist on any matter
upon which the Board is authorized to pass under this chapter shall be
construed as limitations on the power of the Board to act.



   (H)   A mere finding or recitation of the enumerated conditions,
unaccompanied by the findings of specific fact, shall not be deemed findings
of fact and shall not be deemed in compliance with this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 12-9.08)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 158.033  APPEALS FROM THE BOARD.



   The decision of the Board shall be final; provided, however, that, any
person aggrieved by a decision of the Board, a taxpayer or a municipal
officer may, at any time within 30 days after the filing of the decision in
the office of the Board, petition the Court for a writ of certiorari for
review of the Board’s decision. Allowance of the writ shall not stay
proceedings upon the decision appealed from, but the Court may, on
application, on notice to the Board, and for good cause shown, grant a
restraining order, and on final hearing may reverse or affirm, wholly or
partly, or may modify the decision reviewed.



(Prior Code, § 12-9.09)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 158.034  FEES.



   Upon filing an application or appeal, the appellant shall pay filing
fee to the General Fund of the city in accordance with a schedule established
by resolution of the Council, and posted in the office of the Zoning
Administrator. No part of any such fee shall be returnable after an
application is filed and the fee is paid. In the case of an appeal for a
variance to more than one provision of this chapter, the filing fee shall
equal the total amount chargeable for all provisions as prescribed by the fee
schedule. Payment of the filing fee shall be waived when the applicant is the
Zoning Administrator or any other officer or agency of the city acting in an
official capacity.



(Prior Code, § 12-9.10)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)




ZONE CHANGES OR AMENDMENTS




§ 158.045  GENERAL.



   The Council may, from time to time as the public necessity,
convenience, general welfare or good zoning practice requires, change the
district boundaries or amend, change, repeal or supplement the regulations
herein established.



(Prior Code, § 12-10.01)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 158.046  PETITIONS FOR AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   Such change or amendment may be initiated by the Council or
the Commission on its own motion, or by petition of one or more owners of
real property within the area proposed to be changed.



   (B)   The Commission may on its own motion propose any amendments to
this chapter and map.



   (C)   Petitions for change of district boundaries or amendment of
regulations shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the
development procedures ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 12-10.02)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 158.047  PROCEDURE.



   The procedure for change of district boundaries or amendment of
regulations shall be in accordance with the provisions of Ch. 154 of this
code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 12-10.03)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 158.048  PUBLIC NOTICE REQUIRED.



   (A)   In proceedings involving one or more of the following proposed
changes or related series of changes to this chapter, notice shall be
provided in the manner prescribed in division (B) below:



      (1)   A 10% or more increase or decrease in the number of
square feet or units that may be developed;



      (2)   A 10% or more increase or reduction in the allowable
height of buildings;



      (3)   An increase or reduction in the allowable number of
stories of buildings;



      (4)   A 10% or more increase or decrease in setback or open
space requirements; and



      (5)   An increase or reduction in permitted uses.



   (B)   In proceedings governed by division (A) above, the city shall
provide notice to real property owners pursuant to at least one of the
following notification procedures:



      (1)   Notice shall be sent by first class mail to each real
property owner, as shown on the last county assessment, whose real property
is directly governed by the changes;



      (2)   Include notice of such changes with utility bills or
other mailings; and



      (3)   The city shall publish such changes prior to the first
hearing on such changes in a newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality. The changes shall be published in a “display ad” covering
not less than one-eighth of a full page.



   (C)   If notice is provided pursuant to divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2)
above, the city shall also send notice by first class mail to persons who
register their names and addresses with the city as being interested in
receiving such notice. The city may charge a fee not to exceed $5 per year
for providing this service and may adopt procedures to implement this
provision.



   (D)   Notwithstanding the notice requirements set forth in division
(A) above, the failure of any person or entity to receive notice shall not
constitute grounds for any Court to invalidate the actions of the city for
which the notice was given.



(Prior Code, § 12-10.04)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 158.049  WRITTEN PROTEST.



   If the owners of 20% or more either of the area of the lots included in
a proposed change, or of those immediately adjacent in the rear or any side
thereof extending 150 feet therefrom, or of those directly opposite thereto
extending 150 feet from the street frontage of the opposite lots, file a
protest in writing against a proposed amendment, it shall not become
effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths of all members of the
City Council. If any members of the City Council are unable to vote because
of a conflict of interest, than the required number of votes for passage of
the question shall be three-fourths of the remaining membership of the
governing body; provided that, such required number of votes shall in no
event be less than a majority of the full membership of the legally
established governing body.



(Prior Code, § 12-10.05)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)




CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS




§ 158.060  GENERAL PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   Every zoning district contains certain buildings, structures
and uses of land which are normal and complementary to permitted principal
uses in the district, but which, by reason of their typical physical or
operational characteristics, influence on the traffic function of adjoining
streets, or similar conditions, are often incompatible with adjacent
activities and uses.



   (B)   It is the intent of this chapter to permit conditional uses in
appropriate zoning districts, but only in specific locations within such
districts that can be designed and developed in a manner which assures
maximum compatibility with adjoining uses.



   (C)   It is the purpose of this section to establish principles and
procedures essential to proper guidance and control of such uses.



(Prior Code, § 12-11.01)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 158.061  GENERAL REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Zoning district regulations established elsewhere in this
chapter specify that certain buildings, structures and uses of the land may
be allowed as conditional uses in a given district subject to the provisions
of this section and to the requirements set forth in district regulations.
The city is empowered to grant and to deny applications for conditional uses
and to impose reasonable conditions upon them.



   (B)   (1)   Every conditional use issued shall be personal to the
permittee and applicable only to the specific use and to the specific
property for which it issued. However, upon issuance of an occupancy permit
for the conditional use, signifying that all zoning and site development
requirements imposed have been satisfied, the conditional use shall run with
the land.



      (2)   The maintenance of special conditions imposed as well as
compliance with other provisions of this chapter, shall be the responsibility
of the property owner.



   (C)   The city shall consider not only the nature of the use and the
special conditions influencing its location in the particular district, but
also the proposed location of buildings, parking and other facilities within
the site, the amount of traffic likely to be generated and how it will be
accommodated, and the influence that such factors are likely to exert on
adjoining properties.



   (D)   In order to approve a conditional use, the city must make a
finding of fact that the establishment, maintenance or operation of the use
of the building applied for will not be detrimental to the public health,
safety, peace, convenience, comfort and general welfare of persons residing
or working in the neighborhood or be detrimental or injurious to property and
improvements in the neighborhood or to the general welfare of the city.



   (E)   The city may designate such conditions as it deems necessary
to secure the intent and purpose of this chapter and may require such
guarantees and evidence that such conditions are being or will be complied
with.



(Prior Code, § 12-11.02)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 158.062  CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT APPLICATION.



   Application for a conditional use shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 12-11.03)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 158.063  ACTION, PROCEDURE AND FEES.



   The application shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of
Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 12-11.04)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)




ZONING DISTRICTS, ZONING MAP AND DISTRICT BOUNDARIES




§ 158.075  ZONING DISTRICTS.



   (A)   RR - Rural Residential (minimum five-acre lot area).



      (1)   This district is intended for very low density
residential development and limited agricultural usage.



      (2)   Regulations are designed to preserve the open space
characteristic of the district and to ensure the compatibility of limited
agricultural uses with residential uses.



   (B)   AR - Agricultural Residential (minimum two-acre lot area).



      (1)   This district is intended for low density residential
development and limited agricultural usage.



      (2)   Regulations are designed to preserve the open space
characteristic of the district and to ensure the compatibility of limited
agricultural uses with residential uses.



   (C)   R1-43 - Low Density Residential (minimum one-acre lot area).
This district is intended for low density residential development on parcels
of at least one acre. Land use is composed chiefly of individual homes,
together with required recreation, religious and educational facilities as
the basic elements of a balanced neighborhood.



   (D)   ER - Estate Residential (minimum 15,000-square-foot lot area).
This district is intended for master planned, large lot, estate-type,
residential development. Regulations are designed to stabilize and protect
the single-family residential character of the district, to promote and
encourage creation of a favorable environment for family life, and to
prohibit all incompatible activities. Land use is composed chiefly of
individual homes, together with required recreation, religious and
educational facilities as the basic elements of a balanced neighborhood.
Certain essential and complementary uses are permitted under conditions and
standards that ensure their compatibility with the character of the district.



   (E)   R1-7 - Single-Family Residential (minimum 7,000-square-foot
lot area). This district is intended to promote and preserve residential
development. Regulations are designed to stabilize and protect the
single-family residential character of the district, to promote and encourage
creation of a favorable environment for family life and to prohibit all
incompatible activities. Land use is composed chiefly of individual homes,
together with required recreation, religious and educational facilities as
the basic elements of a balanced neighborhood. Certain essential and
complementary uses are permitted under conditions and standards that ensure
their compatibility with the character of the district.



   (F)   R1-4 - Single-Family Residential (minimum 4,000 square feet
lot area). (Minimum development size five acres, maximum development size 20
acres.)



      (1)   This district promotes and preserves a medium lot size
residential development. Regulations are designed to stabilize and protect
the residential character of the district, to promote and encourage creation
of a favorable environment for family life, and to prohibit all incompatible
activities. Land use is also composed of recreation, where certain essential
and complementary uses are permitted under conditions and standards that
ensure their compatibility with the character of the district.



      (2)   The square footage reduction in this single-family
residential district allows additional lots per acre but setback and open
space requirements are maintained the same as the larger single-family
residential zoning which reduces the maximum home size and maintains open
space.



   (G)   RMH-1 - Single-Family Residential Including Mobile Homes
(minimum 5,000-square-foot lot area). This district is intended to promote
and preserve residential development. Regulations are designed to stabilize
and protect the single-family residential character of the district, to
promote and encourage creation of a favorable environment for family life and
to prohibit all incompatible activities. Land use is composed chiefly of
individual homes and/or mobile homes, together with required recreation,
religious and educational facilities as the basic elements of a balanced
neighborhood. Certain essential and complementary uses are permitted under
conditions and standards that ensure their compatibility with the character
of the district.



   (H)   R-2 - Low-Density Multiple-Family Residential. This district
is intended to promote and preserve residential development consisting of
single-family (attached and detached) and two-family homes. Regulations are
designed to stabilize and protect the residential character of the district,
to promote and encourage creation of a favorable environment for family life
and to prohibit all incompatible activities. Land use is composed chiefly of
individual attached and/or detached homes and/or two-family homes, together
with required recreation, religious and educational facilities as the basic
elements of a balanced neighborhood. Certain essential and complementary uses
are permitted under conditions and standards that ensure their compatibility
with the character of the district.



   (I)   R-3 - Medium-Density Multiple-Family Residential. This
district is intended to promote and preserve residential development
consisting of single-family (attached and detached), two-family and
multi-family dwelling units including apartments, town homes and
condominiums. Regulations are designed to stabilize and protect the
residential character of the district, to promote and encourage creation of a
favorable environment for family life and to prohibit all incompatible
activities. Land use is also composed of recreation, religious and
educational facilities as the basic elements of a balanced neighborhood.
Certain essential and complementary uses are permitted under conditions and
standards that ensure their compatibility with the character of the district.



   (J)   CBD - Central Business District.



      (1)   This district is intended to promote and preserve a full
range of business, commercial, government, financial and other compatible
business and commercial uses all located in or in close proximity to the
existing and historical central business area of the community. In addition,
the district is intended to allow for mixed-use development and high density
residential uses in the form of multi-family housing, including apartments,
town homes and condominiums.



      (2)   The allowed uses are intended to serve the needs of the
entire community and the larger service area surrounding the community.



   (K)   CR - Commercial Residential District.



      (1)   This district is intended to promote and preserve a full
range of business, commercial, government, financial and other compatible
business and commercial uses and all residential uses in close proximity to
the existing historical central business area of the community. In addition,
the district is intended to allow for mixed-use development and high density
residential uses in the form of multi-family housing, including apartments,
town homes and condominiums.



      (2)   The allowed uses are intended to serve the needs of the
entire community and the larger service area surrounding the community.



      (3)   The allowed residential uses are included to promote the
viability of these uses for as long as possible.



   (L)   HC- Highway Commercial. This district is intended to promote,
preserve and be limited to highway and tourist related business and
commercial uses located at or close to the Interstate 40 interchanges. In
addition, the district is intended to allow for mixed-use development and
high density residential uses in the form of multi-family housing, including
apartments, town homes and condominiums.



   (M)   I-1 - Light Industrial. This district is intended to promote
light industrial uses that are compatible with all surrounding districts.



   (N)   I-2 - Heavy Industrial. This district is intended to promote
heavy industrial uses that are compatible with all surrounding districts.



   (O)   HP - Historical Preservation Overlay Zone. The purpose of this
zone is to promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of
the community and to ensure the harmonious growth and development of the
municipality by encouraging the preservation and rehabilitation of historic
districts therein. The historic zone designation is to be superimposed over
existing zones where there are surviving properties in their original setting
or that give a historic dimension to the city. This zone is intended to
encourage the retention of historic properties and archaeological sites and
to preserve, and keep them in active use and in their original appearance,
setting and placement rather than to modify uses in the underlying zones. It
is also intended that new or remodeled buildings, located within historic
districts, be designed and constructed to harmonize with buildings located
within the immediate vicinity in order to preserve property values, to
provide for future development and to promote an awareness of the heritage of
the city among residents of and visitors to the community.



   (P)   BP - Business Park. This district is intended to provide for
the development of a mix of office, research and production, and quality
light industrial uses with the emphasis on office and research uses. The uses
are to be grouped in a campus or park like setting and shall be performed or
carried out entirely within completely enclosed buildings. The district is
further intended to promote the provision of ample off-street parking and
loading areas, open space and landscape buffers in areas adjacent to
non-business development or other incompatible land uses. In addition, the
district is intended to allow for mixed-use development and high density
residential uses in the form of multi-family housing, including apartments,
town homes and condominiums.



(Prior Code, § 12-4.01)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 820, passed -
-2001; Ord. 833, passed - -2006; Ord. 892, passed - -2008; Ord. 968, passed
6-28-2018)



§ 158.076  ZONING MAP.



   The zoning districts are shown on a map entitled “The Zoning Map of
the City of Williams, Arizona”, which is maintained in the office of the
City Clerk and which is hereby incorporated into this chapter by reference.



(Prior Code, § 12-4.02)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 892, passed -
-2008)



§ 158.077  INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   Where the locations of any zoning district boundaries are unclear, the
following rules shall apply.



   (A)   District boundaries follow street, highway or railroad
dedicated right-of-way lines and lot lines.



   (B)   Dimensions are either shown on the zoning map or shall be
determined by the use of the scale shown on the zoning map.



   (C)   Where the application of the above rules does not clarify the
zoning district boundary location, the Zoning Administrator shall determine
the location.



(Prior Code, § 12-4.03)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 892, passed -
-2008)



§ 158.078  ANNEXATION.



   Territory annexed to the city shall be zoned as RR, Rural Residential,
unless and until such time the City Council approves a change of zone request.



(Prior Code, § 12-4.04)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 892, passed -
-2008)



§ 158.079  USES PERMITTED IN EACH ZONING DISTRICT.



   (A)   Uses permitted in each zoning district.



 


Uses Permitted In Each Zoning District




Uses

 

RR

 

AR

 

R1-43 & ER

 

R1-7

 

R1-4

 

RMH-1

 

R-2

 

R-3

 

CBD

 

CR

 

HC

 

I-1

 

I-2

 

BP

 

HP





RESIDENTIAL


Accessory dwelling unit (ADU)
 

X(34)

 

X(34)

 

X(34)

 

X(34)

 



 

X(34)

 

X(34)

 

X(34)

 

X(34)

 

X(34)

 



 



 



 

X(34)

 

X(26)



Bed and breakfast
 

X(27)

 

X(27)

 

X(27)

 

X(27)

 



 

X(27)

 

X(27)

 

X(27)

 

X(27)

 

X(27)

 

X(27)

 



 



 



 

X(26)



Boarding house
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

X

 



 

X

 



 



 



 



 

X(26)



Dwelling unit
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

X(25)

 

X(25)

 

X(25)

 



 



 



 

X(26)



Manufactured home
 

X(29)

 

X(29)

 



 



 



 

X(29)

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

X(26)



Mobile home
 



 



 



 



 



 

C(23)

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

X(26)



Mobile home park
 



 



 



 



 



 

C(23)

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

X(26)



Modular home
 

X(24)

 

X(24)

 

X(24)

 

X(24)

 

X(24)

 

X(24)

 

X(24)

 

X(24)

 

X(24)

 

X(24)

 

X(24)

 

X(24)

 

X(24)

 



 

X(26)



Multi-family dwelling
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

X

 



 

X

 



 



 



 



 

X(26)



One-family dwelling
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 



 

X

 



 



 



 



 

X(26)



Two-family dwelling
 



 



 



 



 



 



 

X

 

X

 



 

X

 



 



 



 



 

X(26)



AGRICULTURE


General agriculture
 

X(1)

 

X(1)

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

X(26)



Roadside stands
 

X(2)

 

X(2)

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

X(26)



Stables
 

C(3)

 

C(3)

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

X(26)



OTHER


Accessory uses
 

X(4)

 

X(4)

 

X(4)

 

X(4)

 

X(4)

 

X(5)

 

X(5)

 

X(5)

 

X(6)

 

X (5) (6)

 

X(6)

 

x(6)

 

X(6)

 



 

X(26)



Airport
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 



 

X(26)



Business park uses
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

X(33)

 

X(26)



Cemetery
 

X(7)

 

X(7)

 

X(7)

 

X(7)

 



 

C(7)

 

C(7)

 

C(7)

 



 



 



 



 



 



 

X(26)



Church
 

X(8)

 

X(8)

 

X(8)

 

X(8)

 

X(8)

 

X(8)

 

X(8)

 

X(8)

 

X(8)

 

X(8)

 



 



 



 



 

X(26)



Commercial, CBD
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

X(9)

 

X(9)

 



 



 



 



 

X(26)



Commercial, highway
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

X(10)

 



 

X(10)

 



 



 



 

X(26)



Congregate care
 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 

X

 

X

 

X

 



 



 



 



 

X(26)



Day care center
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 

X

 

X

 



 



 



 



 

X(26)



Domestic animals
 

X(11)

 

X(11)

 

X(11)

 

X(11)

 

X(11)

 

X(11)

 

X(11)

 

X(11)

 



 

X(11)

 



 



 



 



 

X(26)



Dude ranch
 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

X(26)



Group home
 

X(12)

 

X(12)

 

X(12)

 

X(12)

 



 

X(12)

 

X(12)

 

X(12)

 

X(12)

 

X(12)

 

X(12)

 



 



 



 

X(26)



Home occupations
 

X(13)

 

X(13)

 

X(13)

 

X(13)

 

X(13)

 

X(13)

 

X(13)

 

X(13)

 



 

X(13)

 



 



 



 



 

X(26)



Industrial, heavy
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

X(14)

 



 

X(26)



Industrial, light
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

X(15)

 

X(15)

 



 

X(26)



Infusion food establishment
 



 

C(35)

 

C(35)

 



 



 

C(35)

 

C(35)

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 





Kennel
 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 



 

X(26)



Laundry, self-help
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

X

 

X

 



 



 



 



 

X(26)



Medical marijuana dispensary
 



 

C(35)

 

C(35)

 



 



 

C(35)

 

C(35)

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 





Medical marijuana facility
 



 

C(35)

 

C(35)

 



 



 

C(35)

 

C(35)

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 





Medical marijuana cultivation site
 



 

C(35)

 

C(35)

 



 



 

C(35)

 

C(35)

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 





Metal building
 

X(30)

 

X(30)

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

X (dd)

 

X (dd)

 



 

X(26)



Mixed use
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

X

 

X

 

X

 



 



 

X

 

X(26)



Public uses
 

X(16)

 

X(16)

 

X(16)

 

X(16)

 

X(16)

 

X(16)

 

X(16)

 

X(16)

 

X(16)

 

X(16)

 

X(16)

 

X(16)

 

X(16)

 



 

X(26)



Public utility
 

X(17)

 



 

X(17)

 



 

X(17)

 

X(17)

 

X(17)

 

X(17)

 

X(17)

 

X(17)

 

X(17)

 

X(17)

 

X(17)

 



 

X(26)



Recreational vehicle park
 

C(19)

 

C(19)

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C(19)

 

C(19)

 



 



 

X(26)



Radio and TV studio
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

X(18)

 

X(18)

 



 

X(18)

 

X(18)

 



 

X(26)



Radio/TV towers
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 



 

C

 

C

 



 

X(26)



Sales office, subdivision
 

C(20)

 

C(20)

 

C(20)

 

C(20)

 

C(20)

 

C(20)

 

C(20)

 

C(20)

 



 



 



 



 



 



 

X(26)



Schools, private
 

X(21)

 

X(21)

 

X(21)

 

X(21)

 

X(21)

 

X(21)

 

X(21)

 

X(21)

 



 



 



 



 



 



 

X(26)



Shelter care
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 

X

 

X

 



 



 



 



 

X(26)



Signs
 

X(22)

 

X(22)

 

X(22)

 

X(22)

 

X(22)

 

X(22)

 

X(22)

 

X(22)

 

X(22)

 

X(22)

 

X(22)

 

X(22)

 

X(22)

 



 

X(26)



Storage containers and trailers
 

X(31)

 

X(31)

 

X(31)

 

X(31)

 

X(31)

 

X(31)

 

X(31)

 

X(31)

 

X(31)

 

X(31)

 

X(31)

 

X(32)

 

X(32)

 



 

X(26)



NOTES TO TABLE:

X - means allowed use

C - means conditional use (see conditional use, §§158.060 through 158.063
of this chapter)

Numbers (1) - (35) refer to additional requirements or clarifications listed
in § 158.079(B) of this chapter




 



(Prior Code, § 12-5.01)



   (B)   Additional requirements and clarifications for uses permitted
in each zoning district.



      (1)   General agriculture includes:



         (a)   Nurseries, greenhouses, orchards, aviaries,
apiaries, raising of field crops, tree crops, berry and bush crops, vegetable
and herb gardening, and irrigation systems public and private;



         (b)   Farm animals; provided:



            1.   All animals be maintained so as not to create
or cause a nuisance;



            2.   Notwithstanding any other provision, the
maximum number of animals, excepting common house pets allowed to be kept on
the premises shall be as follows.



               a.   Three animals may be kept on two acres,
plus two animals for each additional acre.



               b.   All livestock and poultry kept shall be
kept confined to the premises by erection and maintenance of a stock-tight
fence and necessary cattle guards.



            3.   Notwithstanding any other provision, only one
hog may be kept on the premises;



         (c)   All other agriculture uses, including a guest
ranch, require a conditional use.



      (2)   Retail sales structures of less than 1,000 square feet
that are located on the premises where the products are raised and offered
for sale;



      (3)   Horse riding, training or boarding stables on a minimum
lot size of ten acres;



      (4)   Limited to fences and walls (see the fences and walls
section), garage, enclosed storage, barn, satellite earth station, swimming
pool, amateur radio tower, game court (unlighted), home occupation (see home
occupation in division (B)(13) below) and household pets. Walls and fences:



         (a)   No higher than three feet in the front yard;



         (b)   No higher than six feet six inches in the side or
rear yard;



         (c)   Open wire fences exceeding the above heights are
allowed around schools and other public or quasi-public uses when necessary
for the safety or restraint of the occupants thereof;



         (d)   No fence may contain barbed wire, electrical
current, broken glass or other hazardous material, except storage areas in
industrial zoning districts may use barbed wire provided the barbs are a
minimum of six feet above grade; and



         (e)   In the commercial and industrial zones a six-foot
high solid wall shall be constructed and maintained along the property lines
adjoining a residential zone.



      (5)   Limited to fences and walls (see fences and walls in
division (B)(4) above), garage, enclosed storage, satellite earth station,
swimming pool, amateur radio tower, home occupation (see home occupation in
division (B)(13) below), yard sales limited to three events each no longer
than three consecutive days per residence per each calendar year and
household pets;



      (6)   Limited to uses customary and incidental to the
principal use of the property, satellite earth station, amateur radio tower
(see fences and walls in division (B)(4) above);



      (7)   Must contain a minimum of 40 acres, ten of which shall
be subdivided and developed in the initial plat;



      (8)   Churches and church schools (but not dormitories);
provided that, all buildings are located on a lot of at least 10,000 square
feet in size or the minimum lot size in the district whichever is larger and
are located not less than 50 feet from any lot line;



      (9)   Commercial, CBD, includes indoor business uses serving
the daily needs of the immediate neighborhood as well as community level
needs including the following and similar uses:



         (a)   Appliance, furniture and household equipment
rentals;



         (b)   Places of assembly, including assembly halls,
ballrooms, theaters;



         (c)   Automotive services including automobile service
station, commercial parking lot, automotive repair, but not including body or
radiator repair;



         (d)   Banks and other financial institutions;



         (e)   Business schools;



         (f)   Business support services;



         (g)   Charitable organizations;



         (h)   Churches;



         (i)   Day care center;



         (j)   Eating and drinking establishments with
on-premises alcoholic beverage sale; provided, it is not within 100 feet of
any residential district, and limited to the serving of food or beverages
inside a building or adjacent, secure enclosure and live entertainment
including music or dancing, but no adult entertainment;



         (k)   Emergency medical care facility;



         (l)   Governmental services, public utility offices and
exchanges, excluding storage or repair services;



         (m)   Hotels and motels;



         (n)   Live entertainment, including music or dancing,
but no adult entertainment;



         (o)   Lodges or fraternal associations;



         (p)   Medical and dental office, including veterinarians;



         (q)   Microbrewery;



         (r)   Office uses;



         (s)   Personal services and repair;



         (t)   Plant nursery, including wholesale and retail
sales;



         (u)   Private recreational and clubs;



         (v)   Restaurant;



         (w)   Retail stores;



         (x)   Self storage warehouse;



         (y)   Shelter care facilities;



         (z)   Taxi stand, parking garages above or below ground;



         (aa)   Theaters, assembly halls, ballrooms and similar
places of assembly;



         (bb)   Vehicle facilities for sales, leasing, rental
and/or repair of automobiles, recreation vehicles, trucks and/or trailers,
and where vehicles may be stored on site; and



         (cc)   Vehicle services including automobile service
station, commercial parking lot, vehicle repair, new or used automobile,
motorcycle, boat, truck and recreational vehicle sales and repair, vehicle
repair garage; provided, the storage or parking of wrecked motor vehicles
shall be within an enclosed building or a compound yard enclosed by a
six-foot high solid wall, except for driveway openings.



      (10)   Commercial, highway includes indoor business uses
serving the needs of travelers, visitors and tourists including only the
following:



         (a)   Automotive services including automobile service
station, automotive repair but not including body or radiator repair;



         (b)   Gift shop and convenience grocery store in
conjunction with an automobile service station, motel or truck stop;



         (c)   Motel;



         (d)   Restaurant; and



         (e)   Truck stop.



      (11)   Provided that, such animals are household pets and that
kennels are not maintained;



      (12)   Group homes and supervisory care facilities are
permitted; provided that:



         (a)   No group home is located on a lot within 1,320
feet, measured by a straight line in any direction, from the lot line of
another group home;



         (b)   When required by state or federal regulation, the
home is licensed by, certified by, approved by, registered with or under
contract with a federal, state or local government and evidence of such is
provided to the Zoning Administrator;



         (c)   No change altering the property’s residential
character shall be made to the exterior of the buildings or the grounds;



         (d)   The location of the group home has been approved
by the Zoning Administrator; and



         (e)   An administrative record of each group home is
maintained by the Zoning Administrator.



      (13)   HOME OCCUPATIONS shall mean any occupation or
profession customarily conducted entirely within a dwelling unit and carried
on by a member of the family residing therein; and which occupation or
profession is clearly incidental and subordinate to the use of the dwelling
unit for dwelling purposes; and does not change the character thereof; and in
connection with which there are no employees other than an immediate member
of the family residing in the dwelling unit; and no mechanical equipment
except for that which is customarily used for domestic, hobby, or household
purposes. Home occupations shall require a valid city business license, and
shall have one client on premises by appointment only subject to the
following limitations:



         (a)   Instructional occupations, including, but not
limited to, art, dance, exercise, martial arts and music, shall have no more
than four students on the premises at any one session; and



         (b)   Service occupations, including, but not limited
to, accounting, automotive detailing, cabinet making, furniture making, hair
dressing, sewing, tax preparation and taxidermy, shall have no more than one
client on the premises at any time.



      (14)   Heavy industrial uses, including any kind of scientific
research, manufacturing, compounding, assembling, processing or treatment;
provided that:



         (a)   All uses shall be operated entirely within an
enclosed building; except that, a junk yard operation shall be completely
enclosed with a solid masonry wall and no material or other storage items
shall be stacked higher than the height of the wall; and



         (b)   Dust, fumes, odors, refuse matter, smoke, vapor,
noise, lights and vibrations shall be confined to the heavy industrial zone
and controlled in accordance with city, county, state and federal
environmental laws.



      (15)   Light industrial uses including any kind of scientific
research, manufacturing, compounding, assembling, processing or treatment;
provided that:



         (a)   All uses shall be operated entirely within
enclosed buildings;



         (b)   Dust, fumes, odors, refuse matter, smoke, vapor,
noise, lights, vibrations shall be confined to the interiors of the buildings
and shall be controlled in accordance with all applicable city, county, state
and federal environmental laws;



         (c)   Travel and parking portions of the lot shall be
dust-proofed; and



         (d)   Such uses include, but are not limited to, the
following:



            1.   Auction yard;



            2.   Bakery;



            3.   Printing and newspaper office;



            4.   Blacksmith shop;



            5.   Bottling works;



            6.   Builders supply yards;



            7.   Cabinet making shop;



            8.   Carpenter shop;



            9.   Commercial diary;



            10.   Commercial laundry;



            11.   Concrete batch plant only if portable;



            12.   Dairy processing and distribution plant;



            13.   Dry cleaning plant;



            14.   Electrical shop;



            15.   Frozen food locker (no slaughtering on the
premises);



            16.   Furniture upholstering;



            17.   Greenhouses, (plant nurseries) for
wholesale/retail distribution of plants grown on the site;



            18.   Heavy equipment sales and service;



            19.   Ice and cold storage plants;



            20.   Lumber yards;



            21.   Machine shops;



            22.   Plumbing shop;



            23.   Public utility facilities;



            24.   Publishing plant;



            25.   Roofing shops;



            26.   Sheet metal shops;



            27.   Tire vulcanizing;



            28.   Transportation depots;



            29.   Veterinary clinic including kennels and
boarding;



            30.   Veterinary hospitals; and



            31.   Warehouse.



      (16)   Limited to:



         (a)   Public schools (limited to elementary, junior high
and high school - other public schools are a conditional use);



         (b)   Public parks and playgrounds;



         (c)   Public golf courses including club houses, but not
including miniature golf courses or practice driving tees;



         (d)   Other publicly owned and operated buildings or
properties require a conditional use in all zoning districts other than the
commercial and industrial zoning districts; and



         (e)   All publicly owned and operated buildings or
properties are allowed as a use by right in the commercial and in the
industrial zoning districts; provided that, all outdoor storage or operations
are screened from all residential zoning districts and public rights-of-way.



      (17)   Public utility facilities required for local service,
provided that there are no offices, no repair or storage facilities, no
outdoor storage or full time employees related to the site;



      (18)   Radio and television studios; provided that, no masts
or towers used for transmission or broadcasting purposes are erected on the
premises, except as a conditional use;



      (19)   Recreational vehicle park subject to the requirements
of §§ 158.180 and 158.181 of this chapter;



      (20)   Including model homes, temporary sales offices, and
construction trailers;



      (21)   Limited to elementary, junior high and high school but
not dormitories. Other private schools are a conditional use;



      (22)   Signs are subject to the sign chapter of this chapter;



      (23)   Mobile home park subject to the requirements of §§
158.160 through 158.167 of this chapter;



      (24)   Modular homes may be erected in any zone allowing
residential use in lieu of site built dwellings if all other requirements of
this section are met:



         (a)   The components bear manufacturer’s certification
indicating they meet all requirements of the Uniform Building Code for
residential use;



         (b)   Any and all transporting gear is removed;



         (c)   The structure is placed on, and permanently
affixed to, a permanent foundation meeting all requirements of the Uniform
Building Code which requirements shall include but are not limited to
exterior foundation insulation to a value of R-11 or more;



         (d)   The structure must meet all city building codes;



         (e)   No title is issued or the chapter is surrendered;



         (f)   The modular home installation is approved by the
Building Inspector; and



         (g)   The dwelling unit is assessed as real property by
the County Assessor.



      (25)   A one-family dwelling unit is allowed on each floor
above the first floor or in the rear yard;



      (26)   The historic district zone is an overlay zone. Any use
permitted by the existing zones over which historic district zoning is
superimposed shall be allowed. The area zoned as a historic district shall be
designated by its underlying zone name plus the preface “H”;



      (27)   Bed and breakfast uses are allowed as follows:



         (a)   With four guest sleeping rooms or less in all
zoning districts except industrial; provided that, in residential districts,
no bed and breakfast is located on a lot within 1,320 feet, measured by a
straight line in any direction, from the lot line of another bed and
breakfast; and



         (b)   With five or more guest sleeping rooms in only the
R3, CBD, CR, HC and HP Districts.



      (28)   Additional uses in R1-7 Zoning District.
Notwithstanding anything else contained herein to the contrary, the following
additional uses will be permitted in R1-7 Zoning:



         (a)   Modular home as an allowed use in the R1-7 Zoning
District, subject to the provisions of division (B)(22) above;



         (b)   One-family dwelling as an allowed use in the R1-7
Zoning District;



         (c)   Accessory uses as an allowed use in R1-7 Zoning
District, subject to the provisions of division (B)(4) above;



         (d)   Cemetery human/pet as a conditional use in R1-7
Zoning District, subject to the provisions of division (B)(7) above; and



         (e)   Church as an allowed use in the R1-7 Zoning
District, subject to the provisions of division (B)(2) above.



      (29)   Manufactured homes are allowed as follows:



         (a)   Dwelling must be multi-sectional;



         (b)   The unit must be installed on a foundation system
in compliance with all applicable requirements of the Uniform Building Code;



         (c)   The home must be covered with an exterior material
customarily used on conventional dwellings. The exterior covering material
shall extend to the ground; except that, when a solid concrete or masonry
perimeter foundation is used, the exterior covering material need not extend
below the top of the foundation;



         (d)   The roof must be constructed of shingles or other
material customarily used for conventional dwellings;



         (e)   All tow bars, wheels, axles and other towing
equipment shall be removed when the dwelling is installed on a lot;



         (f)   Unit must be permanently affixed to the property
and its title surrendered;



         (g)   When appropriate, permanent stairs/porch must be
installed in lieu of temporary stairs/porch;



         (h)   The unit must not exceed five years of age on date
of installation;



         (i)   Roof must support snow load of at least 40 pounds;



         (j)   Unit must possess a minimum 12-inch overhang for
eaves; and



         (k)   Electric service must be mounted to structure of
unit.



      (30)   Buildings constructed entirely or partially with metal
siding, including the type of structure known as “Quonset Hut”, are
allowed as principal and/or accessory buildings in Zones I-1 and I-2. Such
buildings are also allowed as principal and/or accessory buildings in Zones
RR and AR subject to the following provisions.



         (a)   Unpainted or gray metal or highly-reflective
buildings are not acceptable.



         (b)   An accessory building shall have the same color
siding as the principal building.



         (c)   An accessory building shall have the same color
roof as the principal building.



         (d)   An accessory building shall have window and door
types similar to the principal building.



         (e)   Landscaping shall be utilized to soften the impact
of any such building and to shield it from view.



      (31)   No storage trailer or storage container shall be
allowed in any residential or commercial zone, except for temporary use
during construction and on the site of said construction;



      (32)   A storage trailer or storage container shall be allowed
in an industrial zone on a temporary or permanent basis. Any such storage
trailer or container on the property more than 90 days shall be deemed
permanent, and must then be affixed to a permanent (non-movable) foundation.
The Commission may recommend and Council may require that such storage
trailers or containers be screened from view of adjacent and/or nearby
properties;



      (33)   Business park uses serving the daily needs of the
immediate neighborhood, the community and the surrounding area, as well as
providing goods and services regionally, nationally and/or internationally;
provided that:



         (a)   All uses shall be operated entirely within
enclosed buildings;



         (b)   Dust, fumes, odors, refuse matter, smoke, vapor,
noise, lights, vibrations shall be confined to the interiors of the buildings
and shall be controlled in accordance with all applicable city, county, state
and federal environmental laws;



         (c)   Travel and parking portions of the lot shall be
paved per city standards;



         (d)   Business park uses include, but are not limited
to, the following:



            1.   Assembly halls, ballrooms, theaters and other
places of assembly;



            2.   Automotive services including automobile
service station, commercial parking lot, automotive repair, but not including
body or radiator repair;



            3.   Banks and other financial institutions;



            4.   Business offices, schools and support
services;



            5.   Business support services;



            6.   Charitable organizations;



            7.   Churches;



            8.   Day care center;



            9.   Eating and drinking establishments with
on-premises alcoholic beverage sale provided it is not within 100 feet of any
residential district, and limited to the serving of food or beverages inside
a building or adjacent, secure enclosure and live entertainment including
music, or dancing, but no adult entertainment;




            10.   Emergency medical care facility;




            11.   Governmental services, public utility
offices and exchanges, excluding storage or repair services;



            12.   Hotels;



            13.   Live entertainment including music or
dancing, but no adult entertainment;



            14.   Lodges or fraternal associations;



            15.   Medical and dental office;



            16.   Parking garages, above or below ground;



            17.   Restaurants;



            18.   Retail stores;



            19.   Taxi stands; and



            20.   Vehicle facilities for sales, leasing,
rental and/or repair of automobiles, recreation vehicles, trucks and/or
trailers, and where vehicles may be stored on site.



      (34)   Accessory dwelling units (ADUs) may be permitted as
follows.



         (a)   ADUs are allowed in certain designated residential
zoning districts, either within, attached to or detached from existing or new
residences, subject to all setbacks, open space and other density
requirements of the district in which they are located, subject to all
parking requirements of this chapter and subject to any codes, covenants and
restrictions in effect for the property on which they are located.



         (b)   The principal residence must not be a mobile home.



         (c)   The ADU must be conventionally framed.



         (d)   The ADU square footage must not exceed 60% of the
principal residence square footage.



         (e)   When platted with a new subdivision, ADUs may be
located on the rear and interior side property lines provided that they are
located above garages, and that:



            1.   Two such ADUs are designed and constructed
together at the common intersection of the rear and interior lot lines of two
lots having alley access; or



            2.   Four such ADUs are designed and constructed
together at the common intersection of the rear and interior side lot lines
of four lots.



         (f)   ADUs may be permitted in new multiple dwelling
condominium developments.



(Prior Code, § 12-5.02)



      (35)   Medical marijuana facility, medical marijuana
cultivation site and infusion food establishment. The operation of a medical
marijuana facility, a medical marijuana cultivation site or an infusion food
establishment shall only be allowed in accordance with the provisions,
procedures and standards set forth in this division (B)(35).



         (a)   Basic use provisions.



            1.   The operation of a medical marijuana
facility, a medical marijuana cultivation site or an infusion food
establishment is not allowed by right in any zoning district.



            2.   The operation of a medical marijuana facility
is allowed only in CBD, CR or I-1 District and only upon obtaining a
conditional use permit for such use.



            3.   The operation of a medical marijuana
cultivation site or an infusion food establishment is allowed only in CBD, CR
or I-1 District and only upon obtaining a conditional use permit for such use.



         (b)   Application. The application procedures for a
conditional use permit to operate a medical marijuana facility, a medical
marijuana cultivation site or an infusion food establishment at a specified
premises shall be the same as the application procedures stated in § 158.062
of this chapter for conditional use permits; except that, in addition to any
other required submittals, an applicant shall provide:



            1.   The location of the premises at which the
medical marijuana facility, the medical marijuana cultivation site or
infusion food establishment will be operated;



            2.   The identity of the medical marijuana
dispensary that will operate the medical marijuana facility or the medical
marijuana cultivation site and, for an infusion food establishment, the
identity of the operator of the establishment;



            3.   If the premises identified in the application
is not owned by the medical marijuana dispensary making application for the
conditional use permit, a written statement signed by the property owner
authorizing the applicant to apply for the use permit for the premises and
consenting to the use being requested in the application;



            4.   A site plan for the property on which the
premises is located showing lot dimensions with front, sides and rear
setbacks and, where applicable, its location within the larger development in
which the property may be situated; and



            5.   An accurate, to-scale, floor plan clearly
showing the configuration of the premises and stating the total floor space
of the premises or portion thereof to be used for the purpose for which the
conditional use permit is requested. In addition to any other information,
the floor plan shall specifically identify and provide as applicable:



               a.   The location of the enclosed, locked
facility in which cultivation or storage of medical marijuana will take place;



               b.   The total floor space for the enclosed,
locked facility;



               c.   The location within the premises where
infusion will take place;



               d.   All entrances and exits to and from the
premises, indicating which such entrances are secured and which, if any, are
not secured;



               e.   The location of any windows from which
a member of the public can view activities occurring inside the premises;



               f.   Any additional security measures or
devices to be installed in or upon the premises, including without limitation
any on-site alarm system or security lighting; and



               g.   Additional protections, if any, against
medical marijuana diversion and theft.



         (c)   Review. The review and approval of an application
for a conditional use permit to operate a medical marijuana facility, a
medical marijuana cultivation site or an infusion food establishment shall
consider all relevant land use factors, including those stated in division
(A) above for permitted uses, as well as the conditional use permit criteria
and location requirements stated in this division (B)(35).



         (d)   Approval. An application for a conditional use
permit under §§ 158.060 through 158.063 of this chapter may be approved or
denied by the City Council, based upon the findings set forth in this
division (B)(35). Approval of such a use permit application shall not be
construed as any endorsement by the city of the use or operation for which
the conditional use permit has been requested by the applicant.



         (e)   Conditional use permit criteria. The premises in
or upon which shall be operated a medical marijuana facility, a medical
marijuana cultivation site or an infusion food establishment shall:



            1.   Be located in a permanent building and shall
not be located in a temporary structure, trailer, cargo container, motor
vehicle or other similar non-permanent enclosure;



            2.   Not be larger than 1,000 gross square feet
for a medical marijuana facility and 3,000 gross square feet for a medical
marijuana cultivation site. The secure storage area shall not exceed 500
square feet in a medical marijuana facility and 1,000 square feet in a
medical marijuana cultivation site;



            3.   If a combined dispensary and cultivation
site, may not exceed 4,000 gross square feet; and



            4.   Be operated only by a medical marijuana
dispensary or, in the case of an infusion food establishment, a person or
entity authorized by state law to infuse edible food products, who does:



               a.   Comply with all registration and
recordkeeping required by city, county and state law;



               b.   Obtain, maintain and display a valid
city business registration or license as may be required by city code;



               c.   Not sell merchandise other than medical
marijuana and related supplies;



               d.   Not have or operate drive-through
facilities or take-out windows;



               e.   Not emit dust, fumes or vapors or the
environment;



               f.   Prohibit consumption of medical
marijuana on the premises;



               g.   Not permit outdoor seating anywhere on
the premises. Where the premises is located within a larger commercial or
industrial development having walkways or other common areas containing
already existing outdoor seating required as a condition of the zoning for
the development, then no new outdoor seating shall be located immediately
adjacent to the premises;



               h.   Allow annual fire inspections pursuant
to the city code; and



               i.   Have operating hours not earlier than
8:00 a.m. and not later than 7:00 p.m.



         (f)   Separation requirements.



            1.   A medical marijuana facility or a medical
marijuana cultivation site shall be located a minimum distance from the uses
set forth in the table below. Measurements shall be made in a straight line
in any direction from the closest property line of the medical marijuana
facility or medical marijuana cultivation site to the nearest lot line of any
parcel containing uses identified in the table. No separation is required
when a medical marijuana facility or a medical marijuana cultivation site is
separated from another such facility or site by a freeway.



            2.   Medical marijuana separation table:



 

Use or Use Classification
 

Separation Requirement (feet)



Another medical marijuana facility or cultivation site
 

2,000



Charter schools, public schools or private schools
 

500



Licensed day care center, public or private
 

500



Residential zoning district boundary
 

60




 



            3.   As part of the conditional use permit review
process, the City Council may allow minor deviations to the separation
requirements if Council finds that, under the particular circumstances, the
subject premises is so located as to satisfy the intent of the separation
requirements.



         (g)   Issuance of conditional use permit.



            1.   A conditional use permit under this division
(B)(35) must be reviewed annually and shall be submitted at the same time as
required for the renewal of the city business license, except as provided in
divisions (B)(35)(g)1. and (B)(35)(g)2. below.



            2.   A conditional use permit issued under this
division (B)(35) shall be deemed void and to have automatically expired if
the permitted use is not commenced by the permit holder or substantial
construction has not taken place within nine months after the date of City
Council approval.



            3.   The validity of a conditional use permit
under this division (B)(35) is further conditioned upon the permit holder and
the permitted premises being at all times in compliance with applicable city
building codes, development standards and other land use regulations stated
in the zoning code or any other ordinance or code adopted by the city.



         (h)   Non-transferability of use permit. A use permit
issued under this division (B)(35) is not transferable to any other location
or premises, nor is it valid for any other use or business associated with a
medical marijuana dispensary that is not specifically identified in the
conditional use permit.



         (i)   Conditional use permit renewal.



            1.   A conditional use permit under this division
(B)(35) may be reviewed by filing an application for renewal on a form
provided by the Zoning Administrator. The application for renewal shall be
received by the Zoning Administrator not less than 70 days before the
expiration of the permit. When the application for renewal is received less
than 70 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the use permit
shall not be delayed, postponed or otherwise affected.



            2.   An application for renewal shall be
considered following the same procedures as an original application. The
application for renewal may be denied for any reason that an original
application may be denied or revoked or if the subject property is in
violation of the terms of the original application.



            3.   A medical marijuana facility or medical
marijuana cultivation site lawfully operating is not rendered in violation of
the distance requirements set forth above if, subsequent to the initial
granting of the conditional use permit under this division (B)(35), any of
the uses identified in the table above are constructed or located within the
required separation area. This provision applies only to the renewal of a
valid use permit and does not apply when an application for a conditional use
permit is submitted after a use permit has expired or has been revoked.



         (j)   Revocation or suspension. A conditional use permit
issued pursuant to this division (B)(35) is subject to revocation or
suspension in accordance with provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 12-5.02)



(Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 750, passed - -1996; Ord. 772, passed -
-1997; Ord. 844, passed - -2004; Ord. 892, passed - -2008; Ord. 916, passed
4-28-2011; Ord. 937, passed 12-12-2013; Ord. 968, passed 6-28-2018)



§ 158.080  DENSITY SCHEDULE.



   (A)   Density schedule.



 


 

RR

 

AR

 

R1-4 3

 

ER

 

R1-7

 

R1-4

 

RMH-1

 

R-25

 

R-3

 

CBD & CR

 

HC

 

I-1

 

I-2

 

HP





Minimum lot area
 

5 acres (16)

 

2 acres (16)

 

1 acre (16)

 

15,000 sq. ft. (16)

 

7,000 sq. ft. (16)

 

4,000 sq. ft.

 

5,000 sq. ft. (16)

 

4,500 sq. ft. (14) (16)

 

4,500 sq. ft. (14)(16)

 

none

 

none

 

none

 

none

 

(13)



Minimum lot width
 

295 feet

 

295 feet

 

100 feet

 

100 feet

 

50 feet

 

50 feet

 

50 feet

 

50 feet (14)

 

60 feet (14)

 

none

 

50 feet

 

none

 

none

 

(13)



Minimum front yard


Principal use
 

60 feet

 

60 feet

 

25 feet

 

30 feet

 

20 feet

 

20 feet

 

20 feet

 

20 feet

 

25 feet (14)

 

0 feet

 

25 feet + (9)

 

25 feet + (9)

 

25 feet + (9)

 

(13)



Accessory use
 

60 feet

 

60 feet

 

25 feet

 

30 feet

 

20 feet

 

20 feet

 

20 feet

 

20 feet

 

25 feet

 

0 feet

 

25 feet + (9)

 

25 feet + (9)

 

25 feet + (9)

 

(13)



Minimum side yard


Principal use
 

15 feet

 

15 feet

 

25 feet

 

15 feet

 

5 feet (1)

 

5 feet (1)

 

5 feet (1)

 

5 feet (2)

 

5 feet (2)

 

0 feet (6)

 

10 feet + (9)

 

10 feet + (9)

 

10 feet + (9)

 

(13)



Accessory use
 

15 feet

 

15 feet

 

25 feet

 

15 feet

 

5 feet (1)

 

5 feet (1)

 

5 feet (1)

 

5 feet (1)

 

5 feet (2)

 

0 feet (6)

 

10 feet + (9)

 

10 feet + (9

 

10 feet + (9)

 

(13)



Minimum rear yard


Principal use
 

30 feet

 

30 feet

 

25 feet

 

40 feet

 

15 feet

 

15 feet

 

15 feet

 

15 feet (3)

 

15 feet (7)

 

0 feet (7)

 

25 feet (7)

 

10-50 feet (7)

 

10-50 feet (7)

 

(13)



Accessory use
 

30 feet

 

30 feet

 

25 feet

 

40 feet

 

15 feet

 



 

15 feet

 

15 feet (3)

 

15 feet (7)

 

0 feet (7)

 

25 feet (7)

 

10-50 feet (7)

 

10-50 feet (7)

 

(13)



Maximum building height


Principal use
 

35 feet (4)

 

35 feet (4)

 

35 feet (4)

 

35 feet (4)

 

35 feet (4)

 

26 feet (4)

 

35 feet (4)

 

35 feet (4)

 

35 feet (4)

 

35 feet (4)

 

35 feet (4)

 

35 feet (4)

 

35 feet (4)

 

(13)



Accessory use
 

35 feet (4)

 

35 feet (4)

 

35 feet (4)

 

35 feet (4)

 

35 feet (4)

 

26 feet (4)

 

35 feet (4)

 

35 feet (4)

 

35 feet (4)

 

35 feet (4)

 

35 feet (4)

 

35 feet (4)

 

35 feet (4)

 

(13)



Minimum open space
 

85%

 

75%

 

75%

 

65%

 

65%

 

65%

 

60%

 

40%

 

30% (5)

 

0%

 

30%

 

30%

 

30%

 

(13)



Minimum land area per dwelling unit
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

1,500 sq. ft. (14)

 

1,500 sq. ft. (14)

 



 



 



 



 

(13)



Minimum separation between buildings
 

10 feet (10)

 

10 feet (10)

 

10 feet (10)

 

10 feet (10)

 

10 feet (10)

 

10 feet (10)

 

10 feet (10)

 

10 feet (10)

 

10 feet + (12)

 



 

20 feet (11)

 

20 feet (11)

 

20 feet (11)

 

(13)



Parking requirements See §§ 158.215 through 158.219
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X



NOTES TO TABLE:

Numbers (1) - (16) refer to additional requirements or clarifications listed
in § 158.080(B) of this chapter.




 



(Prior Code, § 12-6.01)



   (B)   Additional requirements and clarifications for density
schedule.



      (1)   Provided, the total of the two side yards is at least 15
feet;



      (2)   Provided that, for an apartment building on a single lot
or parcel the total of the two side yards is at least 15 feet; for town homes
on individual lots, no more than four town home units may be joined in a
single structure, with setbacks of ten feet for open side yards and zero feet
for interior lot lines between adjoining town home units;



      (3)   When abutting a residential or mobile district;



      (4)   Not to exceed three stories. Exceptions:



         (a)   In any district, to church spires, belfries,
cupolas and domes not for human occupancy; monuments; water towers;
flagpoles; non-commercial radio or television antennas; provided that, such a
structure or antenna shall be so located and constructed that if it should
collapse, its reclining length would be contained within the property on
which it was constructed;



         (b)   In industrial districts, to chimneys, smokestacks,
derricks, conveyors, grain elevators or similar structures wherein the
industrial process involved customarily require a height greater than
otherwise permitted; provided that, such a structure shall be so located and
constructed that if it should collapse, its reclining length would still be
contained within the property on which it was constructed; and



         (c)   In any district, to solar heating or cooling
apparatus.



      (5)   A minimum of 12% of the net lot area shall be provided
as frontage open space to provide a setting for the building, visual
continuity within the community and a variety of spaces in the streetscape;
except that, the frontage open space shall not be required to exceed 50
square feet per one foot of public street frontage and shall not be less than
20 square feet per one foot of public street frontage;



      (6)   The side yard setback shall be as follows.



         (a)   Where a side lot line abuts a more restrictive
zoning district, the setback for the more restrictive district shall apply.



         (b)   Multi-story buildings adjacent to a residential
district shall observe a ten-foot side yard for each story of the building.



         (c)   On interior lot lines abutting an adjacent
commercial or industrial zone, there shall be no required side yards.



         (d)   On all exterior lot lines (adjacent to a public
street), there shall be 15-foot side yard setback which shall not be used for
parking.



      (7)   There shall be a rear yard of:



         (a)   Not less than ten feet if property is adjacent to
any street, alley or other right-of-way or easement;



         (b)   However, buildings adjacent to a residential
district shall observe a 20-foot rear yard; and



         (c)   Multi-story buildings shall observe and additional
ten feet of rear yard for each additional story.



      (8)   Twenty five feet minimum, plus an additional one foot
for each one foot that the structure exceeds 12 feet in height;



      (9)   Provided, the total of the two side yards for interior
lots is at least 30 feet. Where a side yard abuts a residential zone or a
public street, a minimum twenty 25-foot side yard shall be required, plus an
additional one foot for each one foot that the structure exceeds 12 feet in
height;



      (10)   Minimum separation between any principal building and
any other building or enclosure (corral and the like), plus one foot for
every one foot by which the height of any structure exceeds 20 feet;



      (11)   Minimum separation between main buildings on adjacent
lots;



      (12)   Minimum separation between opposing walls of buildings
within a development shall be:



         (a)   Two side or rear walls with no door or window: ten
feet;



         (b)   One side or rear wall with no door or window and
one side or rear wall with doors or windows: 18 feet;



         (c)   Both walls side or rear with doors or windows: 24
feet;



         (d)   One front wall and one side or rear wall: 24 feet;
and



         (e)   Two front walls: 40 feet.



      (13)   The Historic District Zone is an overlay zone. Any use
permitted by the existing zones over which historic district zoning is
superimposed shall be allowed. The density schedule is also the same as the
underlying zone. The area zoned as a historic district shall be designated by
its underlying zone name, plus the preface “H”;



      (14)   For a town home subdivision, the minimum lot size is
2,500 square feet, the minimum lot width is 30 feet and the minimum front
yard setback is 20 feet. For a condominium development or conversion, the
minimum land area per dwelling unit is 2,000 square feet;



      (15)   ADUs are permitted in designated districts, subject to
applicable subdivision codes, covenants and restrictions (CC&Rs), and shall
conform to all setbacks and other requirements of the density schedule
(division (A) above); except that:



         (a)   Within any district, a detached ADU shall be
allowed with a primary residence on a lot that is legal, non-conforming or
that is at least the minimum size for its zoning district; but not less than
7,000 square feet in any case;



         (b)   An ADU within or attached to a primary residence
may be located on any size lot; provided that, the combined structure meets
all other applicable setback and density requirements for the district in
which it is located; and



         (c)   In the R1-7, R-2, R-3 and RMH-1 Zoning Districts,
if an ADU is detached and 12 feet or less in height, its rear and interior
side yard setbacks may be reduced by 50%, but shall in no case be less than
five feet.



(Prior Code, § 12-6.02)



(Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 750, passed - -1996; Ord. 833, passed -
-2006; Ord. 892, passed - -2008; Ord. 968, passed 6-28-2018)




HISTORIC PRESERVATION ZONE




§ 158.095  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this zone is to promote the educational,
cultural, economic and general welfare of the community, and to ensure the
harmonious growth and development of the municipality, by encouraging the
preservation and rehabilitation of historic districts therein. The historic
zone designation may be superimposed over existing zones where there are
surviving properties in their original setting or which give a historic
dimension to the city.



   (B)   This zone is intended to encourage the retention of historic
properties and archaeological sites and to preserve and keep them in active
use and in their original appearance, setting and placement, rather than to
modify uses in the underlying zones.



   (C)   It is also intended that new or remodeled buildings, located
within zoned historic districts, be designed and constructed to harmonize
with buildings located within the immediate vicinity in order to preserve
property values, to provide for future development and to promote an
awareness of the heritage of the city among residents of and visitors to the
community.



(Prior Code, § 12-17.01)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 892, passed -
-2008)



§ 158.096  DEFINITIONS.



   Within zoned historic districts, for the purposes of this subchapter,
unless the context otherwise requires, the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings.



   ALTERATION.



      (1)   Any aesthetic, architectural, mechanical or structural
change to the exterior surface of any part of an existing building.



      (2)   Applicants should follow the Secretary of the
Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation and become familiar with the
requirements for tax certification of rehabilitated historic buildings.



   CONTRIBUTING. A building, site, structure or object that adds to the
district’s sense of time and place and meets the above criteria.



   HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured between the highest part of a
structure and the finished grade at the midpoint of the front facade of the
principal building, excluding chimneys, mechanical equipment and other
miscellaneous additions.



   NON-CONTRIBUTING. A building, site, structure or object that detracts
from the district’s sense of time and place and does not meet the above
criteria.



   ORDINARY MAINTENANCE. Any work, for which a building permit is not
required by law and where the purpose and effect of such work is to correct
any deterioration or decay of or damage to a structure or any part thereof
and to restore the same, as nearly as may be practicable, to its condition
prior to the occurrence of such deterioration, decay or damage.



   PREVAILING SETBACK. The most frequently occurring distances from the
front facades of all buildings in the historic district to the front property
lines.



   PROPORTION. The relationship between the width and height of a building
front facade, windows, doors and the like.



   RHYTHM. The ordered recurrent alternation of solids to voids in the
front facade, streetscape and the like.



   SITE UTILIZATION. The spacing between the sides of buildings.



   ZONED HISTORIC DISTRICT. One or more buildings, sites, structures
and/or objects, contributing and/or non-contributing, including signs affixed
thereto, that are zoned historic preservation by the Mayor and Council under
this subchapter, and that meet the criteria established by the National
Register of Historic Places which states, “The quality of significance in
American history, architecture, archaeology and culture is present in
districts, sites, buildings, structures and objects that possess integrity of
location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling and association
and: (1) That are associated with events that have made a significant
contribution to the broad patterns of our history; or (2) That are associated
with the lives of persons significant in our past; or (3) That embody the
distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction or
that represent the work of a master, or that possess high artistic values, or
that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may
lack individual distinction; (4) That have yielded, or may be likely to
yield, information important in prehistory or history; or (5) That relates to
events, personages or architectural styles that are at least fifty years
old.” However, outstanding examples less than 50 years old should be
evaluated on their own merits.



(Prior Code, § 12-17.02)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 892, passed -
-2008)



§ 158.097  HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION.



   (A)   Membership.



      (1)   The city’s Historic Preservation Commission
(“Commission”) shall be composed of seven members, appointed by the Mayor
and Council, all of whom have demonstrated interest, experience or knowledge
in one of the following: history; architecture; planning; archaeology;
historic archaeology; real estate; historic preservation; law; or related
field.



      (2)   To the extent available in the community, at least two
professionals from the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural
history, planning, archaeology or related historic preservation disciplines
such as cultural geography or cultural anthropology should be members of the
Historic Preservation Commission.



      (3)   The Commission must obtain expertise in that field when
considering National Register nominations and other actions that will impact
historic properties.



      (4)   Commission members shall be appointed by the City
Council to serve no more than three three-year staggered terms of office.



      (5)   The Historic Preservation Commission shall meet at least
four times each year and follow the provisions of the state’s Open Meeting
Act.



   (B)   Powers. Unless otherwise specified herein, the powers and
duties of the Historic Preservation Commission shall be as follows:



      (1)   Advise the Mayor and Council in all matters regarding
historic preservation in the city;



      (2)   Adopt criteria consistent with the National Register of
Historic Places for the identification of historic districts and properties;



      (3)   Prepare, or cause to be prepared, a comprehensive
inventory of historic buildings and districts in the city;



      (4)   Increase public awareness of the value of historic,
architectural, archaeological and cultural preservation by developing and
participating in public information programs;



      (5)   Make recommendations to the Mayor and Council concerning
the utilization of grants from federal and state agencies, private groups and
individuals on the utilization of budgetary appropriations to promote
historic preservation in the city. The Commission shall raise funds as
necessary to promote its programs and activities;



      (6)   Make known, to the owners of historic properties and to
the public, standards for architectural review;



      (7)   Evaluate and comment upon decisions by other public
agencies affecting the physical development and land use patterns in historic
districts as appropriate;



      (8)   Hold public hearings as specified in this chapter; and



      (9)   Perform any other functions that may be designated by
resolution or motion of the Council.



   (C)   Reporting and notification procedures. The Commission shall
prepare a written annual report of Commission activities that is provided to
the Mayor and Council and to the state’s Historic Preservation Officer, and
that is available to the public.



(Prior Code, § 12-17.03)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 892, passed -
-2008)



§ 158.098  INITIATION OR AMENDMENT OF DISTRICTS.



   (A)   A Historic Preservation Zoning District may be initiated by
the owner of the proposed property, by the Historic Preservation Commission,
by the Planning and Zoning Commission or by the Mayor and Council.



   (B)   The procedure for establishing or amending a Historic
Preservation Zoning District shall be in accordance with Ch. 154 of this code
of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 12-17.04)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 892, passed -
-2008)



§ 158.099  CRITERIA FOR ESTABLISHING A DISTRICT.



   In determining whether an area, neighborhood or district shall be zoned
as a Historic Preservation Zoning District, the criteria of the National
Register of Historic Places shall be followed.



(Prior Code, § 12-17.05)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 892, passed -
-2008)



§ 158.100  PERMITTED USES.



   Use requirements in the HP, Historic Preservation, Zoning District
shall be as follows.



   (A)   Any use permitted by the existing zones over which historic
district zoning is superimposed shall be allowed.



   (B)   The area zoned as a Historic Preservation Zoning District
shall be designated by its underlying zone name, plus the preface “H”.



(Prior Code, § 12-17.06)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 158.101  SIGNS.



   Sign regulations within the Historic Preservation Zoning District are
found in §§ 158.195 through 158.202 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 12-17.07)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 158.102  HISTORIC DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT REVIEW.



   (A)   The erection or construction of a new building or structure;
or any alteration involving the modification addition, moving or demolition
of any part of an existing structure that would affect the exterior
appearance of any existing building; or the installation of a sign; or the
construction or enlargement of a parking lot within a Historic Preservation
Zoning District shall require plan review and approval in accordance with Ch.
154 of this code of ordinances. The Historic Preservation Commission and the
Main Street Design Committee shall be invited to participate in any required
Departmental Review Team (DRT) meeting for such work. If a DRT meeting is not
required, a copy of any building permit application for such work shall be
forwarded to the Historic Preservation Commission and to the Main Street
Design Committee for review, comment and/or approval.



   (B)   Rehabilitation plans should follow “The Secretary of
Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation” and the criteria set forth in
this chapter. The potential for significant archaeological resources shall be
considered before a permit is issued.



(Prior Code, § 12-17.08)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 892, passed -
-2008)



§ 158.103  DEVELOPMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Shall be in accordance with Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances;



   (B)   Drawings (“elevations”) showing views of the existing
structure as well as all proposed structures on the property;



   (C)   Specific graphic information regarding exterior materials,
colors and architectural details (trim, hardware and the like); illumination,
security, aesthetics;



   (D)   A sign plan, drawn to scale, showing the design, color,
lettering and methods of attachment of all exterior signs; and



   (E)   Other information that the Historic Preservation Commission or
Main Street Program members may find necessary to establish compliance with
this and other ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 12-17.09)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 892, passed -
-2008)



§ 158.104  COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   All work performed pursuant to the issuance of a building
permit shall conform to the requirements of the permit and to the development
plan.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector, the Historic
Preservation Commission members and the Main Street Program members to
inspect from time to time any work performed pursuant to the permit to ensure
such compliance.



   (C)   In the event work is not performed in accordance with the
permit the Building Inspector shall issue a stop work order and all work
shall cease.



   (D)   No person, firm or corporation shall undertake any work on
such project at along as stop work order shall continue in effect.



(Prior Code, § 12-17.10)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 772, passed -
-1997; Ord. 892, passed - -2008)  Penalty, see § 158.999



§ 158.105  APPEAL.



   The Historic Preservation Commission’s decision may be appealed to
the Board of Adjustment by the property owner or any citizen within 15
working days after the decision is rendered by the Historic Preservation
Commission.



(Prior Code, § 12-17.11)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 892, passed -
-2008)



§ 158.106  CRITERIA FOR THE ALTERATION OF EXISTING STRUCTURES OR THE
CONSTRUCTION OF NEW STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Conforms to the city’s Historic District Streetscape Plan or
Main Street architectural drawings;



   (B)   Conforms to the Secretary of Interiors Standards for
Rehabilitation as follows:



      (1)   A property shall be used for its historic purpose or be
placed in a new use that requires minimal change to the defining
characteristics of the building and its site and environment;



      (2)   The historic character of a property shall be retained
and preserved. Removal of historic materials or alteration of features and
spaces that characterize a property shall be avoided;



      (3)   Each property shall be recognized as a physical record
of its time, place and use changes that create a false sense of historical
development, such as adding conjectural features or architectural elements
from other buildings, shall not be undertaken;



      (4)   Most properties change over time; those changes that
have acquired historic significance in their own right shall be retained and
preserved;



      (5)   Distinctive features, finishes and construction
techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a historic property
shall be preserved;



      (6)   Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather
than replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a
distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the old in design, color,
texture and other visual qualities and, where possible, materials.
Replacement of missing features shall be substantiated by documentary,
physical or pictorial evidence;



      (7)   Chemical or physical treatments, such a sandblasting,
that cause damage to historic materials shall not be used. The surface
cleaning of structures, if appropriate, shall be undertaken using the
gentlest means possible;



      (8)   Significant archeological resources affected by a
project shall be protected and preserved. If such resources must be
disturbed, mitigation measures shall be undertaken;



      (9)   New additions, exterior alterations or related new
construction shall not destroy historic materials that characterize the
property. The new work shall be differentiated from the old and shall be
compatible with the massing, size, scale and architectural features to
protect the historic integrity of the property and its environment; and



      (10)   New additions and adjacent or related new construction
shall be undertaken in such a manner that, if removed in the future, the
essential form and integrity of the historic property and its environment
would be unimpaired.



   (C)   NPS Technical Bulletins, Keeping Up Appearances and other
technical references;



   (D)   Alterations to an existing, contributing historic building,
site structure or object located in a zoned historic district shall properly
preserve the historical and architectural characteristics which make it
unique, and any changes or additions shall conform to the intrinsic and
unique character of the building or structure itself;



   (E)   The design should adhere to the Secretary of the Interior’s
Standards for Rehabilitation and the owner or developer should be aware of
current tax incentives when rehabilitation work is contemplated; and



   (F)   New construction within a Historic Preservation Zoning
District shall require no specific architectural style; however, the
following criteria should be considered in determining whether the proposed
design of a new structure is compatible with the collective characteristics
of the structures located within the Historic Preservation Zoning District.



      (1)   Height. Alterations to a zoned historic building may be
no higher than the tallest comparable feature of the existing structure or
adjacent structures.



      (2)   Setback. Alterations to a zoned historic building must
maintain the original front setback of the existing structure or the
prevailing setback existing within the Historic District; providing that,
such a setback is compatible with the historic character of the existing
building.



      (3)   Proportion. Alterations to a zoned historic building
shall reflect the proportions of the existing building or can be demonstrated
to be historically accurate.



      (4)   Roof types. Alterations to a zoned historic building
shall have roofs compatible in configuration, mass and materials to that of
the style of the existing building or can be demonstrated to be historically
accurate.



      (5)   Texture. Surface texture of alterations to a zoned
historic building shall be appropriate to the historical style of the
existing building and the period in which it was constructed or can be
demonstrated to be historically accurate.



      (6)   Site utilization. Site utilization shall be compatible
with the historical period in which the existing building was built.



      (7)   Projections and recessions. Projections and recessions,
such as porches, steps, awnings, overhangs, entrances, windows and the like,
shall be compatible with the style of the existing building and/or the
historical period in which it was built.



      (8)   Architectural details.



         (a)   Architectural details, such as cornices, lintels,
arches, grill work, shutters, window and door trim canals and the like, shall
be appropriate to the historical style of the existing building and/or the
historical period in which it was built.



         (b)   An exception, for case by case review, will be
grill work for security.



      (9)   Building form. Size, mass and scale of alteration to a
designated historic building shall be compatible with that of the existing
building or it can be demonstrated to be historically accurate.



      (10)   Color. Color of a building, including trim, roof and
the like, shall be appropriate to the architectural style of the subject
building and/or its historical period.



      (11)   Landscaping. Planting and other ornamental features
shall reflect the historical period of the subject structure.



      (12)   Enclosures. Fences, walls or other physical features
used to enclose open space or provide privacy shall be based on historic
precedent or shall be compatible with the architectural style of the subject
building and compatible with other historic buildings within the Historic
Preservation Zoning District and reflect the historical period of the
Historic Preservation Zoning District.



      (13)   Utilities. New power, telephone and cable television
installation shall be reviewed for appropriateness and compatibility. No
electric utility boxes shall be used on street side facades if any
alternative location is feasible. Solar units and TV antennae dishes shall
not be visible from the street level.



      (14)   Alterations. Alterations to a non-historic building
within a historic district shall reflect the architectural style and
characteristics of the existing building. In addition, such alterations shall
generally conform to the above criteria of the buildings within the Historic
District.



(Prior Code, § 12-17.12)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 892, passed -
-2008)



§ 158.107  DEMOLITION OF STRUCTURES OR LANDMARKS.



   (A)   No demolition permit shall be issued by the Building Inspector
for demolition of all or any part of a building, site, structure or object
which has been zoned as historic before review.



   (B)   The Historic Preservation Commission may deny a demolition
permit.



   (C)   In making its decision, the Commission shall hold a public
hearing to determine if the applicant has shown that the preservation of the
structure is physically and/or economically infeasible.



   (D)   The Commission shall also take into consideration
post-demolition plans, including replacement structures, for the historic
zoned property.



   (E)   If preservation is found to be physically and/or economically
infeasible, the Building Inspector shall notify the applicant that the
issuance of the demolition permit is approved by the Historic Preservation
Commission.



   (F)   (1)   If the preservation of the structure is found to be
feasible, the Commission shall either attempt to convince the owner to
preserve the building or, if the owner does not so agree within 30 days, to
advertise and attempt to identify a purchaser for the property at fair market
value who will agree to preserve the building or structure for a period of at
least five years.



      (2)   If no purchaser is found within six months, the
demolition permit shall be approved.



(Prior Code, § 12-17.13)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 892, passed -
-2008)



§ 158.108  POST-DEMOLITION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   If a structure is demolished and the area is left vacant, the
area shall be maintained in a clean and inoffensive manner.



   (B)   If a structure is demolished and the area is converted to
another use not requiring buildings (such as a parking lot), the area shall
be buffered by landscaping and walls or fences that generally conform to the
character of the other buildings and structures located within its historic
district or historic site.



   (C)   If a structure is demolished and a new structure is erected,
the structure shall generally conform to the character of the buildings
located within its historic district as determined by using the historic
district criteria as identified in this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 12-17.14)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 892, passed -
-2008)



§ 158.109  MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent ordinary
maintenance and repair of any exterior elements of any designated historic
building.



   (B)   (1)   Historic District properties shall be kept in good
repair by the property owner so as to not distract from their exterior
appearance.



      (2)   Deterioration caused by deliberate neglect of
maintenance or repairs shall not be considered valid grounds for the approval
of a demolition permit application.



   (C)   (1)   The Building Inspector shall advise the Historic
Preservation Commission of cases of deliberate neglect or failure to meet
minimum Building Code standards, particularly in regard to appearance, public
safety and fire safety.



      (2)   The Historic Preservation Commission shall review such
cases and make recommendations to the Building Inspector.



   (D)   If maintenance is necessary, the owner shall be notified.



   (E)   If the Commission finds that deliberate neglect is occurring,
the owner shall be cited by the Building Inspector and have up to 90 days to
make the specific repairs necessary to correct the neglect.



   (F)   If the repairs are not completed within 90 days, the city may
make the repairs and place a lien for the expenses against the property owner
or enforce the following penalties.



(Prior Code, § 12-17.15)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 892, passed -
-2008)



§ 158.110  APPLICABILITY.



   It is unlawful to erect, construct, reconstruct or maintain any
building, site, structure or object including signs in a Historic District
Overlay Zoning District in violation of any existing ordinances or a stop
work order issued by the Building Inspector or to not make specific repairs
to correct deliberate neglect as cited by the Building Inspector.



(Prior Code, § 12-17.16)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 892, passed -
-2008)  Penalty, see § 158.999




SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS




§ 158.125  INTERPRETATION.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall be minimum requirements and
shall be liberally construed in favor of the city.



(Prior Code, § 12-7.01)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 158.126  BUILDING PERMIT AND PLOT PLAN REQUIRED.



   (A)   Prior to the construction, remodeling or placement of any
building or accessory building, a building permit and an approved plot plan
are required.



   (B)   Application for a plot plan and building permit shall be made
in accordance with Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances.



   (C)   All buildings constructed or placed in the city shall meet the
required Uniform Building Code, except for mobile homes and modular homes
when specifically allowed by this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 12-7.02)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)  Penalty, see §
158.999



§ 158.127  USES ALLOWED IN THE VARIOUS ZONING DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Although it is intended that all possible uses are listed, it
is possible that specific uses may not be listed that should be due to their
similarity to other allowed uses.



   (B)   The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to
administratively approve uses that are similar to other allowed uses in each
of the approved zoning districts.



(Prior Code, § 12-7.03)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 158.128  PRINCIPAL USES AND BUILDINGS LIMITED TO ONE PER LOT WITHOUT CITY
APPROVED SITE PLAN.



   (A)   Only those uses specifically designated as “permitted
uses” in the zoning district regulations shall be permitted as principal
uses; all other uses shall be prohibited as principal uses.



   (B)   No more than one principal building shall be permitted on a
single lot unless a site plan designating the location of all principal
buildings has been approved by the City Council and has been recorded with
the Clerk and Recorder of the appropriate county.



(Prior Code, § 12-7.04)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)  Penalty, see §
158.999



§ 158.129  ACCESSORY USES AND BUILDINGS.



   (A)   Accessory uses. Uses normally accessory to principal or
conditional uses shall be permitted as specified. No accessory use or
structure shall be permitted in any district until its principal use or
structure is present or under construction.



   (B)   Accessory buildings. No accessory building shall be used for
living or sleeping purposes.



(Prior Code, § 12-7.05)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)  Penalty, see §
158.999



§ 158.130  TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION BUILDINGS.



   (A)   (1)   Temporary buildings for uses incidental to
construction work are permitted.



      (2)   Such buildings shall be removed upon completion or
abandonment of the construction work. Such temporary buildings shall not be
used as residences, except as follows: a travel trailer or mobile home may be
used as a residence when the main building is being renovated or remodeled;
provided, the maximum time limit allowed shall be 90 days.



      (3)   Temporary buildings may be used for a night watchman’s
residence on a construction site.



   (B)   Portable-type structures may be allowed for use as temporary
real estate sales offices when associated with a land or housing sales
operation at a subdivision.



      (1)   Such structures may not be used for residences nor
contain sleeping accommodations.



      (2)   Placement of such structures shall only be done after
issuance of a conditional use.



(Prior Code, § 12-7.06)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)  Penalty, see §
158.999



§ 158.131  DUMPING OR DISPOSAL.



   The use of land for the dumping or disposal of scrap, debris, obsolete
vehicles, iron, junk, garbage, rubbish, refuse, ashes, slag, industrial
wastes or byproducts shall be prohibited in every district.



(Prior Code, § 12-7.07)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)  Penalty, see §
158.999



§ 158.132  JOINT USE PROHIBITED.



   No lot, yard, parking, loading, building or other space, required in
connection with any building, shall be included as part of a yard, area or
space required for any other building.



(Prior Code, § 12-7.08)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)  Penalty, see §
158.999



§ 158.133  EXTERIOR LIGHTING.



   All lighting for off- street parking or loading areas or for the
external illumination of buildings shall be directed away from and shielded
from any adjacent residential district and shall not detract from visibility
on adjacent streets.



(Prior Code, § 12-7.09)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)  Penalty, see §
158.999



§ 158.134  STRUCTURES NEAR AIRPLANE RUNWAY OR LANDING STRIP.



   (A)   No building or structure or any portion thereof which exceeds
a height of 20 feet shall be erected or structurally altered within 500 feet
of the projected centerline of an existing or proposed runway or landing
strip for a distance of 1,000 feet from the end of the existing or proposed
runway or landing strip.



   (B)   No building or structure or any portion thereof shall be
erected to exceed a height that would interfere with the takeoff or landing
of a plane with a glide angle of one foot vertical for every 40 feet
horizontal, such glide angle to be computed as beginning at a point on the
extended centerline of the runway 200 feet beyond and at the same elevation
as the end of the runway pavement; or, if runway pavement is not provided,
100 feet beyond and at the same elevation as the end of the landing strip.



(Prior Code, § 12-7.10)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)  Penalty, see §
158.999



§ 158.135  STREET AND UTILITY REQUIREMENTS.



   The following restrictions shall apply.



   (A)   All lots, except in the RR and AR Zoning Districts, shall abut
a public street connecting with the public street system. In the RR and AR
Zoning Districts each lot or parcel must have access to an easement granting
access to the property, which easement shall connect with the public street
system.



   (B)   A building permit shall not be issued for any lot, except in
the R1-43, RR and AR Zoning Districts, for which public sewerage and water
supply is not available and used. In the RR and AR Zoning Districts, each lot
or parcel may be served with an individual water and/or sewer system if
approved by the county’s Health Department. In the R1-43 Zoning District,
each lot may be served with an individual sewer system if approved by the
county’s Health Department.



(Prior Code, § 12-7.11)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)  Penalty, see §
158.999



§ 158.136  SITE UNSUITABILITY.



   (A)   No land shall be used or structure erected where the land is
unsuitable for such use or structure by reason of flooding, concentrated
runoff, inadequate drainage, adverse soil or rock formation, extreme
topography, low percolation rate or bearing strength, erosion susceptibility
or any other features likely to be harmful to the health, safety and general
welfare of the community.



   (B)   The Commission, in applying the provisions of this section,
shall state in writing the particular facts upon which its conclusions are
based.



   (C)   The applicant shall have the right to present evidence
contesting such determination to the Council if he or she so desires,
whereupon the Council may affirm, modify or withdraw the determination of the
unsuitability.



(Prior Code, § 12-7.12)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)  Penalty, see §
158.999



§ 158.137  MOVING OF BUILDINGS.



   (A)   No building or structure, which has been wholly or partially
erected on any premises located either within or outside the city, shall be
moved to or be placed upon any other premises within the city until a permit
for such removal and for such relocation shall have been issued by the Zoning
Administrator.



   (B)   Any such building or structure shall conform to all provisions
of this chapter in the same manner as any new building or structure.



   (C)   No such building or structure shall be used or occupied until
a final inspection and notice of approval by the Building Inspector.



(Prior Code, § 12-7.13)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)  Penalty, see §
158.999



§ 158.138  PROJECTIONS INTO REQUIRED YARDS.



   (A)   A chimney may project into any required yard a distance of no
more than two feet.



   (B)   Open terraces, patios, steps or similar features not over
three feet in height above grade, may project into any required yard;
provided that, projections into required front yards shall not exceed ten
feet.



   (C)   Solar heating and cooling units, non-commercial solar
greenhouses and associated apparatus may be located in a rear or side yard;
provided that, such apparatus does not cover more than 30% of rear yard and
shall be no closer than five feet to any lot line.



   (D)   All solar apparatus can only be installed with a special
building permit and must be inspected and approved before operating.



   (E)   Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky and
unobstructed.



   (F)   Trees, shrubbery and other landscape features shall not be
considered obstructions.



(Prior Code, § 12-7.14)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)  Penalty, see §
158.999



§ 158.139  MOBILE HOMES.



   (A)   All mobile homes shall be equipped with tie-downs approved by
the Building Inspector.



   (B)   All mobile homes shall be skirted with fire-resistant material
which is not susceptible to rapid weathering.



   (C)   No material may be stored over or against a mobile home.



   (D)   Mobile home lots or spaces shall be kept free from open stored
materials.



   (E)   No flammable materials shall be stored beneath a mobile home.



(Prior Code, § 12-7.15)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)  Penalty, see §
158.999



§ 158.140  TRASH ENCLOSURES.



   (A)   A container (acceptable to the city) for temporary storage of
garbage, refuse and other waste materials shall be provided for every use in
every zoning district.



   (B)   (1)   In addition, trash enclosures shall be provided for
non-residential uses and shall be constructed that contents are not visible
from a height of five feet from above grade from any abutting street or
property.



      (2)   Trash enclosures shall comply with the following
regulations.



         (a)   Trash enclosures shall be constructed of solid
walls with solid concrete floor sloped for drainage and maintenance of
sanitary conditions.



         (b)   Enclosures shall be of sufficient height to
conceal contents, including containers.



(Prior Code, § 12-7.16)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)  Penalty, see §
158.999



§ 158.141  GRADING AND STRIPPING.



   No person shall strip, excavate or otherwise remove top soil for sale
or for use, except in connection with a building permit.



(Prior Code, § 12-7.17)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)  Penalty, see §
158.999



§ 158.142  AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION PUMP.



   No automobile service station pump shall be located closer than 20 feet
to a street property line.



(Prior Code, § 12-7.18)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)  Penalty, see §
158.999



§ 158.143  STORING AN UNOCCUPIED MOBILE HOME.



   An unoccupied mobile home may not be stored in a residential zone.



(Prior Code, § 12-7.19)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)  Penalty, see §
158.999



§ 158.144  STORING A RECREATION TRAILER.



   A recreation trailer may be stored in a rear yard.



(Prior Code, § 12-7.20)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)  Penalty, see §
158.999



§ 158.145  YARD SALES, SWAP MEETS AND RUMMAGE SALES.



   (A)   Yard sales are permitted in all residential neighborhoods;
provided that, such sales are held for not more than 48 hours at a time, nor
more than four times in any 12-month period; and, provided that, only the
personal property of the family is sold.



   (B)   Yard sales held longer than 48 hours at a time or held more
often than four times in any year, at any single address, are considered to
be a commercial use and shall be restricted to commercially zoned areas.



(Prior Code, § 12-7.21)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)  Penalty, see §
158.999




MOBILE HOME PARKS




§ 158.160  PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL.



   (A)   Pursuant to § 158.079 of this chapter, mobile home parks can
be approved by the city as a conditional use permit. (See §§ 158.060
through 158.063 of this chapter.)



   (B)   The application shall meet the specifications of this chapter
and shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of Ch. 154 of this
code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 12-8.01)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 158.161  STANDARDS.



   (A)   The minimum size shall be five acres.



   (B)   The location including the maximum length and width of any
mobile home shall be shown on the approved plan for each site.



   (C)   No mobile home or accessory building may be located in any
area not indicated on the approved plan.



   (D)   No mobile home may be located any closer than 16 feet from
another mobile home.



   (E)   No mobile home may be closer than eight feet to any property
boundary.



   (F)   There shall be a minimum distance of 20 feet between the front
of the mobile home and any private street.



   (G)   There shall be a minimum distance of 12 feet between the side
of a mobile home and a private street.



   (H)   A minimum distance of 25 feet shall exist between any mobile
home and a public street.



   (I)   There shall be no access from any mobile home site onto a
public street.



(Prior Code, § 12-8.02)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)  Penalty, see §
158.999



§ 158.162  PARKING.



   (A)   Two parking spaces, nine feet by 18 feet, are required on each
site for each unit. Parking spaces may not be closer than eight feet to any
private street.



   (B)   One guest parking space for each three mobile home sites shall
be provided in a common parking area.



(Prior Code, § 12-8.03)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)  Penalty, see §
158.999



§ 158.163  SCREENING.



   (A)   All mobile home parks shall be screened from any adjacent
non-mobile home development or street, with a masonry wall or adequate
planting or solid material fence of six feet in height.



   (B)   If adjacent to a public street, the fence must be ten feet
from the street curb.



(Prior Code, § 12-8.04)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)  Penalty, see §
158.999



§ 158.164  RECREATION AREA.



   (A)   No less than 10% of the gross site area shall be devoted to
recreational facilities and common area.



   (B)   Recreation areas shall be provided in a central location.



   (C)   Recreation areas may include space for community buildings and
community use facilities, such as indoor recreation areas, swimming pools,
hobby and repair shops and service buildings.



   (D)   All recreation areas shall be landscaped and maintained.



(Prior Code, § 12-8.05)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)  Penalty, see §
158.999



§ 158.165  PRIVATE STREETS.



   (A)   All private streets shall be improved with a minimum paved
width of 32 feet.



   (B)   No parking is allowed on 32-foot streets.



   (C)   Street construction standards shall be the same as those for
public streets and approved by the city.



   (D)   All mobile home parks shall be provided with safe, convenient,
paved vehicular access from abutting public streets.



   (E)   Access to each site shall be provided by private streets.



   (F)   Each mobile home park shall have two direct connections to
public streets as approved by the city.



   (G)   No mobile home site shall have direct frontage on or direct
access to a public street.



   (H)   A mobile home park shall have a minimum of 200 feet frontage
on a public street.



   (I)   All private streets shall be properly lighted in accordance
with a park lighting plan approved by the city.



   (J)   Each private street curb cut or access point shall be at least
100 feet from any intersection.



   (K)   All mobile home parks shall provide safe, convenient,
hard-surfaced, all-season, pedestrian walkways of adequate width (not less
than four feet) and allow access from each mobile home site to the recreation
area, facilities as well as walkways outside of the park.



(Prior Code, § 12-8.06)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)  Penalty, see §
158.999



§ 158.166  MOBILE HOME SPACE.



   (A)   The approved dimensions of each mobile home site shall be
marked on the ground by permanent metal stakes.



   (B)   Each mobile home site shall be improved to provide adequate
support for the placement and tie- downs of the mobile home.



   (C)   Every mobile home shall be equipped with tie-downs approved by
the Building Inspector.



   (D)   Each mobile home site shall be provided with an all-weather
outdoor living and service area exclusive of parking and/or storage areas.



      (1)   Such area shall be improved as necessary to assure
reasonable privacy and comfort.



      (2)   The minimum area may not be less than 300 square feet
with the least dimension a minimum of 15 feet.



   (E)   Each mobile home site which shall include the mobile home,
off-street parking spaces, yards and outdoor living spaces shall not be less
than 5,000 square feet in area.



   (F)   A common storage area(s) shall be provided for the storage of
boats, campers, recreation vehicles, utility trailers and extra vehicles at
the following ratio:



      (1)   Three hundred square feet for each mobile home space
with a minimum storage area of 4,500 square feet; and



      (2)   Each storage area shall be enclosed with a solid wall
fence six feet in height.



   (G)   All mobile homes shall be skirted with fire-resistant material
which is not susceptible to rapid weathering.



   (H)   No material may be stored over or against a mobile home.



   (I)   Mobile home lots shall be kept free from open stored materials.



   (J)   No flammable materials shall be stored beneath mobile homes.



   (K)   The maximum height for accessory buildings shall be 15 feet.



   (L)   No accessory building shall be used for sleeping, living or
commercial purposes.



   (M)   Expandable sections of mobile homes shall be considered a part
of the mobile home.



   (N)   Every mobile home shall be connected to electric power, city
water supply, city sewage disposal, gas and telephone service lines in
compliance with applicable city codes and all utility distribution and
service lines shall be installed underground.



(Prior Code, § 12-8.07)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)  Penalty, see §
158.999



§ 158.167  ACCESSORY USES.



   A maximum of one attached carport or enclosed garage, one attached
cabana, ramada or covered patio and one detached storage room per mobile home.



(Prior Code, § 12-8.08)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)  Penalty, see §
158.999




RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS




§ 158.180  PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL.



   Pursuant to §§ 158.060 through 158.063 of this chapter, recreation
vehicle parks can be approved by the city as a conditional use permit. The
application shall meet the specifications of this chapter and shall be
processed in accordance with the provisions of Ch. 154 of this code of
ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 12-12.01)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 158.181  STANDARDS.



   (A)   Recreational vehicle parks shall meet the approval of the
state’s Health Code for the establishment of recreational vehicle (travel
trailer) parks and campgrounds. A letter of approval from the state’s
Department of Health Services shall be submitted with the application.



   (B)   Recreational vehicle parks shall meet the standards for fire
protection in recreation vehicle (travel trailer) parks as cited in the
National Fire Codes.



   (C)   A recreational vehicle park shall consist of a minimum of two
and one-half acres.



   (D)   Each recreational park vehicle space shall have an area of not
less than 1,000 square feet and a width of not less than 25 feet.



   (E)   No direct access to an individual site shall be permitted from
a public street.



   (F)   All interior drives and private access streets shall be a
minimum width of 24 feet.



   (G)   All road and drives shall be graded and surfaced with a
minimum of three inches of gravel.



   (H)   Minimum setback of recreational vehicle (trailer and towing
vehicle) from any boundary line shall be eight feet; except that, minimum
setback from any public street shall be 25 feet.



   (I)   Minimum setback of recreational vehicle (trailer and towing
vehicle) from any private access street shall be four feet; minimum distance
between adjacent travel trailers shall be 15 feet.



   (J)   All public utilities shall be placed underground.



(Prior Code, § 12-12.02)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)  Penalty, see §
158.999




SIGNS




§ 158.195  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to establish requirements and
to encourage good design that meets the identification and informational
needs of all land uses while maintaining the special character of the city. A
basic tenet of adopting and applying these regulations is that unrestricted
signs do not benefit either the private business owner or the community at
large. Toward this end, the City Council finds that the city is a unique and
historic community that has traditionally depended on tourism and that
tourism is affected by the visual quality and character of the city.



   (B)   These sign regulations are intended to:



      (1)   Recognize that signs are a necessary means of useful
communication for the convenience of the public;



      (2)   Maximize the value of signage as a means of locating and
identifying businesses and properties;



      (3)   Protect, preserve, and enhance the unique aesthetic
character, beauty, and charm of the city and its surrounding areas as a place
to live, visit, and conduct business that encourages the continued
development of tourism;



      (4)   Promote signs that are of appropriate scale and
integrated with the surrounding buildings and landscape;



      (5)   Promote clear views of natural surroundings by
minimizing visual clutter, reducing competition for airspace, and encouraging
the construction of signs of natural materials, which are compatible with the
historic, cultural and natural surroundings;



      (6)   Protect the public from hazardous conditions that can
result from signs that are structurally unsafe, obscure the vision of
motorists, create dangers to pedestrian traffic, or which compete or conflict
with necessary traffic signals and warning signs;



      (7)   Eliminate distracting lighting, excessive glare, and
light pollution by reasonably limiting the illumination of signs and
buildings to subdued, adequately shielded, or concealed light sources;



      (8)   Impose reasonable time, place, and manner restrictions
while not interfering with the free exercise of rights granted under the
First Amendment of the Constitution of the United States of America; and



      (9)   Maintain and enhance the historic character of Route 66.



(Ord. 939, passed 3-27-2014)



§ 158.196  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADVERTISING FLAG.  A flag intended to advertise a business, product,
service or event, including a flag with a corporate mark or graphic symbol,
with or without words.



   ALTERATION OF SIGN.  The moving or modification, in any manner, of a
sign including, but not limited to, changes to the sign structure, height,
size, area, shape, or foundation, but excluding the exchange, replacement, or
repainting of the sign faces of cabinet-type signs where there are no changes
to the original cabinet. The changing of movable parts or components of a
sign that is designed for such changes, or the changing of copy, display
and/or graphic matter, or the content of any sign shall not be deemed an
alteration.



   ANIMATED SIGN.  A sign or display, other than an electronic message
center (EMC), manifesting either kinetic or illusionary motion occasioned by
natural, manual, mechanical, electrical, or other means.



   AWNING.  An architectural projection that provides weather protection,
identity, or decoration and is wholly supported by the building to which it
is attached. An awning is comprised of a lightweight, rigid skeleton over
which a covering is attached.



   BANNER.  A temporary sign, printed on a flexible surface, mounted
either horizontally or vertically, and used for special occasions or events.



   BEACON.  Any light source with one or more beams directed into the
atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same lot as the light
source; also any light with one or more beams that rotate or move.



   BLIGHT.  The state or result of being deteriorated or ruined: urban
blight.



   BUILDING FACADE.  That portion of any exterior elevation of a building
extending from grade to the top of the parapet wall or eaves for the entire
width of the building elevation or that portion comprising the exterior
elevation of one business located in a multiple tenant structure.



   BUILDING GRAPHICS.  A mosaic, mural, painting, graphic art technique
or combination or grouping thereof, applied or implanted directly onto a
building wall or fence.



   BUSINESS.  An individual business enterprise or operation in a
wholly-owned, leased, or rented space providing product(s) and/or service(s)
to customers on premise.



   CANOPY.  A roofed structure that covers an area, especially one that
shelters a passageway between two buildings.



   COPY.  The graphic content of a sign surface in either permanent or
removable letter, pictographic, symbolic, or alphabetic form.



   DILAPIDATED.  A sign on which:



      (1)   The lettering or background material or any part of the
sign has flaked, broken off, or changed color;



      (2)   Structural supports or frame members are visibly
corroded, stained, bent, broken, or dented; or



      (3)   Sign supports are twisted, leaning or at angles other
than those at which the sign was originally erected.



   DIRECTIONAL SIGN.  A sign erected solely to direct pedestrian or
vehicular traffic.



   DIRECTORY SIGN.  A sign that contains name and information for a
multi-residential or multi-tenant development.



   ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER  or EMC.  A sign that is capable of
displaying words, symbols, figures, or images that can be electronically
changed by remote or automatic means.



   FLASHING.  A pattern of sudden alternation between a fully-illuminated
frame and a frame without illumination, or a frame where the copy color and
the background color alternate or reverse color schemes rapidly (less than
every three seconds).



   FRAME EFFECTS.  A visual effect applied to a message to transition
from one message to the next. Transition methods include, but are not limited
to the following:



      (1)   DISSOLVE.  A frame effect accomplished by varying the
light intensity or pattern, where the first frame gradually appears to
dissipate and lose legibility simultaneously with the gradual appearance and
legibility of the second frame.



      (2)   FADE.  A frame effect accomplished by varying the light
intensity, where the first frame gradually reduces intensity to the point of
not being legible (i.e. fading to black) and the subsequent frame gradually
increases intensity to the point of legibility.



      (3)   SCROLL.  A frame effect where the frame appears to move
vertically across the display surface (usually used to describe a frame
effect where the message is too large to ever be seen on the display surface
at once).



      (4)   TRAVEL.  A frame effect where the message appears to
move horizontally across the display surface (usually used to describe a
frame effect where the message is too large to ever be seen on the display
surface at once).



   FREESTANDING SIGN.  A sign not attached to any building and which is
supported by one or more uprights set in a fixed position in the ground.



   GROUND SIGN.   A sign mounted directly on the surface of the ground or
on a suitable foundation thereon.



   HEIGHT OF SIGN.  The vertical distance measured from the highest point
of the sign to the adjacent street grade or surface beneath the sign.



   HISTORIC SIGN.  A sign which has historical or cultural significance
to the city as determined by the Historic Preservation Commission or which is
listed on the National Register of Historic Places.



   INTERSTATE 40 (I-40) OVERLAY.  That portion of a strip of land 2,200
feet in width, whose center line coincides with that of Interstate 40 within
the city limits, and which is zoned as Central Business District or Highway
Commercial District.



   LEADING EDGE. The portion of a sign that is closest, in any direction,
to the adjacent property line or right-of-way line.



   MANUAL READER BOARD (MRB).  A board whose display can be changed
manually but not electronically.



   MARQUEE.  A projecting structure over the entrance to a building or
structure, especially a theater or hotel.



   MONUMENT SIGN.  A lower profile sign where the base is on the ground
and the maximum height can be eight feet and maximum length can be ten feet.
This type of sign can only be installed in lieu of a freestanding sign.



   OBSCENE SIGN.  A sign that contains offensive language, is hate based,
is discriminatory, or on which the dominant theme of material taken as a
whole appeals to a prurient interest in sex, or is patently offensive because
it affronts community standards relating to the description or representation
of sexual matters, and is utterly without redeeming social value.



   PHOTOMETRIC.  The measurement of the intensity of light or of relative
illuminating power.



   PROPERTY FRONTAGE.  A side of a property that borders on a public
street.



   ROOF SIGN.  A sign that is placed on a roof or extends above a parapet
or wall.



   SANDWICH-BOARD SIGN also known as A-FRAME SIGN.  A portable
advertising sign usually comprising two top-hinged panels, maximum size two
feet by three feet.



   SECONDARY FRONTAGE.  A side of a property that a faces a parkway
(alleyway) or an interior park.



   SIGN.  The means by which anything is made visibly known or used to
identify, advertise or promote an individual, firm, association, corporation,
professional business, commodity, service or product, that can be viewed from
the public right-of-way. For the purposes of removal, SIGN shall also include
all sign structures.



   SIGN AREA.  The surface area of a sign usually measured in square feet
and meant to represent the surface area of only one side of any two-sided
sign (for irregular shapes, the area of the smallest rectangle, square,
circle or triangle that encompasses the sign).



   SIGN WALKER.  A person who wears, holds or otherwise carries a sign
for commercial purposes, or who wears a costume intended for commercial
advertising purposes.



   SKYLIGHTS AND SEARCHLIGHTS.  Lights used to illuminate the sky for the
purpose of drawing attention to a business or event.



   TEMPORARY SIGN.  A sign or banner primarily intended to announce
special functions or occasions and not for permanent use (restricted to three
consecutive days per event).



   WALL SIGN.  A sign painted on or attached flush to the exterior
surface of a building. When attached directly to the surface of the building
it can project no more than eight inches from the building surface and not
above the wall.



   WINDOW SIGN.  A sign mounted on the interior surface of a window.



(Ord. 939, passed 3-27-2014)



§ 158.197  SIGNS PERMITTED IN EACH ZONING DISTRICT.



 


 





Residential Zones

 

Business Zones

 

Industrial Zones

 

Historic Preservation

 

I-40 Overlay





ZONES
 

RR, AR, ER, R1-43, R1-7, RMH-1, R2, & R3

 

CBD, CR, & HC

 

I-1 & I-2

 

HPD

 

I-40



Animated
 



 



 



 



 





Awning/Canopy
 



 



 



 

X(K)(L)

 





Canopy
 



 

X(I)

 

X(I)

 



 

X(I)



Directional
 

X(C)

 

X(C)

 

X(C)

 

X(C)

 

X(C)



Directory
 

X(D)

 

X(D)

 

X(D)

 

X(D)

 

X(D)



Electronic Message Center (EMC)
 



 

X(N)

 

X(N)

 



 

X(N)



Free Standing
 

X(F)

 

X(G)

 

X(G)

 

X(K)

 

X(G)



Ground
 

X(B)

 

X(B)

 

X(B)

 

X(B)

 

X(B)



Illuminated
 

X(J)

 

X(J)

 

X(J)

 

X(L)

 

X(J)



Manual Reader Board (MRB)
 



 

X(P)

 

X(P)

 

X(P)

 

X(P)



Monument
 



 

X(Q)

 

X(Q)

 



 

X(Q)



Off Site
 



 

X(M)

 

X(M)

 

X(M)

 

X(M)



Sandwich Board Sign
 



 



 



 

X(P)

 





Temporary
 

X(E)

 

X(E)

 

X(E)

 

X(E)

 

X(E)



Window
 



 

X(O)

 

X(O)

 

X(K)

 

X(O)



Wall
 



 

X(H)

 

X(H)

 

X(H)

 

X(H)





 



Legend



X indicates the sign type is allowed.



C indicates the sign type is a conditional use (see conditional use, §§
158.060 - 158.063)



Letters (A) - (Q) indicate additional requirements or clarification as listed
in this chapter (see § 158.198).



(Ord. 939, passed 3-27-2014)



§ 158.198  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS AND CLARIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Maximum size of nameplates is two square feet and fixed flat
to the main wall of a residence building, not exceeding one per street
frontage. Information on nameplates shall be limited to the name of the
occupant and address.



   (B)   Ground signs are permitted subject to the following:



      (1)   Allowed for nonresidential uses; or at the entrance from
a public street to a multiple-family residence development, or a mobile home
park, or a subdivision. Maximum number is one per street frontage.
Information is limited to the name of the facility, building or organization
and address number. The maximum size is 24 square feet. The maximum height is
six feet.



      (2)   In the Historic Preservation zone, the size is limited
to six square feet. The maximum height is six feet.



      (3)   In the I-40 Overlay District for non-residential uses,
maximum number is one per street frontage. Information is limited to the name
of the facility, building, or organization, gas pricing board (if
applicable), and address number. The maximum size is 100 square feet. The
maximum height is 20 feet.



   (C)   Directional signs are allowed when required to assist the flow
of traffic in multiple-residence development or other permitted uses
containing multiple tenants or building groups. Not to exceed six square feet
in area and three feet in height.



   (D)   Directory signs are allowed when required in
multiple-residence development or other permitted uses containing multiple
tenants or building groups. Not to exceed 24 square feet in area and six feet
in height except in the historic preservation zone where the size is limited
to six square feet.



   (E)   The following temporary signs are permitted in indicated
zoning districts:



      (1)   For sale, lease or rent.



         (a)   For each single- and two-family residential use
one freestanding for sale, lease or rent sign is allowed on each street
frontage and on the property it advertises. The maximum size shall be six
square feet in area and five feet in height.



         (b)   For all other uses one freestanding for sale,
lease or rent sign is allowed on each street frontage and on the lot for
which it advertises. The maximum size shall be six square feet in area and
five feet in height. In addition, one for sale, lease or rent wall sign is
allowed per each street frontage. The sum of the square footage of all
allowed freestanding temporary signs shall not exceed 24 square feet in area.



      (2)   On-site subdivision or development. One ground sign is
permitted at each entrance to the subdivision or development from a public
street. The maximum size shall be 32 square feet. Each sign shall be located
on the site for which it advertises and not closer than 50 feet to any
existing residential dwelling unit outside of the subdivision or development.
All signs must be removed if the subdivision or development is sold out or at
the end of five years whichever comes first.



      (3)   Off-site directional sign. Off-site directional signs to
a subdivision or development, open house, or other special event are limited
to six square feet in area and a maximum of three in number. Other special
events include garage sales, yard sales, food sales, craft sales, bazaars,
and auctions. Off-site directional signs are only permitted for four
three-day special events in any one calendar year. All off-site directional
signs can only be placed on private property with the permission of the
property owner and must be removed within 24 hours after the conclusion of
the event.



      (4)   Promotional displays limited to grand openings, a change
in business name, or a change in business ownership. Banners are allowed for
30 consecutive days with a permit. Pennants, streamers, flags, and other
attention-attracting devices associated with such events are allowed for a
maximum of three consecutive days per week in any district except the
Historic Preservation District, and must be well maintained.



      (5)   Special daily event. Special daily event for businesses,
including but not limited to; dances, food or drink special, sale items,
special activity or function, etc. are allowed one banner for a period not to
exceed one day per week or three consecutive days per occurrence and not more
than two occurrences per month.



      (6)   Long-term special events. Long-term special events such
as community events and seasonal activities shall be allowed to display
pennants, banners, streamers, flags, and other attention-attracting devices
for a maximum of 30 consecutive days per year, and these items must be well
maintained. Each distinctly different event shall be allowed a 30 consecutive
day period. Such advertisement shall be allowed to be displayed no more than
two weeks prior to the event for the duration of the event.



      (7)   Political signs. One freestanding sign per each street
frontage per each candidate or measure is allowed on private property with
the property owner's permission. The maximum sign shall be 16 square feet in
size and a maximum of six feet in height if the sign is located in an area
zoned for residential use, or a maximum of 32 square feet if the sign is
located in any other zoning district. Signs must contain the name and
telephone number of the candidate or campaign committee contact person.
Political signs may be erected 60 days before an election day. The signs must
be removed with 15 days after the specific election to which they refer.
Political signs may be placed in a public right-of-way that is owned or
controlled by the city, as long as it is not placed in a location that is
hazardous to public safety, obstructs clear vision in the area or interferes
with the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (42 U.S.C. §§
12101 - 12213 and 47 U.S.C. §§ 225 and 611). If the city deems that the
placement of a political sign constitutes an emergency, the city may
immediately relocate the sign. If a sign is placed in violation of division
(E)(6) above and the placement is not deemed an emergency, the city may
notify the candidate or campaign committee that placed the sign of the
violation. If the sign remains in violation for at least 24 hours after
notification, the city may remove the sign. A city employee acting within the
scope of the employee's employment is not liable for an injury caused by the
failure to remove a sign, unless the employee intended to cause injury or was
grossly negligent.



   (F)   Limited to allowed temporary signs only.



   (G)   Freestanding signs are permitted subject to the following:



      (1) For all districts other than the I-40 Overlay:



         (a)   One sign is allowed per each public street
frontage;



         (b)   Each sign can be a maximum of 75 square feet in
area;



         (c)   The maximum height shall not exceed 25 feet;



         (d)   Limited to a minimum height of ten feet above the
ground surface immediately below the sign; and



         (e)   Each sign must be set back from any property line
a minimum of 25 feet except signs for commercial uses in the Central Business
District on Railroad Avenue and Route 66, where 25 feet cannot be
accommodated, the setback shall be determined by staff. In no event shall any
sign be closer than 30 feet to any residential zoning district.



      (2) For the I-40 Overlay District:



         (a)   One sign is allowed per street frontage;



         (b)   Each sign can be a maximum of 300 square feet in
area, except as provided in division (G)(2)(c) below;



         (c)   For properties within the I-40 Overlay District
that are at least ten acres in size and which have multiple independent
businesses on the same property, the size of the sign may be increased,
subject to an approved conditional use permit, by 100 square feet in area for
each additional independent business to a maximum of 600 square feet (each
individual business used to calculate additional signage area must be
advertised on the larger sign and must provide its primary product(s) and/or
service(s) to customers) on the premises). Advertising panels for vacant
businesses must be removed from the sign structure within 60 days of such
vacancy, and the removed panel must be replaced by opaque, blank panels to
match the color and design of the structure;



         (d)   Maximum height shall be 75 feet;



         (e)   Limited to a minimum height of ten feet above the
ground surface immediately below the sign; and



         (f)   Each sign must be set back from any property line
a minimum of 25 feet and in no event shall any sign be closer than 30 feet to
any residential zoning district.



   (H)   Wall signs are permitted subject to the following:



      (1)   For a building that contains a single business:



         (a)   A maximum of one sign is allowed per each public
street frontage;



         (b)   If the business has a rear parking lot, a sign is
also allowed to the rear of the building; and



         (c)   Each sign can be a maximum of two square feet for
each linear foot of building frontage but in no event shall the sign exceed
75 square feet in area.



      (2)   For buildings that contain multiple businesses, i.e.,
strip malls, indoor malls:



         (a)   A maximum of one sign is allowed per each public
street, private driveway or rear parking lot frontage, not to exceed two wall
signs, and shall comply with division (H)(l)(c) above for square footage
allowances; and



         (b)   Each business within the building is allowed one
sign per each public street or rear parking lot frontage, not to exceed two
wall signs. Each sign can be a maximum of one square foot for each linear
foot of business frontage, but in no event shall the sign exceed 20 square
feet in area.



      (3)   The maximum height shall be no higher than the building
facade;



      (4)   Limited to a minimum height of eight feet above the
ground surface immediately below the sign; and



      (5)   Each sign may project no more than eight inches from the
surface of the wall to which it is attached.



   (I)   Copy may be affixed to a vertical face of a canopy (limited to
logo and/or color scheme).



   (J)   Lighting including internal and external sources shall be
installed so as to shield the light source and direct the light downward and
to avoid any glare or reflection into any residential building or into any
street, alley, or driveway if such glare or reflection might create a traffic
hazard. Brightness level shall not exceed 0.3 foot-candles above ambient
light measured using foot-candle (Lux) meter at a distance of 100 feet.



   (K)   Within the historic preservation district (see map at the end
of this section) the following regulations shall apply.



      (1)   Each principal building shall be limited to a maximum of
two signs (one may be a wall sign and one may be a projecting sign) per each
public street frontage and if the business has a rear parking lot, these
signs are also allowed to the rear of the building.



      (2)   Freestanding signs may be used in lieu of projecting
signs. The maximum size freestanding sign is 16 square feet and the maximum
height is 16 feet. The minimum height above the ground level is eight feet.



      (3)   Projecting signs are limited to 16 square feet in area
and must project no more than five feet. The minimum height above the ground
is eight feet. The sign may project over public (city) rights-of-way with an
approved sign permit pursuant to § 152.04(D)(2), of the city code.



      (4)   Wall and projecting signs may not extend above the top
of the building facade to which affixed.



      (5)   Wall signs can be a maximum of two square feet for each
linear foot of building frontage but in no event shall the sign exceed 75
square feet in area.



      (6)   Awning signage may be used in lieu of wall and/or
projecting signage.



      (7)   Luminous paints are not allowed.



      (8)   Animated signs are not allowed.



      (9)   Holiday and seasonal decorations that employ lighting
shall be erected no more than one month before the holiday and removed within
15 days after the holiday, with the exception of Christmas when decorations
may be erected on October 15.



      (10)   Window signs to be attached to the interior of the
window only are limited in size as follows:



         (a)   May not exceed 25% of the window area;



         (b)   May not exceed the total allowable signage for all
types of signs; and



         (c)   EMC signs are allowed inside windows up to six
square feet in area subject to requirements of this chapter.



      (11)   Sign installation shall not damage the building’s
facade.



      (12)   On unpainted masonry buildings, all facade penetrations
shall be set into lead sleeves or other approved, engineered fasteners, and
the sleeves shall be set into masonry joints.



      (13)   A portable sandwich sign, maximum size six square feet
and minimum five-foot setback from the sidewalk, may be displayed as follows:



         (a)   Only on the private property for which it
advertises; or



         (b)   On public (city) rights-of-way with an approved
sign permit pursuant to § 152.04(D)(2)  of the city code.



      (14)   Any existing historical sign must be maintained as
close to its original form as possible.



      (15)   The reconstruction of a historic sign is allowed upon
approval of the Historic Preservation Commission. The reconstruction is
allowed based on a historic image of the sign itself and may be subject to
conditions approved by the Historic Preservation Commission. The sign should
maintain the original colors and style as much as is practical. The location
of the historic sign may be in the original location or relocated anywhere in
the Historic District subject to the approval of the Historic Preservation
Commission.



      (16)   All signage must be approved by the Historic
Preservation Commission including the following:



         (a)   Signs illuminated with visible bulbs; and



         (b)   Signs illuminated with neon lighting, also known
as “neon signs.”



      (17)   Promotional displays limited to grand openings, a
change in business name, or a change in business ownership are allowed in the
Historic Preservation District for 30 consecutive days with a permit.



   (L)   Under canopy signs limited to two square feet in area.



   (M)   Off-site signs limited to signs owned by a public or
quasi-public entity. Off-site signs shall be permitted as follows: only along
those property lines of Commercial or Industrial zoned property which are
contiguous with the right of way lines of Railroad Avenue, Bill Williams
Avenue, Rodeo Road and Grand Canyon Boulevard. All off-site signs are subject
to the following limitations:



      (1)   All off-site signs shall be free-standing signs, not
attached to any building, wall post, or other structure. Off-site signs shall
be attached to the ground with metal posts and footings that are designed and
constructed in accordance with the sign code and the building codes of the
city. Signs shall measure no more than six feet high by eight feet wide in a
solid rectangular shape with the highest point of the sign no more than 12
feet above grade.



      (2)   Off-site sign shall be located no more than ten feet
from the property line/right of way line along which they are allowed. No
off-site sign shall be nearer than 300 feet from any other off site sign.



      (3)   Each off-site sign shall have space for at least four
but no more than eight individual advertising copy panels, each of which
shall be no more than 24 inches high by 36 inches wide. No individual
off-site sign shall contain more than one advertising copy panel per business
or use advertised thereon. No advertiser may advertise on an off-site sign
unless all other signs in the city that advertise that particular user are in
compliance with all applicable city codes and regulations.



      (4)   The background color of all off-site signs shall be
reflectorized blue and shall include a 1-1/8 inch wide white border along the
outside edges of the sign face except at the corners where it shall have a
six-inch outside radius. The background color and border shall be identical
in shade and composition as the background color and border on standard
“Tourist Information” signs as erected by the Arizona Department of
Transportation (ADOT). The color of each individual advertising panel will be
at the discretion of the individual advertiser.



      (5)   All off-site signs must be maintained by the owner of
such signs, with all parts of said signs, including faces, paint, structure,
individual advertising panels, etc., kept in “like new” condition.
Off-site signs, including sign faces and advertising copy panels, shall be
constructed of aluminum or other metal materials not susceptible to
weathering.



   (N)   Electronic message center EMQ signs.



      (1)   EMC signs are allowed in the following districts:
Central Business District (CBD); Highway Commercial (HC); Interstate 40
(I-40) Overlay; and Industrial (I-1 and I-2) Districts, and in any zoning
district for school and church marquee use. EMC signs located within 100 feet
of any residential parcel shall not be displayed between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m.



      (2)   EMC signs are permissible subject to the following
conditions.



         (a)   EMC signs may be incorporated into permitted signs
so long as they contain static images that are displayed for a minimum hold
time of eight seconds before transitioning from one static image and/or
message to the next.



         (b)   Not more than one such sign shall be placed on
property held in single and separate ownership unless the property fronts on
more than one street, in which case one such sign shall be permitted on each
separate street frontage.



         (c)   EMC signs shall be included as part of other
allowed flush wall mounted or freestanding signs.



         (d)   EMC signs are only allowed in conjunction with a
nonresidential use. EMC signs are not allowed in the Historic Overlay
District, except EMC signs are allowed inside windows up to six square feet
subject to the same requirements as all other EMC signs.



         (e)   The maximum allowable area of an EMC sign that is
incorporated into a larger sign shall not exceed 35% of the allowable square
footage.



         (f)   All EMC signs shall come equipped with automatic
dimming technology which automatically adjusts the sign’s brightness based
on ambient light conditions.



         (g)   No EMC sign shall exceed a brightness level of 0.3
foot candles above ambient light as measured using a foot candle (Lux) meter
at a preset distance depending on sign area at a position five feet to six
feet above ground level and perpendicular from the face of the sign, measured
as follows:



 


Area of Sign (sq. ft.)

 

Measurement Distance (ft)






10

 

32




15

 

39




20

 

45




25

 

50




30

 

55




32

 

56.7




For Signs of Other Sq. Ft. Measurement: Distance = Square Root of the (area
of Sign Sq. Ft. x 100); (100 x Area)





 



         (h)   Flashing, revolving, moving, rotating, or similar
intermittent lights are prohibited on EMC signs.



         (i)   Frame effects shall not be allowed. All frame
changes shall be instantaneous.



   (O)   Window signs are to be attached to the interior of the window
and are not to exceed 25% of the window area, and may not exceed the total
allowable signage.



   (P)   Manual reader boards (MRBs) are allowed as follows: within the
Central Business District (CBD), Historic Preservation Overlay, Highway
Commercial (HC) District, Interstate 40 (I-40) Overlay, and Industrial (I-1
and I-2) Districts; and in any zoning district for school or church use. MRBs
shall not exceed 35% of the signage.



   (Q)   Monument signs are permitted subject to the following.



      (1)   One sign is allowed per each public street frontage in
lieu of a freestanding sign.



      (2)   Each sign can be a maximum of 75 square feet in area,
including the base.



      (3)   The maximum height shall not exceed eight feet and the
maximum length shall not exceed ten feet.



      (4)   Each sign must be set back from the property line not to
interfere with pedestrian or traffic line of site as determined by staff.







 



(Ord. 939, passed 3-27-2014)



§ 158.199  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   A sign building permit shall be obtained from the city prior
to the construction of a new sign, or alteration of the size, shape or
location of an existing sign, and/or display of any sign.



   (B)   All signs shall be constructed and attached, mounted,
supported or erected in conformance with the adopted building codes of the
city including the electrical code.



   (C)   All signs and sign structures shall be maintained to a safe
condition. If the city determines that a sign is not maintained in a safe
condition, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the sign owner to repair the
sign within 48 hours. If the sign is not repaired or removed, the City
Council may cause the sign to be repaired or removed with the cost of same to
be assessed to the sign owner.



   (D)   Sign area shall be measured as follows:



      (1)   Each sign may be two-sided and the square footage shall
be the measurement of one of the sides;



      (2)   For three or more faces the sign area shall be 50% of
the sum of the areas of all faces. Spherical, free-form, sculptural, or other
nonstandard shapes shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator;



      (3)   Individual letters or words or graphics mounted on a
wall shall be measured by summing the rectangles that surround the individual
letters, words or graphics; and/or



      (4)   The square footage of a panel, or background made to
appear as a panel.



   (E) Except when specifically allowed otherwise, each sign shall be
located on the lot for which it advertises, informs or otherwise attracts
attention.



   (F)   When located within a distance of 25 feet of a street and/or
two feet of a sidewalk, the minimum height of the sign shall be eight feet
above the grade immediately below the sign.



   (G)   When located above a sidewalk the minimum height shall be
eight feet above the grade immediately below the sign.



   (H)   When located above a driveway the minimum height shall be 14
feet above the grade immediately below the sign.



   (I)   Except as provided in this chapter, signs shall not project
beyond the property lines.



(Ord. 939, passed 3-27-2014)



§ 158.200  EXEMPT SIGNS.



   The following signs are exempt from permit:



   (A)   Nameplate and address signs;



   (B)   Official signs of a public or governmental agency;



   (C)   On premise agriculture signs not exceeding six square feet;



   (D)   On premise bulletin boards for charitable or religious
organizations provided the signs do not exceed 32 square feet;



   (E)   On premise real estate signs not exceeding six square feet;



   (F)   Open signs, mounted inside a window (may include lighting);



   (G)   Political signs as provided in this chapter;



   (H)   Private and commercial name plates and street address
identification signs or no trespassing signs when such signs do not exceed
two square feet;



   (I)   Public utility signs;



   (J)   Signs not visible beyond the lot or parcel on which they are
located;



   (K)   Signs on a vehicle operated in the normal course of business;



   (L)   Holiday signs and decorations no more than 30 days prior to
the holiday and  removed within ten days following that holiday except for
Christmas when the decorations may be erected on October 15. Holiday
decorations shall be removed not more than 15 days after the pertinent
holiday; and



   (M)   Temporary on-site signs such as window signs.



(Ord. 939, passed 3-27-2014)



§ 158.201  PROHIBITED SIGNS.



   Except when otherwise allowed the following signs are prohibited:



   (A)   All signs not specifically allowed herein;



   (B)   Animated signs;



   (C)   Audible signs with audible devices except for freestanding
drive-through menu boards;



   (D)   Confusing sign that interferes with or confuses traffic or
presents a traffic hazard;



   (E)   Dangerous signs;



   (F)   Obstruction: signs that obstruct any door or fire escape of
any building;



   (G)   Portable signs except as allowed per this chapter;



   (H)   Portable signs mounted, attached or painted on trailers,
boats, or motor vehicles when parked, stored or displayed in a manner
intended to attract the attention of the public for advertising purposes;



   (I)   Signs located within, on, or projecting over any public
right-of-way;



   (J)   Roof signs;



   (K)   Temporary signs except as allowed in this chapter;



   (L)   Temporary signs such as pennants, banners, balloons, flags and
similar displays except as provided for approved temporary signs;



   (M)   Billboards and off-premise signs except as specifically
allowed in this chapter;



   (N)   Menu signs exceeding 36 square feet for drive-through
restaurant lanes or exceeding six square feet in any other location; and



   (O)   Obscene signs.



(Ord. 939, passed 3-27-2014)



§ 158.202  NONCONFORMING SIGNS.



   Nonconforming signs shall be subject to the following provisions.



   (A)   Nonconforming signs shall be maintained in good condition
including the repair or replacement of worn or damaged parts in order to
return it to original state.



   (B)   Nonconforming signs shall not be altered, reconstructed,
replaced or relocated other than to comply with this section, except
reasonable repair and maintenance limited to a maximum of a total of 50% of
the cost to reproduce the sign.



   (C) Nonconforming signs shall be removed or brought into conformance
with this title when:



      (1)   The sign structure has been taken down, removed, damaged
or deteriorated by more than 50% by any means;



      (2)   The use of the sign or the property on which it is
located has ceased, or the property has become vacant or been unoccupied for
a period of one year or more. The sign shall be removed within 30 days of
notice to do so by the Zoning Administrator; and



      (3)   The property is developed or redeveloped and is the
subject of a required building permit or other city development review
procedure. Nonconforming signs shall be removed prior to the issuance of
additional building permits on the property on which the nonconforming sign
is located.



(Ord. 939, passed 3-27-2014)




PARKING REQUIREMENTS




§ 158.215  PARKING REQUIREMENTS BY USE.



 

Use
 
Minimum Number of Parking Spaces
 
Use
 
Minimum Number of Parking Spaces




RESIDENTIAL
 
AGRICULTURE


Accessory dwelling unit (ADU)
 
1 PS/BR
 
Retail sales on-site
 
2 AW PS/ST


Boarding house
 
2 PS + 3 PS/BR
 
Riding, training, boarding stable
 
1 PS/EA 2 horse stalls


Mobile home
 
2 PS/DU
 
OTHER


Mobile home park
 
2 PS/DU + l/PS/3 DU
 
Airport
 
2 + 1 PS/200 sq. ft.


Modular home
 
2 PS/DU
 
Assembly
 
1 PS/200 sq. ft.


Multi-family, studio units
 
1 PS/DU
 
Cemetery
 
30 PS - AW on-site


Multi-family, other units
 
2 PS/DU
 
Church
 
1 PS/200 sq. ft.


One-family
 
2 PS/DU
 
Congregate care
 
1 PS/3 beds


Two-family
 
2 PS/DU
 
Day care center
 
1 PS/EM


COMMERCIAL
 
Golf course
 
5 PS/hole


Business schools
 
1 PS/150 sq. ft.
 
Group home
 
1 PS/bed


Charitable
 
1 PS/200 sq. ft.
 
Hospital
 
1 PS/bed


Eating and drinking
 
1 PS/150 sq. ft.
 
Kennel
 
2 PS + 1 PS/EM


Financial
 
1 PS/300 sq. ft.
 
Lodges
 
1 PS/400 sq. ft.


Governmental
 
1 PS/200 sq. ft.
 
Plant nursery
 
1 PS/400 sq. ft. OF


Hotels/motels
 
1 PS/GR
 
Public uses
 
1 PS/200 sq. ft.


Office
 
1 PS/200 sq. ft.
 
Shelter care
 
1 PS/bed


Second hand store
 
1 PS/300 sq. ft.
 
INDUSTRIAL


Personal services
 
1 PS/300 sq. ft.
 
All industrial
 
1 PS/EM


Private recreation
 
3 PS/400 sq. ft.
 
 
 
 


Retail
 
1 PS/300 sq. ft.
 
SUBDIVISIONS


Self storage
 
3 PS
 
With no on street parking
 
1 PS/per 5 residential lots


Vehicle leasing
 
1 PS/200 sq. ft.
 
 
 
 


Vehicle services
 
1 PS/400 sq. ft.
 
 
 
 


NOTES TO TABLE:

AW means all-weather

GR means guest room

BR means bedroom

OF means office

DU means dwelling unit

PS means parking space

EA means each

sq. ft. means square feet

EM means employee

ST means structure




 



   (A)   In the Central Business District (Historic Preservation
Overlay Zone), the required off-street parking and loading requirements for
existing buildings are limited to the existing off-street parking and loading
spaces.



   (B)   No new spaces are required unless a new building is
constructed, in which case the required number of parking spaces shall be
determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission at public hearing.



(Prior Code, § 12-14.01)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 754, passed - -;
Ord. 892, passed - -2008; Ord. 968, passed 6-28-2018)



§ 158.216  PURPOSE.



   (A)   Prevent congestion of the public streets;



   (B)   Establish minimum requirements for off-street parking and
loading and unloading of vehicles;



   (C)   Relieve public streets of the burden of on-street parking;



   (D)   To provide adequate parking to meet the needs of residents,
employees and business patrons; and



   (E)   To reduce the scale of parking areas through landscaping and
by breaking them into smaller areas.



(Prior Code, § 12-14.02)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 892, passed -
-2008)



§ 158.217  GENERAL REGULATIONS.



   (A)   It is the duty of the property owner to plan the use of his or
her property such that the public streets are not required to satisfy parking
or loading needs; curb cuts will be minimized; curb cuts will be located and
sized to minimize traffic disruption on public streets.



   (B)   Each parking space established shall be at least nine feet
wide and 18 feet deep.



   (C)   Driveways and backup aisles shall be provided for all parking
spaces and shall be a minimum of 24 feet wide. Curb cuts shall not exceed 30
feet in width.



   (D)   All required parking and loading areas shall be surfaced with
concrete, asphalt or paving blocks and clearly striped with permanent paint.



   (E)   Required parking shall be located onsite or on contiguous
sites, but no further than 300 feet from the entrance to the principal use on
the site.



   (F)   Square feet shall mean the gross floor area of the building or
use.



   (G)   No part of any vehicle may overhang into a public right-of-way
and no event closer than five feet to a sidewalk or street curb.



   (H)   All parked vehicles must comply with unobstructed view
easement and sight distance requirements at street intersections as
determined by the city.



   (I)   Parking lots shall be designed in groupings no larger than 200
spaces. Larger lots shall be divided by buildings, plazas or significant
landscaped area oriented for pedestrian use.



   (J)   The standards of this section shall apply to all development
on the site, both existing and planned, at the time that any building permit
is required.



(Prior Code, § 12-14.03)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)  Penalty, see §
158.999



§ 158.218  SCREEN WALL REQUIRED.



   All parking lots abutting a residential zoning district shall be
screened from view by the placement of a solid six-foot wall between the
parking lot and the residential zone.



(Prior Code, § 12-14.04)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 892, passed -
-2008)  Penalty, see § 158.999



§ 158.219  LANDSCAPING REQUIRED.



   Ten percent of the total parking lot area shall be landscaped as
approved by the city.



(Prior Code, § 12-14.05)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 892, passed -
-2008)  Penalty, see § 158.999




NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, USES AND LOTS




§ 158.230  GENERAL.



   (A)   This section provides for the regulation of non-conforming
buildings, structures, uses and lots. These regulations are designed to
protect the rights of legally existing non-conforming uses, structures and
buildings, but not promote expansion or enlargement. The site, building,
structure or use will be encouraged to convert to a conforming use in the
future.



   (B)   Any use or activity lawfully conducted under county zoning
regulations at the effective date of annexation or under previous zoning
regulations in effect at the adoption of the ordinance codified in this
chapter, or any amendment, shall be considered a legal non-conforming use
under this chapter.



   (C)   The City Council, by ordinance, may authorize the acquisition
of private property by purchase or condemnation for removal of non-conforming
uses and structures.



(Prior Code, § 12-15.01)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 158.231  NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES.



   (A)   No structural or physical alteration shall be made to any
non-conforming building, structure or lot except when required by law or
ordinance. This requirement does not prohibit routine repairs or maintenance.



   (B)   No expansion shall be made of any non-conforming building,
structure or use unless such expansion conforms to the regulations specified
for the district in which it is located. In cases where the non-conforming
use occupies a building, structure or any portion of a site, expanding the
use into additional building or land area shall constitute an extension and
shall not be allowed.



   (C)   Any non-conforming building, structure or use, or one or more
of a group of non-conforming building, structure or use related to one
industry and under one ownership, which has been damaged by fire, flood,
explosion, earthquake, war, riot or act of God, may be reconstructed and used
as before, if done within 12 months of such calamity. The City Council, after
review and recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission, may
determine that such delay in reconstruction was caused by unforeseen
circumstances beyond the control of the owner of the premises and permit a
reasonable extension of time for reconstruction. Any district requirements
may be waived by the City Council; provided, the area restored is not more
non-conforming than existed at the time of the calamity.



   (D)   (1)   Any non-conforming building, structure or use which
ceases to be used for a period exceeding one year or is superseded by a
conforming use, shall never again be devoted to the non- conforming use,
except as otherwise provided in division (C) above. A non-conforming use
shall not be changed to a different non-conforming use.



      (2)   This shall not prevent a name change or change in
ownership of the same non-conforming use.



(Prior Code, § 12-15.02)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 158.232  NON-CONFORMING LOTS.



   Any legal lot existing at the time of the enactment of this chapter, or
any amendment, which does not conform within lot area, lot width or lot depth
for the zoning district in which it is located, may be used for any use
permitted in that zone district; provided, all other applicable regulations
of this chapter are complied with.



(Prior Code, § 12-15.03)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 158.233  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   (A)   (1)   Development standards relate to the size,
configuration and character of development.



      (2)   Development standards include, but are not limited to,
items such as parking, landscaping, buffer areas and setback.



      (3)   Developed property may be non-conforming because the
development of the property does not meet current zoning ordinance
requirements.



   (B)   Property which is non-conforming, due to deficiencies in
development standards, shall be regulated as follows.



      (1)   No change of use or change to a building structure shall
be permitted which creates a deficit or increases an existing deficit in
off-street parking spaces, loading areas or other development standards.



      (2)   Any site which is non-conforming due to deficiencies of
development standards and which require review or approval by the city shall,
as a requirement of that review, be brought into conformance including, but
not limited to, development standards for parking, circulation, driveways,
drainage, storage, screening and landscaping, with this chapter and other
applicable codes before any permit or other request can be approved.



(Prior Code, § 12-15.04)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)  Penalty, see §
158.999




LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERING




§ 158.245  MINIMUM ON-SITE LANDSCAPING REQUIRED.



   The minimum lot area to be landscaped as a percentage of total lot area
shall be as follows:



   (A)   Five percent in the I-1 and I-2 Districts;



   (B)   Twenty percent in the R-3, HC and CBD Districts; and



   (C)   Thirty percent for any non-residential use in the RR, AR, ER,
R1-43, R1-7, RMH-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts.



(Prior Code, § 12-16.01)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995; Ord. 772, passed -
-1997)



§ 158.246  LOCATION OF REQUIRED LANDSCAPING.



   A ten-foot wide strip of land adjacent and parallel to each street
right-of-way line shall be landscaped.



(Prior Code, § 12-16.02)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)



§ 158.247  LANDSCAPE BUFFER REQUIRED.



   (A)   For each multi-family or non-residential use, a 15-foot wide
strip of land adjacent and parallel to any single-family district shall be
landscaped.



   (B)   For each non-residential use, a 15-foot wide strip of land
adjacent and parallel to any multi- family district shall be landscaped.



   (C)   For each loading dock or service drive, a 25-foot wide strip
of land adjacent and parallel to any residential district shall be landscaped.



(Prior Code, § 12-16.03)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)  Penalty, see §
158.999



§ 158.248  REQUIRED LANDSCAPE MATERIALS.



   (A)   For any land uses, including residential, a minimum of 50% of
the voluntary or required landscape area shall be landscaped with living
vegetation acceptable to the city. The remaining landscape area may be
landscaped with decorative rock or bark.



   (B)   The landscaped area shall be provided with a drip irrigation
system.



(Prior Code, § 12-16.04)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)  Penalty, see §
158.999




MURAL REGULATIONS




§ 158.260  PURPOSE.



   The intent of this subchapter is:



   (A)   To provide for wall murals on old and new development in the
Central Business District of the city;



   (B)   To preserve and protect the special character and identity of
the city’s downtown area;



   (C)   To ensure that renovation and/or rehabilitation within the
Historic Preservation District will be compatible with and will preserve and
enhance the district’s special character, a portion of which has been
included in the National Register of Historic Places; and



   (D)   To establish guidelines based on the existing character of the
downtown, as defined by its prevailing architectural styles, building
materials and urban design features.



(Prior Code, § 12-18.01)



§ 158.261  GENERAL REGULATIONS AND GUIDELINES.



   (A)   To be deemed appropriate, a mural must:



      (1)   Be an asset to the Central Business District;



      (2)   Complement the overall design of the building;



      (3)   Match the era of the original construction or accepted
renovation;



      (4)   Complement the character of the area;



      (5)   Match the flavor of the district in which it is to be
located;



      (6)   Have content appropriate to the city and its environs;



      (7)   Reflect the historic and cultural traditions of the city
and state;



      (8)   Be in context with the surrounding streetscape in size,
shape, style and general color scheme;



      (9)   Be designed with consideration for other murals in the
immediate vicinity;



      (10)   Be incorporated as an element of the overall building
design;



      (11)   Be devoid of advertising or even the suggestion of
advertising;



      (12)   Not contain any logo, graphic or text representative of
any business operated within the building on which it is to be placed;



      (13)   Be designed to complement the wall on which it is
proposed;



      (14)   Be proportionate to the blank space proposed for
placement;



      (15)   Be large enough to be significant but not overwhelming;



      (16)   Be in good taste with no crude, coarse or vulgar
language or image; and



      (17)   Be located so as to avoid any negative impact.



   (B)   A mural is to be treated as any other painting approval on a
building, and must:



      (1)   Be done in a professional, artistic manner (the artist
shall be asked to provide samples of previous mural work and/or references
from other jurisdictions where such work has been done); and



      (2)   Have financial assurance for an ongoing maintenance
program.



(Prior Code, § 12-18.02)  Penalty, see § 158.999



§ 158.262  REGULATION OF MURALS.



   (A)   Any mural or wall painting proposed for the Central Business
District shall follow the approved development procedures (see Ch. 154 of
this code of ordinances) for either:



      (1)   A plot plan, historic district (if applicable); or



      (2)   A plot plan and building permit (if outside the Historic
Preservation District).



   (B)   The applicant (property owner) shall submit to the Building
Department the following:



      (1)   An application signed by the property owner;



      (2)   A legal description of the property;



      (3)   A copy of the plat as recorded in the County
Recorder’s office;



      (4)   Scaled drawings of the building facade showing the mural
placement;



      (5)   A color photograph of the building facade, including:



         (a)   The street curb in the foreground;



         (b)   The entire roofline of the side of the building
that is the site of the proposed mural; and



         (c)   A portion of the building or street on either side
of the proposed mural or wall painting site.



      (6)   A color rendering, drawn to scale, of the proposed
mural, including the proposed building side from ground to roof (photo
simulations of the proposed mural project are encouraged).



   (C)   The Chief Building Official shall forward copies of the
application and accompanying documents to:



      (1)   The Main Street Design Committee, which shall review the
project for conformity with the city’s urban design guidelines; and if
applicable; and



      (2)   The Historic Preservation Commission, which shall review
the project for conformity with the established guidelines, particularly the
Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation.



   (D)   After review and approval of the application, the Chief
Building Official shall issue a building permit to the owner of the property,
and said permit shall be subject to the following conditions.



      (1)   The property owner shall maintain the mural or wall
painting in good condition.



      (2)   The Building Department has the authority to order the
removal of any mural or wall painting that is:



         (a)   Not completed in strict accordance with the
approved permit; or



         (b)   Not maintained in good condition.



   (E)   The Building Department also has the authority to order
removal of any mural or wall painting completed without an approved permit.



   (F)   In addition, the Building Department has the authority to
order the painted surface to be restored to its original paint color and
design following a removal ordered under division (D)(2) or (E) above.



(Prior Code, § 12-18.03)



§ 158.263  ADDITIONAL REGULATION FOR THE HISTORIC PRESERVATION DISTRICT.



   A mural will not be approved for any historic unpainted brick and/or
stone surface within the Historic Preservation District.



(Prior Code, § 12-18.04)



§ 158.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Anyone violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of a Class 1 misdemeanor punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both.



   (B)   Conviction shall be punished by a fine of not more than $300
or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both fine and
imprisonment.



   (C)   It is a separate offense for each and every day the violation
is committed, continued or permitted.



   (D)   The imposition of any sentence or fine shall not exempt the
offender from compliance with the requirements of this chapter.



   (E)   The owner, lessee, tenant and/or other person in possession of
the property or use in violation are all and equally responsible for the
violations.



   (F)   In addition, the city may bring civil proceeding in a court of
competent jurisdiction to enforce compliance with this chapter including the
prevention, restraining and/or abatement of the violations.



   (G)   In addition, any violation is declared to be a public nuisance
and the city may enjoin or restrain said violation like any other nuisance
under authority of any applicable city and state law.



(Prior Code, § 12-2.03)  (Ord. 747, passed - -1995)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2019 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES




[Reserved]




PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Arizona Revised Statutes





References to Prior Code





References to Resolutions





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO ARIZONA REVISED STATUTES



 

A.R.S. Cites
 
Code Section




1-211 through 1-215
 
10.05


3-561 to 3-563
 
111.09


3-561(1)
 
111.01


3-561(2)
 
111.01


3-1401 through 3-1404
 
90.04


Title 4
 
158.011


4-101.26
 
112.15


4-205.08
 
158.011


8-201 et seq.
 
130.99


Title 9, Ch. 4, Art. 6.2
 
157.03


Title 9, Ch. 4, Art. 7.2
 
116.05


9-240
 
10.19


9-462.01 et seq.
 
158.002


9-463.05C
 
51.04, 52.04


9-499
 
12.07, 12.08


9-500.12 et seq.
 
154.074


9-531.01
 
51.04


11-1014G
 
90.99


12-116.01
 
70.99


12-116.02
 
70.99


12-124
 
12.05


Title 13, Ch. 11
 
116.07


Title 13, Ch. 12
 
116.07


Title 13, Ch. 13
 
116.07


Title 13, Ch. 14
 
116.07


13-3401
 
116.07


13-3903
 
94.20, 94.99


Title 28
 
70.01


Title 28, Art. 5
 
92.99


Title 28, Ch. 25
 
156.03


28-101
 
116.02


28-667
 
70.03


28-872
 
92.99


28-882(C)
 
72.09


28-884(A)(1)
 
72.09


28-884(A)(2)
 
72.09


28-4801 et seq.
 
92.04


33-1901(2)
 
151.05


33-1901(3)
 
151.05


33-1905
 
151.05


34-201(C)
 
36.17, 36.18


34-201(D)
 
36.18


34-201(E)
 
36.18


34-201(F)
 
36.18


34-602 et seq.
 
36.18


36-1404
 
32.05


36-1601
 
94.01


36-1761
 
116.03


36-2801
 
158.011


38-431 et seq.
 
32.07


38-431
 
30.05


38-431.09
 
30.05


Title 40, Ch. 2, Art. 6.2
 
155.12, 155.32


40-4001 et seq.
 
158.011


Title 45, Ch. 6
 
155.12


47-2105
 
111.01


Title 48, Ch. 21, Art. 1
 
155.12


48-501 to 48-691
 
31.11


48-3601
 
155.05


48-3603
 
155.01


48-3609(11)
 
155.12


48-3610
 
155.01


48-3613
 
155.12, 155.13


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE



 

Prior Code
 
2018 Code




1-1.07
 
10.99


1-1.08
 
10.99


1-1.09
 
10.09


1-2.02
 
10.06


1-2.05
 
10.17


1-2.08
 
10.05


1-3.01
 
11.01


1-4.01
 
11.02


1-5.01
 
11.03


1-6.01
 
11.04


2-1.01
 
30.01


2-1.02
 
30.02


2-1.03
 
30.03


2-1.04
 
30.04


2-1.05
 
30.05


2-1.10
 
30.06


2-1.11
 
30.07, 30.99


2-1.12
 
30.08


2-1.13
 
30.09


2-1.14
 
30.10


2-2.01
 
31.01


2-2.02
 
31.02


2-2.03
 
31.03


2-2.04
 
31.04


2-2.05
 
31.05


2-2.06
 
31.06


2-2.07
 
31.07


2-2.08
 
31.08


2-2.09
 
31.09


2-2.10
 
31.10


2-2.11
 
31.11


2-2.12
 
31.12


2-2.13
 
31.13


2-2.14
 
31.14


2-3
 
32.01


2-3.01
 
32.02


2-3.03
 
32.03


2-3.04
 
32.04


2-3.05
 
32.05


2-3.06
 
32.06


2-3.07
 
32.07


2-3.08
 
32.08


2-4.01
 
33.01


2-4.02
 
33.02


2-4.03
 
33.03


2-4.04
 
33.04


2-4.05
 
33.05


2-4.06
 
33.06


2-4.07
 
33.07


2-5.01
 
30.25


2-5.02
 
30.26


2-5.03
 
30.27


2-6.01
 
36.15—36.24


2-6.02
 
36.01


2-6.03
 
36.02


3-1.01
 
111.01


3-1.02
 
111.02


3-1.03
 
111.03


3-1.04
 
111.04


3-1.05
 
111.05


3-1.06
 
111.06


3-1.07
 
111.07


3-1.08
 
111.08


3-1.09
 
111.09


3-1.10
 
111.10


3-1.11
 
111.11


3-1.12
 
111.12


3-1.13
 
111.13


3-1.14
 
111.14


3-1.15
 
111.15


3-1.16
 
111.15


3-1.17
 
111.15


3-1.18
 
111.99


3-1.19
 
111.99


3-1.20
 
111.99


3-1.21
 
111.99


3-1.22
 
111.99


3-1.23
 
111.99


3-1.24
 
111.99


3-1.25
 
111.99


3-1.26
 
111.16


3-1.27
 
111.17


3-2.01
 
112.01


3-2.02
 
112.02


3-2.03
 
112.03


3-2.04
 
112.04


3-2.05
 
112.99


3-5.01
 
114.01


3-5.02
 
114.02


3-5.03
 
114.03


3-5.04
 
114.04


3-6.01—3-6.19
 
115.03


3-7.01—3-7.11
 
115.01


3-8.01—3-8.05
 
115.02


3-9.01
 
112.15


3-9.03
 
112.16


3-9.04
 
112.17


4.01
 
113.01


4.02
 
113.99


5-1.01
 
35.15


5-1.02
 
35.16


5-1.03
 
35.17


5-1.04
 
35.18


5-1.05
 
35.19


5-2.01
 
35.30


5-2.02
 
35.31


5-2.03
 
35.32


5-2.04
 
35.33


5-2.05
 
35.34


6-1.01
 
130.01


6-1.02
 
130.02


6-1.04
 
130.03


6-3.01
 
93.20


6-3.02
 
93.21


6-3.03
 
93.22


6-3.04
 
93.99


6-4.01
 
71.01


6-4.02
 
71.02


6-4.03
 
Ch. 74, Schd. II


6-4.04
 
71.03


6-4.05
 
71.04


6-4.06
 
71.05


6-4.07
 
71.06


6-4.08
 
71.07, 71.99


6-5.01
 
92.01


6-5.02
 
92.02


6-5.03
 
92.03


6-5.04
 
92.04


6-5.05
 
92.99


6-5.06
 
92.99


6-6.01
 
130.04, 130.99


6-7.01
 
151.01


6-7.02
 
151.02


6-7.03
 
151.20


6-7.04
 
151.21


6-7.05
 
151.22


6-7.06
 
151.23


6-7.07
 
151.21


6-7.08
 
151.03


6-7.09
 
151.03


6-7.10
 
151.40


6-7.11
 
151.41


6-7.12
 
151.42


6-7.13
 
151.42


6-7.14
 
151.42


6-7.15
 
151.43


6-7.16
 
151.44


6-7.17
 
151.45


6-7.18
 
151.24


6-7.19
 
151.25


6-7.20
 
151.25


6-7.21
 
151.25


6-7.22
 
151.25


6-7.23
 
151.25


6-7.24
 
151.25


6-7.25
 
151.99


6-7.26
 
151.99


6-7.27
 
151.99


6-7.28
 
151.99


6-7.29
 
151.99


6-7.30
 
151.99


6-7.31
 
151.99


6-7.32
 
151.99


6-7.33
 
151.99


6-7.34
 
151.99


6-7.35
 
151.99


6-7.36
 
151.99


6-7.37
 
151.99


6-7.38
 
151.99


6-7.39
 
151.99


6-7.40
 
151.99


6-7.41
 
151.99


6-7.42
 
151.99


6-7.43
 
151.06


6-7.44
 
151.04


6-7.45
 
151.05


6-8.01
 
91.01


6-8.02
 
91.02


6-8.03
 
91.03


6-8.04
 
91.04


6-8.05
 
91.05


6-8.06
 
91.06


6-8.07
 
91.07


6-8.08
 
91.08


6-8.09
 
91.09


6-8.10
 
91.10


6-8.11
 
91.11


6-8.12
 
91.11


6-8.13
 
91.99


6-8.14
 
91.99


6-8.15
 
91.99


6-8.16
 
91.99


6-8.17
 
91.99


6-8.18
 
91.99


6-8.19
 
91.99


6-8.20
 
91.99


6-8.21
 
91.99


6-8.22
 
91.99


6-8.23
 
91.99


6-8.24
 
91.99


6-8.25
 
91.12


6-8.26
 
91.12


6-8.27
 
91.12


6-8.28
 
91.12


6-8.29
 
91.12


6-8.30
 
91.13


6-8.31
 
91.14


6-8.32
 
91.14


6-8.34
 
91.14


6-8.35
 
91.14


6-8.36
 
91.14


6-8.37
 
91.15


6-8.38
 
91.16


6-8.39
 
91.17


6-9.01
 
130.15, 130.99


6-9.02
 
130.16


6-9.03
 
130.17


6-9.04
 
130.18


6-9.05
 
130.19


6-9.06
 
130.20


7-1
 
150.01


7-3.01
 
150.02


7-3.02
 
150.02


7-4.01
 
150.15


7-4.02
 
150.16


7-4.03
 
150.17


7-4.04
 
150.99


7-2.01
 
155.01


7-2.02
 
155.02, 155.03


7-2.03
 
155.04


7-2.04
 
155.05


7-2.05
 
155.06 - 155.15


7-2.06
 
155.31


7-2.07
 
155.30


7-2.08
 
155.45


7-2.09
 
155.51


7-2.10
 
155.32


7-2.11
 
155.32


8-1.01
 
152.01


8-1.02
 
152.02


8-1.03
 
152.03


8-1.04
 
152.04


8-1.05
 
152.99


8-2.01
 
50.01


8-2.02
 
50.02


8-2.03
 
50.03


8-2.04
 
50.04


8-2.05
 
50.05


8-2.06
 
50.99


8-3.01
 
52.01


8-3.02
 
52.01


8-3.03
 
52.02


8-3.04
 
52.03


8-3.05
 
52.04


8-3.06
 
52.05


8-4.01
 
51.01


8-4.02
 
51.02


8-4.03
 
51.03


8-4.04
 
51.04


8-4.05
 
51.05


8-4.06
 
51.06


8-4.07
 
51.07


8-4.08
 
51.40—51.47, 51.99


8-4.09
 
51.08


8-4.10
 
51.09


8-4.11
 
51.99


8-5.01
 
156.01


8-5.02
 
156.02


8-5.03
 
156.03


8-5.04
 
156.04


8-5.05
 
156.05


8-5.06
 
156.06


8-5.07
 
156.07


8-5.08
 
156.08


8-5.09
 
156.09


8-5.10
 
156.10


8-5.11
 
156.11


8-5.12
 
156.12


8-5.13
 
156.13


8-5.14
 
156.14


8-5.15
 
156.15


8-5.16
 
156.99


8-6.01
 
93.01


8-6.02
 
93.02


8-6.03
 
93.03


8-6.04
 
93.04


8-6.05
 
93.05


8-6.06
 
93.06


8-6.07
 
93.06


8-7.01
 
152.15


8-7.02
 
152.16


8-7.03
 
152.17


8-7.04
 
152.18


8-7.05
 
152.19


8-7.06
 
152.20


8-7.07
 
152.21


8-7.08
 
152.22


8-7.09
 
152.99


8-8.01
 
152.35


8-8.02
 
152.36


8-8.03
 
152.37


8-8.04
 
152.38


8-8.05
 
152.39


8-8.06
 
152.40


8-8.07
 
152.41


8-8.08
 
152.42


8-8.09
 
152.43


8-9.01
 
153.01


8-9.02
 
153.02


8-9.03
 
153.03


8-9.04
 
153.04


8-9.05
 
153.99


8-10.01
 
51.20


8-10.02
 
51.21


8-10.04
 
51.23


8-10.05
 
51.22


8-10.06
 
51.24


8-10.07
 
51.25


8-10.08
 
51.26


8-10.09
 
51.27


8-10.10
 
51.28


8-10.11
 
51.29


8-11.01
 
53.01


8-11.02
 
53.02


8-11.03
 
53.03


8-11.04
 
53.04


8-11.05
 
53.04


8-11.06
 
53.05


8-12.01
 
155.01—155.04


8-12.02
 
155.05


8-12.03
 
155.06—155.16


8-12.04
 
155.30, 155.31


8-12.05
 
155.45—155.51


8-12.06
 
155.32


9-1.01
 
34.01


9-1.02
 
34.02


9-1.03
 
34.03


9-1.04
 
34.04


9-1.05
 
34.05


9-1.06
 
34.06


10-1.01
 
154.001


10-1.02
 
154.001


10-1.03
 
154.001


10-1.04
 
154.001


10-1.05
 
154.001


10-1.06
 
154.001


10-1.07
 
154.001


10-1.08
 
154.001


10-1.09
 
154.001


10-1.10
 
154.001


10-1.11
 
154.001


10-1.12
 
154.001


10-1.13
 
154.001


10-1.14
 
154.001


10-1.15
 
154.001


10-2.01
 
154.015


10-2.02
 
154.016


10-2.03
 
154.017


10-2.04
 
154.018


10-2.05
 
154.019


10-2.06
 
154.020


10-3.01
 
154.035


10-3.02
 
154.036


10-3.03
 
154.037


10-3.04
 
154.038


10-3.05
 
154.039


10-3.06
 
154.040


10-3.07
 
154.040


10-3.08
 
154.041


10-3.09
 
154.041


10-3.10
 
154.042


10-3.11
 
154.043


10-3.12
 
154.044


10-3.13
 
154.044


10-3.14
 
154.044


10-3.15
 
154.044


10-3.16
 
154.044


10-4.01
 
154.055


10-4.02
 
154.056


10-5.01
 
154.070


10-5.02
 
154.071


10-6.01
 
154.072


10-7.01
 
154.073


10-7.02
 
154.073


10-7.03
 
154.073


10-8.01
 
154.074


10-8.02
 
154.074


10-8.03
 
154.074


10-10.01
 
154.085


10-10.02
 
154.086


10-10.03
 
154.087


10-10.04
 
154.088


10-10.05
 
154.089


11-1.01
 
157.01


11-1.02
 
157.02


11-1.03
 
157.03


11-1.04
 
157.04


11-1.05
 
157.99


11-1.06
 
157.05


11-1.07
 
157.06


11-1.08
 
157.07


11-2.01
 
157.08


11-2.02
 
157.08


11-3.01
 
157.09


11-3.02
 
157.10


11-4.01
 
157.25


11-4.02
 
157.26


11-4.03
 
157.27


11-5.01
 
157.40


11-5.02
 
157.40


11-5.03
 
157.40


11-6.01
 
157.41


11-6.02
 
157.41


11-6.03
 
157.41


11-6.04
 
157.41


11-7.01
 
157.55


11-7.02
 
157.56


11-7.03
 
157.57


11-7.04
 
157.58


11-7.05
 
157.59


11-8.01
 
157.60


11-8.02
 
157.60


11-9.01
 
157.11


11-9.02
 
157.12


11-9.03
 
157.13


12-1.01
 
158.001


12-1.02
 
158.002


12-1.03
 
158.003


12-1.04
 
158.004


12-1.05
 
158.005


12-1.06
 
158.006


12-1.07
 
158.007


12-2.01
 
158.008


12-2.02
 
158.009


12-2.03
 
158.999


12-3.01
 
158.010


12-3.02
 
158.011


12-4.01
 
158.075


12-4.02
 
158.076


12-4.03
 
158.077


12-4.04
 
158.078


12-5.01
 
158.079


12-5.02
 
158.079


12-6.01
 
158.080


12-6.02
 
158.080


12-7.01
 
158.125


12-7.02
 
158.126


12-7.03
 
158.127


12-7.04
 
158.128


12-7.05
 
158.129


12-7.06
 
158.130


12-7.07
 
158.131


12-7.08
 
158.132


12-7.09
 
158.133


12-7.10
 
158.134


12-7.11
 
158.135


12-7.12
 
158.136


12-7.13
 
158.137


12-7.14
 
158.138


12-7.15
 
158.139


12-7.16
 
158.140


12-7.17
 
158.141


12-7.18
 
158.142


12-7.19
 
158.143


12-7.20
 
158.144


12-7.21
 
158.145


12-8.01
 
158.160


12-8.02
 
158.161


12-8.03
 
158.162


12-8.04
 
158.163


12-8.05
 
158.164


12-8.06
 
158.165


12-8.07
 
158.166


12-8.08
 
158.167


12-9.01
 
158.025


12-9.02
 
158.026


12-9.03
 
158.027


12-9.04
 
158.028


12-9.05
 
158.029


12-9.06
 
158.030


12-9.07
 
158.031


12-9.08
 
158.032


12-9.09
 
158.033


12-9.10
 
158.034


12-10.01
 
158.045


12-10.02
 
158.046


12-10.03
 
158.047


12-10.04
 
158.048


12-10.05
 
158.049


12-11.01
 
158.060


12-11.02
 
158.061


12-11.03
 
158.062


12-11.04
 
158.063


12-12.01
 
158.180


12-12.02
 
158.181


12-14.01
 
158.215


12-14.02
 
158.216


12-14.03
 
158.217


12-14.04
 
158.218


12-14.05
 
158.219


12-15.01
 
158.230


12-15.02
 
158.231


12-15.03
 
158.232


12-15.04
 
158.233


12-16.01
 
158.245


12-16.02
 
158.246


12-16.03
 
158.247


12-16.04
 
158.248


12-17.01
 
158.095


12-17.02
 
158.096


12-17.03
 
158.097


12-17.04
 
158.098


12-17.05
 
158.099


12-17.06
 
158.100


12-17.07
 
158.101


12-17.08
 
158.102


12-17.09
 
158.103


12-17.10
 
158.104


12-17.11
 
158.105


12-17.12
 
158.106


12-17.13
 
158.107


12-17.14
 
158.108


12-17.15
 
158.109


12-17.16
 
158.110


12-18.01
 
158.260


12-18.02
 
158.261


12-18.03
 
158.262


12-18.04
 
158.263


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS



 

Res. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section


593
 
- -
 
32.05


 
 
 
 
 



 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




493
 
- -
 
152.43


495
 
- -
 
130.15—130.20, 130.99


499
 
- -
 
36.15—36.24


502
 
- -
 
32.02


503
 
- -
 
32.03


512
 
- -
 
115.03


583
 
- -
 
31.02


591
 
- -
 
33.04


594
 
- -
 
33.01


613
 
- -
 
31.06


614
 
- -
 
31.06


616
 
- -
 
31.02


637
 
- -
 
32.06


641
 
- -
 
113.01


643
 
- -
 
115.02


647
 
- -
 
11.02


649
 
- -
 
11.02


690
 
- -
 
32.08


754
 
- -
 
158.215


507
 
- -1974
 
30.07, 30.99


683
 
- -1990
 
30.03


720
 
- -1993
 
51.20—51.29


726
 
- -1994
 
115.01


734
 
- -1994
 
53.01, 53.02, 53.04, 53.05


738
 
- -1995
 
130.04, 130.99


745
 
- -1995
 
33.01


747
 
- -1995
 
154.001, 154.015—154.020, 154.070—154.074, 157.01—157.13,
157.25—157.27, 157.40, 157.41, 157.55—157.60, 157.99, 158.001—158.011,
158.025—158.034, 158.045—158.049, 158.060—158.063, 158.075—158.080,
158.095—158.110, 158.125—158.145, 158.160—158.167, 158.180, 158.181,
158.215—158.219, 158.230—158.233, 158.245—158.248, 158.999


748
 
- -1995
 
152.04


750
 
- -1996
 
158.079, 158.080


753
 
- -1996
 
51.99


762
 
- -1996
 
112.02, 112.03, 112.99


763
 
- -1997
 
30.05


765
 
- -1997
 
35.19


766
 
- -1997
 
152.15, 152.16, 152.20, 152.21


772
 
- -1997
 
158.079, 158.104, 158.245


773
 
- -1997
 
154.020


774
 
- -1998
 
51.06


775
 
- -1998
 
51.04, 51.06, 52.05


779
 
- -1998
 
112.15—112.17


789
 
- -1998
 
35.34


790
 
- -1999
 
36.15—36.24


791
 
- -1999
 
91.01—91.17, 91.99, 151.01—151.06, 151.20—151.25, 151.40—151.45,
151.99


792
 
- -1999
 
111.01—111.17, 111.99


793
 
- -1999
 
33.01


808
 
- -2001
 
35.30


811
 
- -2001
 
31.01—31.03, 31.06, 31.08—31.13


812
 
- -2001
 
30.25


815
 
- -2001
 
91.08


816
 
- -2001
 
93.20—93.22, 93.99


819
 
- -2001
 
36.15—36.24


820
 
- -2001
 
158.075


822
 
- -2001
 
30.10


835
 
- -2004
 
30.10


844
 
- -2004
 
158.079


843
 
- -2005
 
150.15—150.17, 150.99


848
 
- -2005
 
36.02


833
 
- -2006
 
158.011, 158.075, 158.080


849
 
- -2006
 
30.10


850
 
- -2006
 
31.02, 34.01—34.06


851
 
- -2006
 
36.02


855
 
- -2006
 
111.01—111.17, 111.99


858
 
- -2006
 
155.01—155.16, 155.30—155.32, 155.45—155.51


862
 
- -2006
 
154.085 - 154.089


863
 
- -2006
 
155.01—155.16, 155.30—155.32, 155.45—155.51


865
 
- -2007
 
52.05


890
 
- -2007
 
30.03, 30.05, 30.07, 30.10, 30.99


890
 
- -2007
 
31.01—31.03, 31.06, 31.08—31.13, 32.02, 32.03, 32.06, 32.08, 36.02


892
 
- -2008
 
158.010, 158.011, 158.075—158.080, 158.095—158.099, 158.102—158.110,
158.215, 158.216, 158.218, 158.219


895
 
- -2008
 
154.001, 154.015—154.020, 154.044


904
 
- -2008
 
154.015, 154.020, 154.073


905
 
- -2008
 
157.04, 157.08, 157.10, 157.12, 157.13, 157.40, 157.41, 157.56, 157.57, 157.60


906
 
- -2008
 
158.011


919
 
- -2011
 
90.01—90.11, 90.99


925
 
- -2012
 
36.15—36.24


960
 
- -2017
 
90.11, 90.99


125
 
8-8-1924
 
150.02


9
 
7-30-2001
 
11.03


911
 
10-8-2009
 
110.01


913
 
5-13-2010
 
36.02


917
 
1-13-2011
 
94.01—94.05, 94.99


916
 
4-28-2011
 
158.011, 158.079


917
 
4-28-2011
 
36.02


921
 
7-8-2011
 
130.35—130.37, 130.99


922
 
7-14-2011
 
70.01—70.10, 70.99, 72.01—72.12, 72.99, 73.01—73.05, Ch. 74, Schd. I


926
 
2-23-2012
 
110.01


932
 
12-13-2012
 
110.01


935
 
8-8-2013
 
70.01, 70.99


937
 
12-12-2013
 
158.011, 158.079


940
 
3-13-2014
 
51.40—51.47, 51.99


939
 
3-27-2014
 
158.195 - 158.202


941
 
5-22-2014
 
90.09


945
 
7-24-2014
 
35.01


938
 
12-12-2014
 
30.01—30.10, 30.25—30.27, 30.99, 31.01—31.14, 32.01—32.08,
33.01—33.07, 36.01, 36.02, 36.15—36.24


950
 
6-25-2015
 
30.10


956
 
10-27-2016
 
150.01


962
 
5-24-2018
 
150.01


964
 
6-14-2018
 
115.01


965
 
6-14-2018
 
94.20, 94.99


968
 
6-28-2018
 
158.075, 158.079, 158.080, 158.215


970
 
1-24-2019
 
Adopting Ordinance


971
 
- -
 
116.01 - 116.09


 
 
 
 
 




 







